AUGUST 2023
OHPC Grade One Language Arts
Curriculum
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Listening and Speaking
OHPC Language Arts Grade One – LISTENING AND SPEAKING
Introduction to the Subject
Introduction to Language Arts, Grade 1 to Grade 6: Language is the foundation of communication and the primary instrument of thought. The
study of Language Arts provides access to multiple and inter-related oral, aural, written, and visual ways of representing, exploring, problem solving,
communicating and sharing meaning. Through listening, speaking, writing, representing, reading, and viewing a wide range of text and text form, the
student continues to develop an awareness of culture, personal identity, and the strategies needed to participate, communicate and reflect critically on
thought and action.
Introduction to the Strand
Listening and Speaking are foundational for all learning. The strategies and skills of listening and speaking allow learners to contribute
meaningfully to social environments. As learners receive, reflect on, and communicate ideas, they develop increasing proficiency in cognitive
organization, critical thinking, and problem-solving. Listening and speaking strategies and skills are foundational for the development of reading,
viewing, writing, and representing.
Strand: Listening and Speaking
Essential Learning Outcome 1: Listening and Speaking
The learner will explore, use, and critically apply oral language for pleasure, personal growth, to form and foster relationships and, to develop
an appreciation of and celebration of culture and of oral languages.
Page | 1
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Grade One Expectations for Listening and Speaking
For pleasure and personal growth
• listen to a range of music, rhymes, poetry, stories, information, conversation and environmental sounds for personal enjoyment,
• demonstrate interest, curiosity and engagement in sharing the experiences of others with oral stories and information sharing,
• respond with thought to artistic representations.
To form and foster relationships
• listen respectfully to what other people are saying as they become aware of how to respond with empathy and share with clarity,
• begin to identify overt and implied messages,
• become more aware of active Listening and Speaking strategies,
• to recognise and understand verbal and non-verbal communication in various situations.
To develop an appreciation and celebration of culture and of oral languages
• observe and practice how tone, fluency and intonation impact meaning and mood,
• demonstrate understanding by retelling an oral story or restating factual information in Home Language(s) and/or Standard English,
• begin to apply listening comprehension strategies to enhance understanding of spoken language, music, and environmental sounds,
• begin to appreciate how languages are used to share and reflect on past and present experiences,
• continue to engage in and apply phonological awareness and word play to discriminate among letters and letter patterns,
• continue to develop and apply vocabulary and language structures to enhance communication of ideas with purpose and focus for a range of
audiences.
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
By the end of Grade Suggested formative assessments for Suggested Learning Strategies for ELO 1
One, the learner will ELO 1 that provide information about NOTE: For suggestions about how to engage newcomers who may speak
be expected to: learning a different language than one used within the school community, visit the
The formative assessment strategies listed Teacher Content section below.
Listen and speak for
below not only provide opportunities to
pleasure and personal determine learning prior to instruction, Listen and speak for pleasure and personal growth
growth
observe learner progress during and after
Listen to enjoy and reflect (SCO 1.1): Schedule opportunities to pause,
learning, they provide the information
relax and listen for pleasure and personal growth by providing brief
selections of a variety of genres of music throughout the day:
Page | 2
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
1.1 Choose to listen to needed to inform the next steps of • to welcome students at the beginning of the day
music, poetry and stories instruction. • to transition between subjects
for pleasure. • to provide a short opportunity to stretch and/or relax
• to connect a well know song to the lesson’s focus
1.2 Connect Formative assessments include pre-
After the listening experience, engage the class or small groups of
environmental sounds to assessments, assessments during learning
learners about:
and assessments upon completion of
meaning.
- was the selection enjoyable and why?
learning. Formats for all types of formative
1.3 Use different voices assessments include the following: - how did the selection make them feel?
- what was a special part of the selection they would like to share?
in role playing to COP:
- what other songs, stories, etc. would they enjoy listening to? As
indicate tone and mood. Conversations
learners respond, make note of their participation, language
Observations
1.4 Describe how choice, vocabulary use, sentence use, etc.
Products
musical and
environmental sounds CONVERSATIONS The Sounds of Silence (SCO 1.2): Gather learners together and
affect mood. 1. Anecdotal Notes: demonstrate how to pause and listen by asking the learners to create total
silence in the classroom. Once learners are silent, direct their attention to
Learning and assessment go hand in hand.
1.5 Use Listening the remaining ambient or “non voice” sounds. As a sound is identified,
As learners are engaged prior to learning,
Comprehension engage the class in a “whisper” conversation to discuss the messages and
during learning and after learning, listen,
Strategies to make and observe and record anecdotal notes in the meaning each sound conveys. For example:
simplify meaning: ask Observation of Student Learning • truck passing by – where do you think it is going? Why do you
questions, recall ideas, Journal. Before classes begin, create an think this?
predict, visualise, and electronic or hard copy Observation of • bird song – what do you think the bird is saying? Why is the bird
make connections. Student Learning Journal to record brief, saying that?
dated comments about learner progress • hallway sounds – what do you think is going on? Could it be
1.6 Listen to, retell, and thus far and to determine next steps for something else? etc.
express an opinion instruction. This journal will also house To maintain the silence and focus on listening, learners also respond in a
about the story. other formative assessments such as whisper.
rubrics, checklists, and quizzes. Practice The Sounds of Silence while inside, outside, and on a community
walk.
Page | 3
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Sample format for anecdotal notes during
Language Arts: Please Read to Me! (SCO 1.5, 1.6,1.7): Provide opportunities to listen
Name: for a purpose by scheduling Teacher Read Alouds every day. Choose a
Listening Reading and Writing and range of fiction and nonfiction texts that are relevant and of interest to the
1.7 Listen to
and Viewing Representing learners ( See Learner Interest Survey in the Inclusive assessment
differentiate between
Speaking Strategies column) . These Teacher Read Alouds provide opportunities for
make-believe and truth.
Date: Date: Date: learners to not only ask questions and share their thoughts about the
Focus: (insert Focus: (insert Focus: (insert
1.8 Listen to follow and poem, story, nonfiction information or news item, they also provide an
SCOs SCOs SCOs observed )
opportunity for learners to develop their listening comprehension
give direction e.g. 2-3 observed ) observed ) Progress
strategies, such as predicting, visualising, analysing, etc. NOTE: For more
steps. Progress Progress observed:
information about Comprehension Strategies, visit the Teacher Content
observed: observed: Next Steps:
1.9 Listen and respond Next Steps: Next Steps: section suggestions in the Resources section below.)
with increasing
understanding and Date: Date: Date: Sample Read Aloud text: The Field celebrates the spirit of
Focus: (insert Focus: (insert Focus: (insert
confidence to soccer and the beauty of St.Lucia. The rhythmic text is
SCOs SCOs SCOs observed )
sprinkled with Creole words.
conversations expressed
observed ) observed ) Progress
in Standard English Progress Progress observed:
The Global Digital Library has a wide selection of Read Aloud books.
observed: observed: Next Steps:
Listen and speak to Next Steps: Next Steps: Visit https://digitallibrary.io/topic/library-books/read-aloud/ and choose a book of interest
form and foster and relevance to the learners.
relationships Learner Interest Inventory:
Create a Learner Interest Inventory: BRAIDING THE STRANDS: Teacher Read Alouds braid Listening and
1.10 Use turn taking -chat with the learners about their favourite Speaking with Reading and Viewing. Note: Books chosen for Teacher Read Alouds
strategies as a listener things to do, songs, sports, foods, etc. As should reflect learner interests (Use Learner Inventory in the Inclusive Assessment
and a speaker. learners respond create a list of favourites. Strategies to the left of this column to gather information about learner interests)
Once the list is created, ask the learners to
1.11 Identify and use
raise their hand to indicate their favourites. Listen and speak to form and foster relationships
some non-verbal cues and create a tally. Use this inventory to
(e.g., facial expressions, gather information about learner interests,
gestures etc.) and in oral preferences, and goals and use this
Page | 4
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
communication with information to create topics for the whole We are Good Listeners (SCO 1.9): Form and
thoughtfulness. class and small group discussion. Also use foster relationships by co-creating a “We Are Good
this information to choose anchor texts, Listeners Chart” with learners. Each day for a
1.12 Listen, share
music, videos and experiences as the week, chat about what it means to be a good
information ask and and foundation of future lessons. (See sample listener, and decide on one positive statement about
answer questions on a on page Teacher Content section) what good listeners do. Learners illustrate or choose
topic opinion in a digital icon to represent the statement.
response to views Class Chats: make note of how a learner or https://encrypted-
articulated by others. group of learners share information. Date tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcQ1TJNyd24QFsQ3T-EB-xCdomeqTtwdrrWb3g&usqp=CAU
each entry to maintain a record of progress. Place the chart in a visible spot and draw learners’ attention as a reminder
Listen and speak to to learners to listen carefully and respectfully. Make note of how learners
develop appreciation Name: listening strategies are evolving throughout the year and revisit or revise
and celebration of seed sprout bud flower this chart as needed. NOTE: This type of co-constructed chart is more
meaningful than purchased commercial wall charts.
culture and oral Turn
languages. taking
Em-
BRAIDING THE STRANDS: The co-creation of class charts braids this
1.13 Use and respond to pathy
conversation with Interactive Writing (ELOs 5,6,7).
Home Language(s) with Extend-
ing
awareness and purpose
Silent Languages (SCO 1.11): Introduce the learners to simple sign
peer’s
to greet, thank, make a
ideas language as a means to send a quiet message (tell a friend that you liked
request, explain, Asking what they said) or to signal to you, the teacher, a
apologise and issue an ques- message about how they feel. Visit
invitation. tions youtube.com/watch?v=51u2VLbBu6I for a teacher tutorial on
signs for emotions. See Additional Resources for
1.14 Continue to
more information about sign language.
develop Home Language OBSERVATIONS
and Standard English During lessons playtime, observe and gather This is ME! (SCO 1.10, 1.11, 1.12)
vocabulary, phrasing and information about the learner’s comfort Provide each learner with a small a paper bag, a small box, etc.). Learners
level with communication, friendships,
find small objects that represent their interests (a pretty stone), their
language choices, and vocabulary use.
activities (a paintbrush), etc. During daily Class Chats, one or two learners
Page | 5
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
sentence use to share Throughout the year, sample anecdotal share their “This is Me” container using the language of home. During the
ideas. notes focussed on speaking and listening in sharing, make note of the learner’s participation, choice of language,
could include: expression and use of oral language to describe and explain.
1.15 Describe sounds,
● learner’s choice of spoken language, https://jodidurgin.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/07/all-about-me-bag-brown-paper-1024x1024.png
images, events, people,
● learner’s comfort switching from
and places with clarity
home language to Standard English,
that includes: ● understanding of how we “share” a INTEGRATING THE SUBJECTS: Connect “This is Me” with science lessons
-relevant details and a conversation about the environment or HFLE topics that encourage conversation with families and
range of descriptive ● comfort level asking questions, friends.
words reflecting size,
● oral responses to literal W4 + H
colour, intensity, etc. questions, such as: Who? What? Listen and speak to develop appreciation and celebration of culture
When? Where? How? and oral languages.
1.16 Produce complete
● Developing vocabulary
sentences when suitable ● oral responses to questions to Welcome! (SCO 1.13) Begin each day’s learning
to task and setting demonstrate deeper understanding, experiences with celebrations of culture and
such as: Why, What if? How do you language. Meet each learner at the door
(Phonological Awareness)
know? etc. with a brief, pleasant greeting that begins
● understanding of word order to their day with affirmation, personal growth and an authentic
1.17 Continue to
make a statement, ask a question, connection between the teacher and learner. Vary each day’s greeting with
develop the foundation
etc. a special hand greeting (fist bump, sequence of claps, light stomping, etc.),
of phonological
Note: one week’s assessments of learning a question about a recent event in the community, or the first line of a
awareness by orally
often serve as a pre-assessment to familiar song the learner joins in.
identifying, producing,
determine the next focus of instruction. INTEGRATING SUBJECTS: Refer to the sounds of the morning
and manipulating
greeting during Science class in terms of loudness, patterns of sounds,
various units of speech
PRODUCTS (oral, not written) etc.)
sounds within words,
Questioning: After a listening activity,
including:
such as a Teacher “Read Aloud”, ask What’s Happening? (SCO 1.13, 1.14, 1.15): Create a series of vignettes
- initial and final sounds
questions of individual learners or groups of that reflect common occurrences on the playground, in the
- segmenting sounds in
learners questions that focus on school, or in the community where polite and courteous Home
one syllable words
understanding and applying the information
Page | 6
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
- beats in a word in the fiction or nonfiction passage. See the Language and Standard English conversation are used. Examples include:
(syllables) Resources section for suggestions for - Greeting a friend after the weekend,
- onset and rhyme questions that develop critical thinking. Use - Consoling a friend who is not feeling well,
- blending sounds to a Four level Rubric to gather information - Meeting a teacher or principal in the community,
make one-syllable words. about learner progress in Listening and - Sharing a happy event with a friend,
-identifying phonemes in Speaking as they participate in activities - Meeting someone new to the school or community.
one syllable words throughout the year. For example: Choose a group of learners to demonstrate how to role play the vignette.
After the demonstration of the role play, provide pairs or triads with a
1.18 Use common SCO(s) : Ready to Got it Getting Not yet vignette to role play. Observe triads and make notes of the learner’s
singular and plural 1.5 move on there experience with these social conversations, preferred language,
nouns in the meaningful Listenin expressions, etc.
g
context of sentences(e.g.
compre-
You say, I say, we might also say (SCO 1.12,1.13,1.14) (samples to be
She runs, We run
hension
contextualized to each Member State)
ask
Ask learners to share their words for objects and actions. Establish a
questions
1.19 begin to use Recall classroom chart such as:
common irregular plural ideas
forms, such as predicts
man/men, connects
child/children, and visualises
foot/feet
A Single Point rubric is another formative
1.20 use common assessment tool to quickly make note of
pronouns with learner progress and information to next
increasing understanding
steps of instruction.
( I, me, mine, they, Areas to grow Meeting Areas that glow
Expectations As the year progresses, this chart can be refined to be topic specific, such
them, theirs, him, his,
(summarise of as “Different ways to greet people”, “Different ways to express
hers)
list SCOs emotions”, “Different names for foods” etc.
observed)
Page | 7
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Note: Encourage learners who are reluctant to contribute to conversations
1.9 turn with prompts such as, “(Name of Learner), give a thumbs up if you agree
taking or a thumbs down if you don’t.”)
1.11respond
with an on
topic
opinion
Loose Parts Learning Centre (SCO 1.13, 1.14)
Create a space in the classroom to display bits and
pieces of items the teacher and learners collect from
Phonological Awareness Checklist: Use the environment. During Centre Time, small groups
a checklist to record learner progress in of learners gather and use the “loose parts” to:
phonological awareness (See a)use new vocabulary as they create, organise, etc.
OR
https://www.readingrockets.org/sites/default/files/Component_
check.pdf for a comprehensive Grade One b) (SCO 1.17) use the loose parts as manipulatives to segment letter
Oral Language checklist that can be referred sounds in words.
to throughout the year. Throughout these small group loose parts conversations, use a single
point rubric (see Inclusive Assessment column) observe learners
Quizzes development in the SCOs represented in the lesson plan; for example,
Sample Quiz participation, language use, listening strategies and creativity.
Learner views the emojis below, chooses 5,
recreates the facial expression and describes Phonological Awareness
the when and why of the emoji’s
expression. What Does That Sound Feel Like? (SCO 1.17): Throughout the term,
develop a list of interesting names, places, words from stories,
conversations or other subject areas etc. Each day, choose a few words
and focus on the first letter of the name, place, etc. Use this as an oral
activity with a focus on how the mouth looks and feels when the sound is
made. Throughout the day, pause when another interesting word that
Page | 8
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
begins with that sound is used. As the year progresses, focus on final,
medial and blended sounds.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS: In Reading and in Writing, letter names will be
introduced/reviewed and used meaningfully within the context of authentic and engaging
anchor texts.
Refer to Ministry documents for Hear the Rhyme and Feel the Beat (SCO 1.16, 1.17): Schedule
information about the levels of progress as time to play with the sounds of language:
indicated by quiz scores; for example: - share well known and new poetry; ensuring the rhyming words are
9-10 Ready for more (Level 4) emphasised with a louder voice, stamping a foot, a change of
7-8 Got it (Level 3) voice, etc. Visit https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GjbrpyjcvIY for a Caribbean
6-7 Getting there (Level 2) rhyming song.
Up to 5 Not yet (Level 1) - simple cloze rhyming; for example, I throw a ball, you put a dress
on your ____ ; Ruff, says the dog, ribbit days the ____.
Providing Feedback: - teacher and learners clap a beat to a song or poem
- to learners - teacher and learners tap the sounds of learners’ names
When providing learner feedback, be - teacher or learner says the sounds of a well known word: I will r-
specific. Show the learner what he/she has u-n down the street; class responds (I will run down the street)
done well, then tell the learner what
he/she’s ready to learn next. For the teacher: Lots of ideas to teach Phonological Awareness
“I notice that you can . . . and now it’s time
Phonological Awareness is an essential skill in early literacy development.
to learn how to . . .”
While many resources are available online, be sure to choose resources
-to parents/caregivers that are developmentally appropriate and culturally relevant, so adapt the
“I’ve been noticing that (learner’s name) is examples in online resources words that are of interest to students and
able to . . . and now it’s time for (learner’s reflect the home language(s) used in the community; for example, choose
name) to learn how to . . .” names of people, places, or objects that are local, not those chosen by the
authors of the resources. For example:
Learner Self assessments
Page | 9
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
What does Listening feel like?
Provide opportunities for learners to reflect
on their own progress in listening and
In some countries, this image may be matched with the sound
speaking:
for S (soccer); but in the Member States and throughout the world, it
Display a symbol that the class knows
would be much a more appropriate match for the sound of the letter F
means “Listen, don’t speak”
(football). Images of a banana, mango and coconut may bemore well
Then, during 30 seconds of silence, learners
known, specific and relevant examples of the letter sounds of b, m, and c.
listen for environmental sounds that can be
heard above the silence. Learners then
Remember that phonological awareness’s focus is on listening and
pause, think about, and share how their
speaking, (Phonics instruction is included in the Reading/Viewing and
body listens.
Writing/representing Strands)
-My hands are:
-My legs are: Visit https://www.uwo.ca/fhs/lwm/teaching/dld_2018_19/Woldmo_PAGuideKindergarten.pdf
-My eyes are:
-My ears are: and
-My mouth is:
https://www.readingrockets.org/literacy-home/reading-101-guide-parents/your-first-grader/phonological-
and-phonemic-awareness for excellent ideas and resources to teach phonological
awareness in K-2. Many of these ideas can be shared with Parents for
practice at home.
Examples of the suggestions available from
https://www.uwo.ca/fhs/lwm/teaching/dld_2018_19/Woldmo_PAGuideKindergarten.pdf include:
Page | 10
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Page | 11
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Reinforce the phonological awareness lessons learned throughout the day
in all subject areas.
Additional Resources and Materials
For learners new to the Member State and unfamiliar with the vernacular, refer to apps such as Google Translate to create welcoming charts that
include a picture of interest and the accompanying word. These welcoming charts may be referred to during the Morning Message as a means to
Page | 12
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
include all learners in the day’s discussion topic. ChatbotGP will also provide the teacher with information about familiar stories, songs, etc. of other
culutres and languages.
To support ELO 1 Speaking and Listening:
Remember that the entire school, school grounds and community provide excellent opportunities to learn about and develop oral
language: speaking and listening. Vocabulary and oral conversation is best taught in authentic situations. Schedule regular outdoor walk-and-
talks to explore, listen and talk about all the sights, sounds, natural and physical objects the school community has to offer.
Audio / video books for Grade one learners to include in listening centers: Visit https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL7Jfe1zshOWZWR7KJRCUfzYjlzLlr4_ei
Storyline Online https://storylineonline.net/ Another great addition to a listening center; this site also offers a Teacher’s Guide and excellent multi subject
integrated lesson plans for many stories.
Puppets are engaging toys that can help support oral language skills and communication, social/emotional development, and help
children learn and understand the world around them through safe, imaginative play. https://bit.ly/2UGMViK
Connecting Mindfulness to Speaking and Listening lessons
Visit https://www.edutopia.org/article/8-activities-learners-and-teachers-create-mindful-classroom/ for suggestions about how to develop thoughtful, calm, caring and empathetic
learners.
Loose Parts Learning
Unstructured loose parts play is a foundational element of many high-quality early childhood programs, but they actually hold plenty of learning
potential for all ages. Tinkering and making are pleasantly engaging for everyone! Because loose parts can be used in so many ways, they are ideal for
multi-age environments. With the same pile of beach pebbles, a preschooler could make piles or towers, a kindergartner
could practice counting, and a third grader could model multiplication problems by creating arrays.
https://www.weareteachers.com/loose-parts-activities/ For examples of how to use loose parts to enhance oral language, visit
https://www.weareteachers.com/loose-parts-activities/
Page | 13
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Using sign language as a classroom management tool. Try simple Sign Language for Classroom
Management: Visit: https://encrypted-tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcSW1HZtvvKfzR3QdIKa71xvttvURIWx3Iy9Ww&usqp=CAU
and https://www.weareteachers.com/teach-sign-language/
Choosing anchor topics to introduce lessons: Use the Learner Interest Survey (see the Inclusive Assessment Strategies column above) to
determine the learners’ favourite songs, activities, stories, animals, sports, etc. As classroom discussions or phonological awareness activities are
planned, draw on this information to ensure learner interest and engagement.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Assessment of Listening and Speaking
Learner Interest Inventory Samples: These samples, collected through a search for Grade One Learner Interest
Inventories, provide a selection of the available inventories. Adapt as needed for your classroom and context.
Rethinking Listening in the Primary School Classroom: A discussion about reflecting on learner listening and
how learners can assess their own listening. https://beyondtheapple.com/2017/02/24/a-learners-self-assessment-of-listening-habits/
Using Speaking and Listening as a Classroom Management Tool
Listening and Speaking as Tools for Classroom Management: Schedule a discussion to decide on the sounds (a piece of music, a quiet bell, an
image, etc.) that will be used to signal that it’s time to pause and pay attention to the teacher, a visitor, or a learner.
Building Community Relationships with Schools https://www.kqed.org/mindshift/53091/why-schools-should-be-organized-to-prioritize-relationships
Creating a Classroom of Cooperative Learners: See https://www.teachervision.com/professional-development/cooperative-learning for information about Cooperative
Learning and Cooperative Learning strategies.
How do I design my classroom for small group listening activities? Establish a listening center with a table and 2-4 chairs with access to
manipulatives and objects that make sounds, and recordings of stories, songs, and information about topics of interest to learners. During small
group work, learners use the listening center to engage in listening and sharing.
Page | 14
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Listening to the environment as a Classroom Management Tool: When it’s reading time or time to make a transition to another subject, or
when you need to draw the class back together, play a sound. A sample environmental sounds site is: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ii-oNQ2aTmc
How do I settle the class into a routine? Grade One classrooms can become hectic, so schedule regular moments throughout the day (or stop an
activity for a one-minute time frame to be calm) to explore Listening and Speaking through silent thoughts and mindfulness.
Visit: https://www.edu.gov.mb.ca/k12/cur/ela/list_speak/listening_speaking.pdf
Listening Comprehension
What are The Listening Comprehension Strategies? Listening is an integral component of meaning making. Listening Comprehension
Strategies can be explicitly taught through engaging and relevant opportunities to think deeply about auditory messages. Listening Comprehension
Strategies include: Predicting, Connecting, Visualising, Determining Importance, Analysing, Synthesising, Inferring. Note: Listening Comprehension
Strategies are the same as reading comprehension strategies and are applied in all subject areas.
● Retelling: learners retelling information or a story they have listened to.
● Connecting - When learners preview text, they tap into what they already know, that will help them to understand the text they are about to
read. This provides a framework for any new information they listen to and read.
● Visualising - learners who visualize while reading often have better listening comprehension. Readers can take advantage of illustrations that
are embedded in the text or create their own mental images or drawings when reading text without illustrations.
● Predicting - When learners make predictions about the text they are about to read, it sets up expectations based on their prior knowledge
about similar topics. As they read, they may mentally revise their prediction as they gain more information.
● Recognizing Literal Meaning: Questions about facts, details or information explicitly stated in the audio story.
● Making Inferences: Questions asking learners to make inferences as they listen to audio stories, interpreting what is said by going beyond the
literal meaning.
● Identifying Main Idea: Questions asking learners to identify the central idea or gist of an audio story .
● Drawing Conclusions: Questions asking learners to draw conclusions by synthesizing information in an audio story.
● Analyzing Reasoning: Questions asking learners to analyze reasoning supporting a claim in an audio story.
● Finding Evidence: Questions asking learners to identify statements or details in an audio story that provide evidence to support claims.
https://blog.listenwise.com/2017/04/8-components-listening/conclusions
The Ontario Teachers’ Federation https://www.eslkidstuff.com/blog/top-10-lists/top-10-listening-activities-without-a-cdalso provides suggestions for developing Listening
Comprehension. Adapt the language level of some questions to reflect the age and context of the learners in your community.
Page | 15
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Are Grade One learners too young for critical thinking? Even young learners engage in critical thinking. Bloom’s taxonomy provides sample
questions that encourage learners to think beyond the “correct answer”. Visit https://www.linnbenton.edu/learner-services/library-tutoring-testing/learning-center/academic-
coaching/documents/20-Bloom-Question-Cues-Chart.pdf and choose questions that complement the development level of the learners in your classroom.
Culture and Languages
Visit: Culture Queen: I Like the Me I See
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XwU4N_1OVWU
Manners are important. Be aware that different cultures have different social norms and ensure that all learners see and practice respectful
conversation.
Phonological Awareness
What is Phonological Awareness? Throughout the early years, learners acquire strategies that provide opportunities to hear, blend, combine, and
segment sounds. the suggested learning activities below provide suggestions to develop phonological awareness. The brain processes and sorts
sound into meaningful components of environmental sounds (e.g., truck, birds) and speech sounds.
The International Literacy Association provides free regular Position Statements and Research Briefs for teachers interested in building their
understanding about Phonological Awareness, visit https://www.literacyworldwide.org/docs/default-source/where-we-stand/9457_Phonological_Awareness_1-2020_Final.pdf
The North Carolina Department of Public Instruction provides an excellent start for teachers searching for grade one phonological awareness learning strategies. A
chart of developmental expectations for phonological awareness is available below.
Oral Language instruction focuses on:
● Phonological processing: the way the brain processes sounds for speech (I hear this, it means . . . ).
● Phonemic awareness includes: rhyming, alliteration, segmentation, blending, substitution, deletion, and manipulation. Phonemic awareness
skills provide the foundation for the skills required for reading.
Page | 16
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
● Articulation: the way the lips, teeth, tongue, and palate interact with voice and air movement to create playful and/or meaningful speech
sounds
NOTE: Phonics, is included in the reading and writing strands of Language Arts. Phonics connects the sound of the letter with the recognition of
the printed letter. (also known as sound-symbol recognition). Learning strategies for phonics are included in ELO 3 (Reading and Viewing) and
ELO 7 (Writing and Representing) https://www.readingrockets.org/topics/developmental-milestones/articles/development-phonological-skills. Which Phonological Awareness Skills
are Expected for Grade One Learners?
Page | 17
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Strategies to Support Subject Integration:
Language Arts provides a wealth of opportunities for integration among subjects. Suggestions for integration among subjects are embedded
throughout the curriculum with this identifying icon
In addition to the suggestions in the ILS columns, Sample Planning Template for a curriculum based Integrated Unit of Language Arts and Social
Studies may be useful as a guide to begin developing the focus and topics covered in the unit.
Sample Planning Template for Integrated Unit (Language Arts and Social Studies)
THEME: Our relationships and responsibilities in our community and family
Subjects Essential Learning Outcomes Specific Learning Outcomes
Language ELO1: The learner will explore, use, and critically apply oral language for SCO: Listening to form and foster relationships 1,13, 1.14, 1.15, 1.16, 1.17
Arts (Listening pleasure, personal growth, to form and foster relationships and, to develop an
and Speaking) appreciation of and celebration of culture and of oral languages.
Social Studies To understand that we have roles and responsibilities in our families, school, Knowledge: Recognise that when everyone in our family shares and helps
(Civic and community. one another, we all benefit
Participation) Skills: List the ways that our siblings, parents, grandparents and other
relatives help us and vice versa
Values: appreciate that helping other family members is important for our
collective wellbeing
Beginning date: End date:
Culminating project: Digital presentation of photos with accompanying storytelling
Sample Materials to anchor and support lessons:
- Musical selections: To listen and sing: The More We Get Together https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-J3S4xFzU90
- To listen and move: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jJV9NGH8taY
- Listening and viewing a Read Aloud to appreciate our country, community and family https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5kV__nbWkr4
- Family and community members to share stories about helping in the community
- Photos of family members helping each other and those in the community
Overview of lessons:
Language Arts (Listening and Speaking) Social Studies (Civic Participation)
(Teachers will refer to the SCOs and ILS for ideas to insert 1-2 sentence overview of (Teachers will refer to the SCOs and ILS for ideas to a 1-2 sentence overview of
each proposed Language Arts curriculum based lessons to include in the theme. ) each proposed Social Studies curriculum based lesson to include in the theme.)
Overview of formative assessments
Conversations:
Observations:
Products:
Page | 18
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Reading and Viewing
OHPC Language Arts Grade One – READING AND VIEWING
Essential Learning Outcome 2
Introduction to the Strand
Reading and viewing are meaning-making, problem solving activities that provide opportunities to interact with a wide range of written and visual
text for a variety of purposes. Readers learn to integrate a variety of meaning, structure, vocabulary, and word solving strategies and skills as they
develop thoughtful and critical understanding and insight into written or visual representations of text.
Strand: Reading and Viewing
Essential Learning Outcome 2
The learner will demonstrate a variety of ways to use background knowledge and interests to select and engage critically with a range of culturally
diverse paper-based, visual, and digital texts for pleasure and personal growth.
Grade One Expectations for Reading and Viewing.
Use Background knowledge and interests
• connect background knowledge of common events, well known stories, poems, and songs to establish a foundation of understanding, titles,
pictures and some words and phrases.
• make imaginative and real-life connections to their own experiences.
Select and engage critically with a range of texts for pleasure
• choose books of interest for browsing and gathering meaning through illustrations
• assist understanding by connecting text to background knowledge
• read independently, share, and explain reactions to texts by commenting on meaning and message
Engage critically with a range of texts for personal growth
• Further develop Concepts of Print and apply their functions.
• Interact with a variety of Emergent and, for some learners, Early Stage genres and text forms to engage with and respond to increasingly
varied text.
• Respond to reading using oral, visual, hands on or simple written responses.
Page | 19
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
• Reflect on and identify their strengths as readers, areas for improvement and the strategies they found useful before, during and after
reading.
Page | 20
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
By the end of Grade One, Suggestions for formative assessment Suggestions for inclusive learning strategies for ELO 2
the learner will be expected strategies ELO 2 that provide information
NOTES: ELO 2 focusses on the Independent Reading
to: about learning
portion of reading instruction. Indepenedent Reading is
Use background The formative assessment strategies listed below not scheduled every day. Visit the Additional Resources for
knowledge and interests to only provide opportunities to determine learning Teachers section below for information about Reading
select books prior to instruction, observe learner progress during Instruction in Primary grades reading instruction
and after learning, they provide the information
2.1 reflect on and connect Ensure the classroom has a wide range of text base or
needed to inform the next steps of instruction.
interests and background digital reading materials, including books, one page stories,
knowledge before, during and fact sheets on topics of interest, picture books, age
after reading. appropriate magazines and posters, etc.
OBSERVATIONS
2.2 apply Concepts About Begin each Independent Reading Session with a mini lesson
Use the “Reading and Viewing” section of your
Print to navigate that supports the outcomes of this ELO. Use an anchor text
Observation of Student Learning Journal” to create
Emergent/Early level text. that is viewable by all to demonstrate the lesson. The Global
anecdotal notes, checklists, rubrics, and the results
Digital Library https://digitallibrary.io/ has a wealth of emergent
2.3 connect background of quizzes etc. (see sample listed in ELO 1)
and early books that serve as anchors for these lessons.
knowledge to new learning.
Gathering information through COP
Engage critically with a C: Conversation
range of texts for pleasure O: Observation
P: Products
2.4 regard reading/viewing as
sources of interest, enjoyment, CONVERSATIONS
and information The Concepts About Print Assessment provides
Grade Kindergarten to Grade Two teachers with
2.5 engage in reading or
useful information, gathered through conversation
reading-like behaviour to
about a book, about how learners view and learn
experience a variety of text
from text. Visit:
and text forms
Page | 21
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
2.6 participate in opportunities https://connect.readingandwritingproject.org/file/download?google_drive_d Use background knowledge and interests to select
ocument_id=0B3yKjAsMtuECVXFvM1NVZ1BJenc
to share favourite texts with books
peers
Practicing what I’ve learned about reading (SCO
2.7 re-read, retell and act out 2.1.2.2, 2.3) Design reading corners or classroom libraries
selections of familiar stories, with access paper based and digital written and visual texts
of interest to students.
poems, and nonfiction texts
Schedule daily opportunities for Independent Reading.
Select and engage critically, (Visit page 25 below for more information) Provide daily
with a range of texts for demonstrations to Grade One learners about how to:
personal growth - preview and choose books by looking at the cover, title,
illustrations, author, illustrator.
2.8 select, with teacher
- reflect on background knowledge
assistance, texts appropriate to - apply their knowledge of Concepts About Print (left right,
their interests and reading top to bottom, looking at pictures, identifying known
progress words, etc.)
-apply what they are learning about reading and Viewing
2.9 select just right texts with
throughout the year
assistance and beginning
After each demonstration, schedule time for learners to
independence Teacher – Learner After Reading interview interact with increasing confidence and independence with
Emergent and Early texts and respond to their reading with
2.10 use illustrations in a text
During Independent Reading time, engage 2-3 visual, oral, or written responses. As learners read, take time
to describe and interpret
students each day in a conversation about the text to sit beside 2-5 learners each day and listen to them read
characters, setting, and events they are reading. Using language familiar to the (quiet voice) and talk about what they are reading. Provide a
learner, choose a few of these suggestions to guide brief mini lesson when necessary.
2.11 use nonfiction
this conversation:
instructions and text features
What is the title of this book? Engage critically with a range of texts for pleasure
to create models or artistic
Who is the author?
representations Why did you choose to read this book? Read Around the room (SCO 2.4, 2.5) Create a literate
Which pictures were special? and engaging classroom environment with learner created
Tell me about one of those pictures?
Page | 22
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
2.12 formulate questions as What was your favorite part of the book? or collected wall prints of poems, signs, lyrics, etc. Schedule
well as understandings of “Read Around the Room” sessions for small groups of
digital fiction and nonfiction If you could talk to the author of this book, what earners to explore and share the texts. Observe learners as
you tell would (ask) tell him/her?
text, they read around the room and engage the learners in
Did this book make you laugh? cry? worry? smile?
conversations about what they are reading that reflect the
2.13 develop an understanding cheer? Explain.
daily lessons in reading and viewing; for example, the
and respect for diversity in What connections are there between the book and
information on the signs, what the song is about, rhyming
text. your life? Explain.
words in the song, words new to them etc. Learners share
What did this book make you wonder about?
their learning with peers or in their “Read Around the
What was the author’s purpose for writing this
Room” diary. Each diary page provides learners with an
book?
Do any of the characters remind you of friends, opportunity to search for words that fall under a specific
family members, or classmates? Explain. category; sample pages include:
Show me a few words you know really well.
I read this and I’d like to share it with a friend:
Show me a word that you weren’t sure of.
I’d like to tell a friend about this picture:
As learners’ respond determine if the book was at,
Words that I know:
below or beyond the learners reading
Words I’m not sure of:
comprehension level. If beyond, revisit lesson about
Words beginning with the letter _______
how to choose a just right book for Independent
Etc.
Reading.
OBSERVATIONS Sharing what I read (SCO 2.6,2.7)Provide learners with
opportunities to share favourite fiction or nonfiction texts
Book Club
with peers through small group:
Observe and make notes about learners in groups of
- shared reading (see page 25 below)
3, las they engage in a “book club” and review their - oral retelling
books. Observe for evidence of understanding or - drawings
misunderstanding as peers listen and share - role playing
information or ask questions about the text. Use
Page | 23
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
these observations to begin the next lesson on - demonstrating or teaching something learned
reading comprehension, word work, vocabulary, etc.
As learners are working in groups, visit a group and
PRODUCTS participate in conversations, observing individual learner’s
participation, choices to share, indications of comprehension,
Peer assessment of prior knowledge
etc.
While the KWL is well known, this updated TWHL
Select and engage critically, with a range of texts for
version provides small groups of learners reading
personal growth
the same text with more opportunities to think
about their before, during and after reading Searching for books to become a better reader (SCO
experiences. In groups of two or three, peers ask 2.9) Model the Five Finger Rule to
each other the questions in the TWHL chart below. demonstrate how to choose books for
Learners then combine prior knowledge to develop Independent Reading Time or Home
a shared background knowledge bank. This may be Reading by ensuring the book is not too
completed orally or in written format. easy, not too hard, but just right. Supply
groups of learners with a variety of books that range from
TWHL chart
very easy to more challenging. Each learner practices the
What What How we What we Five Finger Rule https://www.scholastic.com/parents/books-and-reading/raise-
we we will find the have a-reader-blog/five-finger-rule.html to determine the book that’s just
think want information learned right for them.
we to
Time to practice what we know! (SCO 2.8) Schedule
know know
time for small groups of learners to read to each other as
they practice Emergent and Early Level texts with a focus
on fluency, expression, and sight word automaticity. Books
that learners can read confidently can be sent home for
additional practice This provides learners an opportunity to
Hodgepodgedays.com
Page | 24
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
practice at a comfortable level and provides parents and
caregivers the opportunity to enjoy their child’s progress.
Pictures and words work together (SCO 2.10,2.11)
Use the regularly scheduled Teacher Read Alouds for a
Book Walk to demonstrate how to look at pictures in
fiction text for additional information that supports the
stories. After demonstrating, ask learners to share their ideas
about:
- the characters and their expressions
- the setting of a story
- how the pictures help make predictions about what will
happen next
-how the picture can help figure out a difficult word
For nonfiction texts, use questions such as:
-Have you seen what’s in these pictures before?
-What do you know about these pictures?
-What do you think you will learn?
Is this real or make believe?(SCO 2.12) During Daily
Teacher Read Aloud, pause to ask questions that tap into
critical thought, such as:
Do you think this can really happen? Why?
How do you know this information is about something that
can /can’t or will / won’t happen?
What else could have happened? Why do you think that?
If this didn’t happen, then . . . or if this happened, then, . . .
What else do you know about (this event, character, etc)?
Page | 25
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
How did (name of character) feel when . . .? etc.
Learners respond with oral, written or illustrated responses.
Online reading (SCO 2.12) Set up a simple
scavenger hunt for digital text features.
Demonstrate and provide time to practice how
to preview developmentally appropriate
websites by looking at the title, the illustrations, and how to
use the tabs on nonfiction sites. Visit page 25 for a range of
excellent free digital books suitable for Emergent and Early
readers. https://kids.nationalgeographic.com/animals/fish/article/surprising-sharks
INTEGRATING SUBJECTS: Social Studies
Grade One Researchers: Every Grade One class has
learners who require additional challenges or alternate entry
points to learning. Respond by providing opportunities for learners to
think more deeply or gather additional information about the topic.
For fiction: encourage readers to read books by the same author and
prepare a simple author study. Visit
https://www.readingrockets.org/books/authorstudy for information and adapt as
needed. For nonfiction, reinforce a Social Studies lesson on “economic
decision making” with a class discussion about favourite things. Create
a list of favourite things and teach learners how to search (within safe
websites) for images of the objects listed. Discuss the difference between
a want and a need and learners fill in a chart with the images or words
for each category.
https://thisreadingmama.com/wants-vs-needs-learning-pack/
Page | 26
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
Additional Resources and Materials
Books available in many OECS Primary Schools:
School libraries: arrange to borrow a wide range of books to establish a classroom library and replace the books with a new set every few weeks.
Ensure the classroom library has books representing a range of genres and a range of text difficulty levels. Ask the principal about access to:
Hands Across the Seas books which provide schools with excellent books that are written by local and international authors.
Early Learner Programme Student Resources https://handsacrossthesea.org/resources/
Free digital texts for readers:
Global Digital Library https://digitallibrary.io/
Page | 27
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
As the teacher projects the story chosen to illustrate a lesson’s focus, the text could be read aloud or share read with the class; throughout the
reading, the teacher pauses to engage the class in a discussion that highlights the sections of text that focus on the LA lesson. Examples include:
pause and predict; how to figure out this new word; connecting the known to the new. etc.
Bloom Library https://bloomlibrary.org/
Books are presented in many languages, which include books for hearing impaired and visually impaired children. Some books are well levelled for
the early Primary grades and contain authentic language structures rather than phonetically controlled text.
Let’s Read Asia Foundation https://www.letsreadasia.org/
Another example of a free digital library that provides engaging texts from a variety of genres with an option for read aloud.
Visit Common Sense Media https://www.commonsensemedia.org/lists/best-books-for-first-graders for suggestions of books that appeal to Grade One Readers.
Critical Reading and Thought: Build a classroom library by Selecting classroom books based on learner interests. Remind learners to think about
questions of Why? What else? How?
Using Community Resources: The community is an especially valuable resource for learning to read. Invite community members to class to read
to the learners, wander through the community searching for known words displayed on signs, in newsletters, on storefronts, etc.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Teacher’s Personal Professional Development about Literacy Instruction
What is Independent Reading?
The keys to successful independent reading in class include:
1. Student choice from a wide variety of texts that provide opportunities for learners to practice what they’ve learned about reading at a
comfortable level
2. Protected quiet reading time
3. Teacher support
4. Emphasis on the reading process
5. Teacher modeling
6. Community building activities
Page | 28
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
What is Shared Reading? Visit: https://myokapi.com/education/literacy-voices/shared-reading-grade-1-first-reading-book-video/
International Literacy Association: https://www.literacyworldwide.org/get-resources/position-statements
Edutopia Topic Index: https://www.edutopia.org/topic-index
Assessment
Further information about observing learners is available at: https://www.scholastic.com/teachers/articles/teaching-content/observing-learners/
Questions to Guide Assessment Decisions
How do I keep track of learner progress? “Assessment should be taking place constantly. View every conference or small group as an
opportunity. Listen to your learners read aloud for a bit, ask comprehension questions, and try to find something to teach based on what you hear.
For example, if you ask your learners, “What are you thinking about the character?” and they reply with a particular trait, have them collect these
traits across several chapters to see if the character always acts the same way or if there are times when the character surprises them. Ideally, both
what you’re looking for and what you’re choosing to teach are informed by the goal you’ve set with the learner, your current unit of study in reading,
and your knowledge of text-level complexities.” https://bit.ly/2MmcOzU
What is formative Assessment?: The Inclusive Assessment Strategies provide opportunities for formative assessment on learning progress. Teachers
gather information through Conversation, Observation and Products (COP). These observations are dated and recorded in the Observation of Student
Learning Journal.
What does Primary School Reading Instruction look like?
Create a classroom environment where students are exposed to reading materials of different genres and levels of text difficulty (classroom library
with fiction and non-fiction books, magazines etc.).
Often referred to as Readers’ Workshop, the teacher and learners interact with text in the following ways:
Page | 29
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
● DAILY: Teacher Read Aloud: Read a variety of genres (fiction, nonfiction and poetry) that represent learner interests. Include stories,
poems and information from all subject areas.
● DAILY: Interactive Read Aloud: An opportunity to introduce anchors and anchor experiences to introduce lessons focussed on
comprehension, vocabulary, and graphophonic cues.
● Engage learners in Shared Reading opportunities (Readers’ Theatre, Read Around the Room, etc.) to establish a supportive environment
for slightly challenging text, an opportunity to Chime In, and to develop fluency and vocabulary.
● DAILY: Schedule small group Guided Reading to provide explicit instruction on reading strategies and skills.
● DAILY: Schedule Independent Reading opportunities for learners to explore developmentally responsive books that provide practice in
strategy and skill development.
This instructional model is often referred to as Readers Workshop. For more information, visit
What is an Anchor Text? An anchor text provides learners with an engaging example to engage in a lesson. Use different modes to begin a lesson
and reinforce lessons (stories, audio, video, projector, WhatsApp, flashcards, pictures (see Resources Section for information about flashcards).
Are Reading Responses always worksheets? For deeper and more engaging opportunities for learners to demonstrate their understanding of
text, provide a range of opportunities for learners to demonstrate their understanding of texts read:
• discuss with a partner
• oral retelling
• drawing
• write in a journal
• role play etc.
What is meant by Background Knowledge? The learning, language and experiences the learner has gathered thus far is the foundation of what
the reader brings to new learning.
Background knowledge helps learners make connections between what they know and what they are reading.
Learners’ knowledge or experience about a topic or text helps improve comprehension.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts provides a wealth of opportunities for integration among subjects. Suggestions for integration among subjects are embedded
throughout the curriculum with this identifying icon:
Page | 30
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Effective Language Arts instruction takes advantage of opportunities to braid the strands of Listening and Speaking; Reading and Viewing;
and Writing and Representing. Suggestions for braiding the strands are embedded throughout the curriculum with this identifying icon:
Integration of Subjects and Braiding of LA Strands
Dance Lessons: Integrating Reading and Viewing with the arts or physical education. Five-ish minute dance lessons.
https://www.kennedy-center.org/education/resources-for-educators/classroom-resources/media-and-interactives/media/dance/five-ish-minute-dance-lessons/fiveish-minute-dance-lessons/african-dance/
Digital Citizens: Integrating Language Arts with Social Studies, Meet the Digital Citizens lesson plan for K-2 learners
https://www.commonsense.org/education/meet-the-digital-citizens
Page | 31
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
OHPC Language Arts Grade One – READING AND VIEWING
Essential Learning Outcome 3
Introduction to the Subject
Reading and Viewing are meaning-making, problem solving activities that provide opportunities to interact with a wide range of written and visual
text for a variety of purposes. Readers learn to integrate a variety of meaning, structure, vocabulary, and word solving strategies and skills as they
develop thoughtful and critical understanding and insight into written or visual representations of text.
Strand: Reading and Viewing
Essential Learning Outcome 3
The learner will interact with understanding and critical thought to a variety of genres and text forms using comprehension strategies,
vocabulary, language structures, and graphophonic cues.
Grade One Expectations for Reading and Viewing
Interact with understanding and critical thought to a wide range of genres and text forms
• Further develop and apply Concepts of Print to engage with Emergent/Early to Early Stage text,
• Use comprehension strategies before reading, during reading and after reading to establish the meaning of the passage,
• Respond to reading using oral, visual, hands on or written responses.
Develop vocabulary
• Notice and respond to new vocabulary in a passage as an opportunity to learn,
• Identify an increasing number of words with automaticity so attention is directed to the meaning of the text.
Recognise and use language structures
• Become more aware of how to use meaningful and fluent phrasing to assist comprehension,
• Develop understanding of meaningful word order in Home Languages and Standard English.
Interact with and meaningfully apply Emergent/Early graphophonic cues
• Notice and apply some Emergent/Early to Early Stage single and multi-sound symbol relationships to decode unknown words with increasing automaticity,
• Begin to notice reading errors and use graphophonic elements meaningfully and structurally to self- correct.
Page | 32
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
By the end of Grade One, Suggestions for Formative Assessment Suggestions for Inclusive Learning Strategies for ELO 3
learners will be expected to: Strategies for ELO 3 that provide
NOTES: ELOs 3 and 4 focus on instruction that is included in
information about learning
scheduled time for Read Aloud, Shared Reading and Guided
The formative assessment strategies listed Reading. See Additional Resources below for more information.
Interact with understanding and
below not only provide opportunities to ELO 3 provides teachers with examples of learning strategies
critical thought to a wide range
determine learning prior to instruction, specific to comprehension, vocabulary, grammar and phonics
of genres and text forms using
observe learner progress during and after (word work) instruction.
comprehension strategies,
learning, they provide the information
Interact with understanding and critical thought to a wide
3.1 Share and discuss texts with needed to inform the next steps of
range of genres and text forms
peers instruction.
3.3 Retell the beginning, middle, CONVERSATIONS
and end of stories and events using Reading is understanding (SCO 3.4): Throughout the year,
Schedule regular conversations with
images, drama, models and written choose an anchor text (see Additional Resources for suggestions)
learners about their reading to determine
summaries, using to introduce and review comprehension strategies with explicit
their interests, their preferences for genre
instruction in each comprehension strategy that includes:
3.2 Use illustrations, graphics etc. or author and level of confidence.
to ask and answer questions, draw Record anecdotal notes about these - a demonstration through a teacher Think Aloud
conclusions and make inferences, conversations in the Observation of - opportunities to practice the strategy and respond in one
identify details, synthesise main Student Learning Journal and use the of the many ways listed below
main idea from the details information as the foundation for - opportunities to reflect on and share how they use the
determining “what’s next?” lessons for comprehension strategy
3.4 Use a variety of comprehension
the class, groupings, or individual
strategies to create meaning in Examples of comprehension strategies are available in resources
learners.
poetry, fiction, and nonfiction texts section and at: https://www.weareteachers.com/first-grade-reading-comprehension/
during Independent Reading: OBSERVATIONS
Page | 33
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
➢ combine text information Include a September Reading Many ways to show I understand (SCO 3.4) Provide a range
with background Checklist in the Observation of Student of opportunities for learners to demonstrate their understanding
knowledge and experiences Learning Journal to determine the of texts:
➢ create visualisations learner’s understanding of the reading and
✓ discuss with a partner
➢ predict what will happen viewing process thus far.
✓ oral retelling
➢ make inferences by drawing
✓ drawing
on their own experiences
✓ write in a journal
and clues in the text
✓ role play etc.
➢ ask and answer questions
✓ story elements/story maps
about representations of
✓ five finger retelling.
character, setting and
content
➢ identify basic character
traits from text and visual
INTEGRATING SUBJECTS:
contextual clues and critical
The learning strategies below provide learners with opportunities
reflection,
to represent and share their learning in all subjects in various
➢ make connections between
ways.
texts, noticing similarities in
characters, events, Administer a Running Record(oral a) The Arts (meaningful mobiles): Retelling: Learners create a
illustrations, and language, reading record) to all learners at the Reading Rope to create and connect images and words to
➢ identify details from text beginning of the year and at regular summarise the beginning middle and end of a story.
and images intervals throughout the year. Learners Ropes are shared orally.
➢ identify main idea who require additional support will b) Mathematics (probability) Making predictions. Language arts
participate in a Running Record more integrates well mathematical thinking about probability by
3.5 demonstrate understanding
frequently. (See Useful Content Section encouraging learners to reflect on how we make
through various responses to text:
for support) predictions about what will happen next based on events
➢ artistic representations in a story or mathematical patterns. In both subjects,
(visual arts, dance, etc.)
Page | 34
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
➢ discussions learners think about what might come next, what the best
➢ graphic organisers result could be and why, etc.
➢ oral and written responses c) Determining importance and sequence Learners
to questions create a flip chart to summarise sequence of
events (in life cycles (Science) and the
Develop vocabulary
predictable schedule of cultural events
Use the results of the
3.6 Continue to make connections Running Record to determine the (Social Studies).
between Home Language learner’s instructional reading level d) Connecting background knowledge to
vocabulary and Standard English (accuracy, fluency and comprehension) new learning: Create Story Sticks as
vocabulary to the language of the an alternative to KWL charts for
story, poem, song, or visual Assess use of Language structures learners to talk about or write
representations, with Rasinski’s Fluency Rubric about prior knowledge, planning to learn and reflecting
on what has been learned (all subjects).
All readers should practice reading
3.7 Apply known oral vocabulary
within familiar language patterns to fluently (phrasing, intonation, and rate Develop vocabulary
appropriate to the genre). This rubric
make meaning from text,
What does this mean? (SCO 3.7., 3.8) Before a shared reading
provides teachers with a simple tool to
3.8 Continue to develop use of monitor fluency development. (See Useful activity, alert learners to new vocabulary words that will be found
context clues to solve unknown Teacher Content section for more in the text. Assist learners in identifying the words using word
vocabulary, information about fluency) identification strategies such as using context clues and
illustrations and confirm by decoding, making analogy, looking
3.9 Begin to automatically read and
at root word, chunking etc. Discuss the meaning as used in
understand sight and some high-
sentences. New vocabulary can be recorded in subject based
frequency words and words of
personal dictionaries.
personal interests or significance in
a variety of reading contexts I know what these words mean (SCO 3.9).Include
opportunities to use read written texts (advertisements, flyers,
3.10 Demonstrate understanding
newspaper, etc.) learn about the vocabulary of student interests,
(not definitions) and application of
community and family funds of knowledge, specific subject area
Page | 35
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
synonyms, antonyms, and http://www.timrasinski.com/presentations/multidimensional_ vocabulary and Home Language. Learners prepare a list of words
fluency_rubric_4_factors.pdf
homophones of interest, or create an illustration or a sentence using the word
Use a Phonemic Awareness checklist and share with peers.
3.11 Begin to understand how
to monitor student progress at the
Emergent/Early level prefixes and BRAIDING THE STRANDS: Encourage
beginning and throughout the year. For a
suffixes change the meaning of learners to use these words as they participate in
sample, visit
words. the writing process. Using known words provides
https://www.fullertonsd.org/cms/lib/CA50010905/Centricity
/Domain/1993/1st_Grade_Phonemic_Awareness_Assessmen learners with the confidence to express
3.12 Expand vocabulary by t_08-16.pdf
themselves more fully.
noticing and using frequently
Note: To ensure equity and relevance of
occurring root words to read Recognise and use language structures
any phonemic awareness assessment, it is
inflectional forms (e.g., look, looks,
very important to substitute unfamiliar Close the Cloze (SCO 3.13) Use the morning message as time
looked, looking)
words on the this checklist with words
for students to learn how to use the meaning of the sentence to
familiar to the learner
Recognise and use language fill in missing words and phrases. Make note of opportunities
structures where one response is best and other opportunities where
Word Solving Strategies
alternate suggestions will also make sense. Discuss why. Example:
3.13 Develop visualisation
During a Running Record or as learners
strategies to connect words, and Create a sentence about the day’s weather and write it on chart
solve difficult words during their reading,
phrases of Home Language and paper. Cover one of the words with a piece of paper. Read the
listen for the strategies they use:
Standard English text to sentence as a Shared Reading activity and pause at the piece of
meaningful mental images - decoding paper. Discuss what word(s) would be meaningful in the
- looking for picture clues sentence. Uncover the word.
3.14 Demonstrate understanding of - rereading
how word order in fiction and - reading ahead and going back We heard a big clap of thunder and then we were all wet! It was
nonfiction text impacts meaning, and make notes about what the learner ___________ really hard!
relies on the most. Use this information
3.15 Begin to apply Extend this activity with more obtuse sentences:
as an indication of what the learner has
punctuation(full stop, question
under control and plan lessons to extend
We walked down the road and saw a ______________. Since there
mark, exclamation mark) and bold the learner’s access to alternate strategies
are many possibilities, gradually uncover each letter (or an illustration) that
print to guide intonation and for word solving.
Page | 36
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
expression, change the tone, and provides additional information. We walked down the road and saw a
for emphasis, etc. p____________.
PRODUCTS
3.16 Apply automatic knowledge of We walked down the road and saw a p_________.
Use a single point rubric to review the
known sight words within
learner’s use of graphic organizers,
sentences to develop phrasing,
illustrations, models, etc. as indicators of
fluency, and expression
learner progress. For example: bituminous roadways.com
Requires Demonstra Ready to As a self check, ask the learners what other sounds would be
additional tes move on expected in the word, and uncover to look for confirmation. At
support understand this level, it’s not essential that the learners know all the letters;
ing of dominant consonants and some vowels suffice.
SCOs
Interact with and meaningfully
The clue is in the punctuation (SCO 3.14)Use role playing to
Make note List SCOs Make note
apply Emergent/Early
of here of next demonstrate how an ! or ? impact how a sentence is read. Create
graphophonic cues to a variety
additional steps of body movements of punctuation marks and or emojis to make
of genres and text forms
support or instruction their purpose come alive. (! = stamping; ? = shoulder shrug, etc.)
alternate As learners read in pairs, they may wish to act out the
3.17 Continue to recognise and
approach punctuation.
meaningfully apply
to move
Emergent/Early stage knowledge
How does my reading sound?(3.14, 3.15,3.16) During Teacher
toward
of letter patterns to decode
Read Aloud, demonstrate:
progress
unfamiliar words. 1) really fast reading
2) really slow reading
➢ initial and some final and
Self assessment Vocabulary 3) very choppy reading
medial consonants
Knowledge 4) fluent reading
➢ Emergent/Early-stage
After each demonstration, ask learners to make a hand
blends As learners’ approach new reading
movement to show how the reading sounded (a zippy fast
➢ Emergent/Early-stage vocabulary, engage them in an active
movement, a slow movement, a chop/chop/chop movement, a
digraphs search for what they know and what they
fluid and flowing movement.) After each movement is created,
Page | 37
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
➢ Emergent/Early-stage are unsure of. Provide opportunities for discuss if the reading was easy or difficult to understand and
consonant vowel letters learners to self assess based on the why. Discuss how fluent reading helps us to understand. Provide
following criteria and search for learners with texts at their instructional levels to practice fluent
3.18 Apply knowledge of word
information to increase their vocabulary. reading and use a fluency rubric to make note of progress.
order, illustrations, text content
Provide feedback to the learner.
and initial, final and some medial
letter sounds to identify unknown Interact with and meaningfully apply Emergent/Early
words, graphophonic cues to a variety of genres and text forms
3.19 Begin to monitor for errors by Using environmental text to learn phonics (SCO 3.17):
cross checking phonics, meaning, Connect phonics lessons with vowels from known anchor texts.
and structure clues. Choose words from a story,
song, poster, etc. as
https://expandvocabulary.weebly.com/fo examples of the sounds and
rmative-assessment.html sound combinations to be
studied. Provide an
I have no idea of the meaning.
example, such as: the initial
1- I've heard of the word.
sound of Dominica and initial sound of the locations in the
2- I've seen the word.
picture. Learners connect the words located in environmental
3- I know the word.
print to an alphabet list. For example:
4- I can give an example of the word.
5- I can give the definition in my own
A
words.
Boat
C
Self Assessment of Reading Fluency
D Dominica
Learners record themselves reading an NOTE: When using prepared materials for phonics instruction,
instructional level text, poem or song and ensure that all words are familiar to students
listen for their fluency and phrasing. A
Meaningful decoding (SCO 3.17,3.18) Use a Think Aloud to
simple rubric provides a space for each
demonstrate how to use letter blocks or letter puzzle pieces to
Page | 38
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
learner to note their progress and their demonstrate how the sounds of letters learned during Speaking
goals. and Listening can be connected sounds to individual and
combinations of letters. Create small groups of learners and say
MY FLUENCY
aloud a familiar word. Observe learners as they work in pairs to
My reading sounds like a storyteller: match block, to sounds. Begin with simple words and as learners
progress, increase the level of difficulty.
Yes Almost Not Yet
If I know this, I also know . . . (SCO 3.19,3.20) Build a word
My voice changes when I read a ?
solving listening center. Include empty cereal boxes, cracker
Yes Almost Not Yet containers, cookie packages, grocery store fliers, etc. Groups of
learners search the packaging to find words they know and share
My voice changes when I read an !
with their peers. Learners ask each other, “If you didn’t know
that word, how would you figure it out?” Observe or collect
Yes Almost Not Yet
learner’s written responses to these conversations and make note
of word solving strategies used.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS AND
INTEGRATING THE SUBJECTS
Using the words we’re learning (SCO 3.19, 3.20)
Learners work in groups to create stories, nonfiction or picture
books encountered in all subject areas with pictures using skills
taught e.g. book of bl, or oa words.
Page | 39
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Resources for parents to enhance reading comprehension: https://www.readingrockets.org/reading-101-guide-parents/first-grade/comprehension-activities-your-first-grader
What are examples of types of reading comprehension activities for Grade One readers’ use? Visit: https://www.readingrockets.org/reading-101-guide-
parents/first-grade/comprehension-activities-your-first-grader
Graphic Organiser to demonstrate reading comprehension https://www.hmhco.com/blog/free-graphic-organizer-templates
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Personal Professional Development for the Teacher
What does a first grade read like?
Visit https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hvtu3yeXESs to view how a first grade reader uses background knowledge, context, structure and decoding to read,
monitor and self correct.
What is a Think Aloud?
Think-alouds allow the learners to “see” their teacher’s thinking. As the teacher reads aloud, she/he verbalizes how an error is noticed and
corrected; questions they have about the text, what they are learning, etc. Their verbalizations include: describing things they’re doing as they seek to
understand, encounter new vocabulary, notice a word error, etc. The Think Aloud serves as an excellent mini-lesson for any subject area.
Running Records (Oral Reading Records) are an essential assessment tool to monitor learning progress in reading. For more information, visit:
https://digital.scholastic.ca/sites/lpeyx-teaching-support/pdfs/additional/programguide/GrK-runningrecords.pdf or request professional development in how to administer a Running
Record.
Page | 40
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Typical errors in a Running Record (miscue analysis):
Correction: A common sign of a competent reader; a correction is a miscue that the learner corrects in order to make sense of the word in the
sentence.
Insertion: An insertion is a word(s) added by the child that is not in the text.
Omission: During oral reading, the learner omits a word that changes the meaning of the sentence.
Repetition: The learner repeats a word or portion of the text.
Reversal: A child will reverse the order of the print or the word (from instead of form, etc.).
Substitution: Instead of reading the word in the text, a child substitutes a word that may or may not make sense in the passage.
What Do the Errors / Miscues Tell You?
Insertion: Does the inserted word detract from meaning? If not, it may just mean the reader is making sense but also inserts. The reader may also
be reading too fast. If the insertion is something like using finished for the finish, this should be addressed.
Omission: When words are omitted, it may mean weaker visual tracking. Determine if the meaning of the passage is affected or not. If not,
omissions can also be the result of not focusing or reading too fast. It may also mean the sight vocabulary is weaker.
Repetition: Lots of repetition may indicate that the text is too difficult. Sometimes readers repeat when they are uncertain and will repeat the
word(s) to keep the words coming as they regroup.
Page | 41
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Substitutions: Sometimes a child will use a substitution because they don’t understand the word being read. Ask, is it a logical substitution? If the
substitution does not change the meaning, it is often enough to help the child focus on accuracy, because he/she is reading from meaning, the most
important skill.
Components of Reading and Viewing Instruction
Teacher Read Aloud: A systematic method of reading aloud, allows teachers to scaffold children's understanding of the book being read, model
strategies for making inferences and explanations, and teach vocabulary and concepts.
Shared Reading: An interactive reading experience that occurs when students join in or share the reading of a book or other text while guided and
supported by a teacher. The teacher explicitly models the skills of proficient readers, including reading with fluency and expression. Visit
https://myokapi.com/education/literacy-voices/shared-reading-grade-1-first-reading-book-video/
for an excellent example of how Teacher Read Alouds and Shared Reading combine to create an authentic and engaging learning experience for
whole class instruction.
Guided reading: The Teacher works with small groups of students who have similar reading needs. The teacher selects and introduces new books
carefully chosen to match the instructional levels of students with increasingly challenging levels of difficulty and engages learners in a “next steps”
lesson. Learners practice reading with the lesson in mind and complete an oral, written, or visual reading response.
Independent reading: During independent reading, students read on their own for their own purposes. Teachers must be careful that the materials
provided are at the students’ independent level so that they are not frustrated.
Buddy reading: Buddy reading provides an opportunity for students to support each other while reading. Teachers must demonstrate the process
first before students are paired. Reading buddies help each other by decoding unknown words, clarifying misconceptions, and discussing the reading
after it has been concluded.
What are the stages of reading development in Grade One?
All Grade One classrooms include a range of readers. The Chart below provides insight into the range of readers in Grade One, usually from Level
C to Level F or G.
Page | 42
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Support for Emergent and Early Readers in Grade One
Dr. J. Brito https://www.nads.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/Brio-NADS-Stages-of-Reading-Development-2018_Brito.pdf
Support of Emergent Readers (K-Grade 1)
Page | 43
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Support for Early Readers (Grade 1-2)
https://core-docs.s3.amazonaws.com/documents/asset/uploaded_file/203042/Characteristics_of_Readers_at_F_P_Levels.pdf
Page | 44
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
What are the stages of phonemic development?
Word Identification Strategies: Visit https://www.readingrockets.org/article/phonics-and-word-recognition-instruction-early-reading-programs-guidelines-children-reading for useful
information and activities.
Comprehension Strategies: Visit https://www.weareteachers.com/first-grade-reading-comprehension/ for useful and developmental appropriate learning activities.
Page | 45
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts provides a wealth of opportunities for integration among subjects. Suggestions for integration among subjects are embedded
throughout the curriculum with the identifying icon:
Effective Language Arts instruction takes advantage of opportunities to braid the strands of Listening and Speaking; Reading and Viewing; and
Writing and Representing. Suggestions for braiding the strands are embedded throughout the curriculum with the identifying icon:
- Read texts from different subject areas e.g. during read aloud, shared reading activities
- Create the opportunities for learners to listen to local resource persons talk about their work and then have them read about them e.g. a
nurse, policeman
- Provide learners with opportunities for choice of text selection to further their understanding of concepts taught in science or social studies
- Encourage learners to observe and record information through drawing or writing simple sentences e.g. observing the weather and drawing
sunny day, rainy day etc. Learners observe a movie or short familiar documentary and record their favourite parts or complete graphic
organizer with assistance.
- After a trip outside of the classroom, learners dictate sentences based on experience and teacher records for future reading
Think Alouds may be introduced in Language Arts but are useful formats for mini lessons in any subject area.
Page | 46
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
OHPC Language Arts Grade One – READING AND VIEWING
Essential Learning Outcome 4
Introduction to the Subject: Reading and Viewing are meaning-making, problem solving activities that provide opportunities to interact with a
wide range of written and visual text for a variety of purposes. Readers learn to integrate a variety of meaning, structure, vocabulary, and word
solving strategies and skills as they develop thoughtful and critical understanding and insight into written or visual representations of text.
Essential Learning Outcomes: ELO 4: Students will develop their understanding of how an author’s purpose and style, genre, text form, text
features and choice of vocabulary, language, influence the meaning of text and define the author’s craft.
Grade Level Expectations
Read for pleasure and personal growth
• reflect on and identify their strengths as readers, areas for improvement and the strategies they found most helpful before, during and after reading.
Use background knowledge
• become more aware of how to integrate reading with skills in listening, speaking, writing, viewing, and representing to help them make sense of what they
read
Interact meaningfully with a wide range of genres and text forms
• read a range of genres within the range of the Transitional to Proficient Stages
• demonstrate an understanding of a variety of literary, graphic and informational texts, using a range of strategies to construct meaning
• engage in character, setting, plot study and critical reflection
• use problem solving strategies such as monitoring, self-correcting and checking independently
Develop vocabulary
• choose nonfiction reading materials for specific purposes and to gather, analyse and use known and new vocabulary in a variety of contexts
Recognise and use language structures
• recognise a variety of text forms, text features and stylistic elements and demonstrate understanding of how they help communicate meaning. Apply graphophonic elements
meaningfully
• continue to develop and apply their understanding of meaningful word study and form
Page | 47
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
By the end of Grade One, learners Suggestions for Formative Suggestions for Inclusive Learning Strategies for ELO 4
will be expected to: Assessment Strategies for ELO
NOTES: ELOs 3 and 4 focus on instruction that is included in
4
Develop understanding of how scheduled time for Read Aloud, Shared Reading and Guided
author’s purpose and style influence The formative assessment Reading. See Additional Resources below for more information.
meaning strategies listed below not only ELO provides teachers with examples of learning strategies specific
provide opportunities to to author’s purpose and style, which includes genre, text form, text
4.1 Begin to become familiar with the
determine learning prior to features as well as author’s choice of vocabulary and language.
style of local and favourite
instruction, observe learner
international authors (Eric Carle, Dr. NOTE: See Useful Content for the Teacher section in ELO 2 for a
progress during and after learning,
Seuss, Robert Munsch, Bill Martin, Dr.
description of Primary School Reading and Viewing instruction
they provide the information
Seuss, Richard Scary, Maurice Sendak,
etc. ): needed to inform the next steps of Develop understanding of how author’s purpose and style
-does the author write fiction or instruction. influence meaning
nonfiction?
CONVERSATIONS Time to explore books (SCO 4.1) Expose students to a range of
-is the author humorous or serious?
texts, and the work of different authors and
-does the author use a lot of words of Include learners in large group or
just a few words illustrators by creating a random collection of books
small group conversations about
-which are do you enjoy reading or of the same genre; some by the same author, some by
favourite titles, formats, authors,
listening to? Why? different authors. Provide time for learners, working
genres and topics. As learners
-does the author use unusual words? in groups, to note similarities and differences among the books
share their ideas, make notes in
What’s an example? based on criteria such as:
the Observation of Student
4.2 Engage with and participate in Learning Journal about each - The title looks interesting.
Shared Reading and Readers Theatre in learner’s developing awareness of : - The illustrations (pictures) make me want to read this book
fiction, nonfiction, and poetry to - I found other books by this author.
-genres
connect reading with personal and -author’s style As learners share their ideas, observe, ask questions, and prompt for
audience engagement. -use of text features to inform,
further information.
-etc.
4.3. Develop an understanding of text
Use this information to determine Add these books to the Reading Corner of class library for further
features such as bold print and font
most popular genres, authors, etc. exploration during Independent Reading or Shared Reading time.
size adds to an author’s style.
and to make decisions about how
to enhance understanding of
Page | 48
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
4.4 Ask questions of author’s purpose favourites while introducing new Selections from these books can also be used as anchors for lessons
for writing: genres, authors, etc. to introduce the Inclusive Learning Strategies.
- Who is the author writing for?
I like this author! (SCO 4.1) Read Aloud several books or stories
- How does the author want you to
feel? OBSERVATIONS by the same author to the class or a group. Discuss:
What does the author want you to
Gather information about learner - if and why the learners enjoyed the author’s work
know or think about?
understanding about author’s - the words that make “pictures” in their heads”
purpose in procedural writing. - how they feel when they hear the story (happy, excited,
Develop understanding and
wondering, etc.) .
recognise use of genres and text Provide the learner (or groups of
features influence meaning learners) with a set of instructions BRAIDING THE STRANDS: As an Interactive Writing
to assemble a simple block lesson, or during Independent Writing, learners search
4.5 Continue to develop understanding
structure to read and follow. online for author’s contact information and write a letter or
and purpose of fiction, nonfiction, and
poetry genres as represented by email to the author.
Observe learner progress and
Emergent and Early Stage:
problem solving strategies as the Making the author’s style visible (SCO 4.3) Many children’s
Pictures
object is constructed. Record authors(Robert Munsch, Eric Carle, etc.) use punctuation, large
Poems
observations in the Observations print and bold print to engage readers in the humorous or exciting
Stories
of Student Learning Journal. style of the story. Display a few lines from a story on a screen or
Fantasy stories,
Informational texts chart paper. Read the text aloud, changing your voice/emotions to
PRODUCTS
suit the punctuation. Explain how the punctuation, large print and
4.6 Apply some text features to locate Text Features bold print is a signal to change how we read text so we understand it
and predict information in text: better. Share read a few selections to ensure all learners understand.
Provide the learner with a book
As individual learners practice reading with punctuation, select
● title and ask the learner to locate text
individual learners to read a short section to you (not the class) and
● table of contents features and answer questions
provide feedback. Small groups of students may wish to create a
● illustrations about the purpose of the text
shared reading to demonstrate how these techniques impact the
● labels on diagrams features, such as:
story. The examples below illustrate Robert Munsch’s use of
● back blurb
● numbered steps ✓ Cover oversized lettering, punctuation, and extended letter use
✓ Title (pleeeeeeeease) for impact and effect.
✓ Illustrations
Page | 49
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
4.7 Read and follow simple written ✓ Table of Contents
and/or illustrated instructions ✓ Back blurb
✓ Numbered steps
4.8 Use text features to support
✓ Labels on diagrams
individual and/or small group research
on topic of interest As text features are located, ask,
“How does the information help
4.9 Search for answers to questions on
the reader understand the book?”
digital sites
Use a checklist to note of the
Develop understanding of
learner’s understanding of the
how vocabulary and language use,
purpose of each feature. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LBDOyWC--vI
influence the meaning and mood of
BRAIDING THE STRANDS: Encourage learners to use
the text Peer Assessment
these techniques in their own writing.
4.10 Discuss interesting words that Schedule time for learners to Read
Develop understanding and recognise use of genres
evoke emotions Around the Room and search for
and text features influence meaning
words to define or talk about.
4.11 Create a personal word bank
Learners create a list of “Words Titles, pictures, and lists help us understand. (SCO 4.6) Choose
4.12 Develop an understanding that We’ve Learned”. Observe and a variety of nonfiction texts to highlight one or more text features.
words may have similar meanings provide feedback as needed. Discuss the purpose of the text feature. Provide groups of learners
with a variety of nonfiction texts and a text feature hunt worksheet
4.13 Continue to develop an
to complete. See sample at the suggested link below.
understanding of how written word
order impacts meaning.
4.14 Compare texts by same illustrator
for similarities in mood (happy, funny,
exciting, etc.)
https://4kinderteachers.com/what-are-text-features/
4.15 Explore how emoticons, symbols,
I read it and I made it (SCO 4.7) Create a “Maker Space” learning
and shapes are used to convey or
center (see Additional Resources section below) that includes single
enhance meaning
and interlocking blocks, ingredients for a simple recipe, playdough,
Page | 50
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
beads, etc. Each week provide a set of instructions for learner to
follow and create something. Learners completing the task will show
you their work or take a picture for you to review later.
Searching online for information (SCO 4.9) Open a research link
such as https://kids.nationalgeographic.com/animals and demonstrate how to look
at the images and develop questions. Ask learners
to provide additional questions. Demonstrate
how to search for answers within the text,
illustrations and through background knowledge
of peers. Provide opportunities for small groups
of learners to explore this site, choose a text,
develop questions and search for answers. Learners in each group
share the question and answer sheet they have developed with other
groups.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS: During Writing Workshop
Encourage learners to write their own set of instructions for
their peers to create something new.
Develop understanding of how vocabulary and language use
influence the meaning and mood of the text
I say, you say, we say (SCO 4.12, 4.13)
Schedule time for learners to use the computer and/or texts and
pictures to explore the culture of different countries. To begin, they
search for local phrases/slang in songs, advertisements, etc.
(repetition of words for emphasis e.g., ‘good good’, synonyms for
words e.g. pipe-faucet, etc. )
Page | 51
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
The terms and phrases in the local language can be converted to
Standard English by providing learners with a Culture Vibes
Thesaurus to complete ( see below)
Grenadian Examples
Local Term Alternative
colgate toothpaste
jook pierce/stab
Grenadian Examples
Creole Standard English
Dem boy and dem Those boys
Wey dey de dey? Where were they?
After completion, students will be engaged in a gallery walk to
comment/read these words and phrases. This project can be worked
on throughout the year.
Icon Cloze Passage (SCO 4.17) Create a cloze passage that
emphasizes mood words. The mood words will be left out of the
passage and replaced with an emoji. The learners will use the icons,
along with the text to guess the mood word and reread the passage.
Page | 52
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Using clues to predict the meaning.
As learners are reading, they demonstrate understanding by choosing a new word to illustrate
with meaning.
https://storylineonline.net/books/jabari-jumps/
Independent searches for Text Features
Provide learners with a Scavenger Hunt to search for text features. Once found, learners read the section and discuss with peers how the text feature
helped them understand.
Covers reflect author’s style Display the covers of an author’s book and discuss the images, fonts, colours, etc. Connect
the cover to the author’s style.
Page | 53
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
What is meant by Author’s Style?
Author's style refers to the unique way a piece of writing is written. It looks at not only what is said but how it is said. Investigating the author’s style
involves analyzing the writer’s distinctive way of communicating ideas. The writer’s goal is to deliberately create or convey a specific mood or
effect. When looking at an author’s style, it is important to look at certain components that set them apart from other authors. These include:
➢ Using sound devices–zoooooooom, SCREECH! quiet
➢ Choice of words
➢ Sentence structure, length and variation
➢ Using dialogue
➢ Use of local and international culture
➢ Use of sensory details, figurative language, and other literary devices
➢ Tone
➢ Using irony (Not taught in Grade One)
What is meant by the word genre?
Genre refers to the style, form, and content of the text. Types of genres encountered in Grade 1 are pictures, poems, stories, fantasy stories, and
informational texts
Page | 54
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
What are Text Features? Text features provide the reader with additional information about the book or passage. This information
helps the reader understand the story better. Examples of text features are illustrations, captions, bold print, index, glossary and
chapter headings. Visit https://4kinderteachers.com/what-are-text-features/ for examples of Kindergarten and Grade One Text
features.
What is a Maker Space? Visit https://www.myteachingcupboard.com/blog/the-benefits-of-a-classroom-maker-space for information about the
purpose and value of maker spaces.
Books to include in classroom maker spaces: https://www.myteachingcupboard.com/blog/5-picture-books-for-your-classroom-maker-space Many
of these books are available online through YouTube.
Opportunities for Subject integration: Language Arts provides a wealth of opportunities for integration among subjects.
Suggestions for integration among subjects are embedded throughout the curriculum with this identifying icon
In addition to the suggestions in the ILS columns, this Sample Planning Template for a curriculum based Integrated Unit of Language Arts and
Social Studies may be useful as a guide to begin developing the focus and topics covered in the unit.
Sample Planning Template for Integrated Unit (Language Arts and Social Studies)
THEME: How Did You Make That?
Subjects Specific Learning Outcomes
Language Essential Learning Outcome: Students will develop their SCOs: 4.5,4.6,4.7,4.8.4.9
Arts (Listening understanding of how an author’s purpose and style, genre, text form,
and Speaking) text features and choice of vocabulary, language, influence the meaning
of text and define the author’s craft.
Science Essential Learning Outcome: Use tools and materials to design and Knowledge:
(Waves: Light build a device that uses light or sound to solve the problem of Give examples of communicating with sound.
and Sound) communicating over a distance. Give examples of communicating with light.
Skills:
Infer certain messages from the type of sound heard.
Infer certain messages from the light patterns detected.
Create a model of a communication device that uses sound or light or
both.
Page | 55
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Participate actively in classroom discussions.
Practice new vocabulary in discussions
Values:
When conducting practical and group work, display sensitivity and
offer assistance to peers who may have physical or learning challenges.
Participate actively in classroom discussions.
Beginning date: End date:
Culminating project: Leaners will invite the principal and learners other grade levels to view their Poster Display of models and labelled diagrams of a light or
sound communication device
Sample Materials to anchor and support lessons:
- Visit NGSS-Interactive-Read-Alouds.pdf page 11 for sample Teacher Read Alouds that support this integrated unit
- Visit https://www.itsalwaysautumn.com/kid-made-drum-set-kazoo-easy-indoor-craft.html for visual and video instructions on how to make a drum and
kazoo
- Construction materials to create light or sound communication devices (cups, string, combs, tissue paper, flashlights, parchment paper, etc.
- Samples of labelled diagrams
- Samples of posters including text features such as titles, diagrams, arrows, etc.
- Etc.
Overview of lessons:
Language Arts (Reading and Viewing) Science (Teachers will refer to the SCOs and ILS for ideas to a 1-2 sentence
(Teachers will refer to the SCOs and ILS for ideas to insert 1-2 sentence overview of overview of each proposed Science curriculum based lesson to include in the theme.)
each proposed Language Arts curriculum based lessons to include in the theme. )
Overview of formative assessments
Conversations:
Observations:
Products:
Page | 56
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
WRITING AND REPRESENTING
OHPC Language Arts Grade One – WRITING AND REPRESENTING
Expected Outcome 5
Introduction to the Subject
Writing and Representing strategies and skills provide opportunities for learners to communicate with their peers and other meaningful audiences
within and beyond their community using paper and digital formats. The process of writing includes planning, organizing, revising, refining, and
sharing feedback. Throughout this process, ongoing problem solving and critical thinking strategies, applicable to subject areas and to life develop.
Essential Learning Outcome 5
Learners will generate, gather and organize thoughts to explore, clarify and reflect on ideas, feelings and experiences as they create a written or
representative draft, independently and collaboratively, for a range of audiences and purposes.
Grade Level Expectations:
Write for pleasure and personal growth
● use the writing process to share ideas with peers
● identify personal strengths as writers and search for new ways to explore ideas
Engage in the writing process
● understand that the printed word conveys a message
● participate in the plan, draft, revise, edit and share cycle
● use classroom tools and resources to improve writing
● communicate through a variety of written forms, for various purposes and to a specific audience.
● begin to notice and attempt to self correct some errors
● continue to develop a legible and efficient style of printing
● notices a variety of presentation style elements including print, script, fonts, graphics, and layout
Explore language structures
Page | 57
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
● use a combination of home language(s) and English to share their ideas in writing
● use symbols, letters, images and words to communicate ideas about objects, pictures and events
● become aware of how language structure influence meaningful sentences
● begin to organize information around a central idea
● experiment with writing simple sentences in a variety of genres and formats
Explore word solving
● focus on spelling words of personal importance
● continue to connect phonological awareness with phonemic information
● spell more high frequency words correctly
● further develop their use of sound symbol strategies, word structure and word meanings to spell unfamiliar words
Page | 58
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
By the end of Grade One, learners Suggestions for formative Suggestions for Inclusive Learning Strategies for ELO 5
will be expected to: assessments of ELO 5 that
NOTE:
provide information about
Generate and gather thoughts to
learning
explore, ideas, feelings and
experiences The formative assessment strategies
listed below not only provide
5.1 Begin to develop strategies for
opportunities to determine learning
the prewriting stages of the writing
prior to instruction, observe learner
process
progress during and after learning,
5.2 Talk about the ideas they plan to they provide the information needed
write about; provide learners with to inform the next steps of
prompts that are of interest and instruction.
relevant
The Writing Journal (see ILS
5.3 Draft some illustrations to column) provides a very useful
www.raisethebarreading.com
accompany ideas and write thoughts source of ongoing progress to
that match the ideas in their record in the Observation of
drawings Student Learning Journal.
5.4 Use role play to assist with Assessment Tools ELO 5 focuses on the Prewriting and Drafting stages of the the
brainstorming ideas Writing Process. The suggestions below may be applied to all genres
Formative Writing Rubric
Use organisational strategies to Generate and gather thoughts to explore, ideas, feelings and
In Grade One, there is a wide range
arrange thoughts to explore, experiences
of writers at varying stages of
development. The Northwestern Pre-writing strategies (SCO 5.1, 5.3, 5.4)
Page | 59
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
clarify and reflect on ideas, Illustrated Rubric provides teachers See Teacher Content sections for suggestions of how to manage the
feelings and experiences with an excellent resource to prewriting session.
monitor progress in each of the
5.5 Begin to use simple graphic Provide each learner with a writer’s notebook to keep track of their
Traits of Writing throughout
organizers to brainstorm and plan brainstorming (planning or
Kindergarten to Grade Two. Visit
prewriting), drafting, revising and
5.6 Begin to become familiar with https://educationnorthwest.org/sites/default/files/gr
adesK-2-6pt-rubric.pdf for a sample that editing. Refer to each learner’s
the purpose of various genres and
can be copied and inserted as a writer’s notebook regularly for evidence of progress and areas
how different genres look and sound:
reference in the Observation of requiring support. Use this notebook throughout the year with all
✓ narratives, Student Learning Journal. See the writing projects.
✓ poetry Teacher Content section for a
✓ expository sample page.
5.7 Begin to develop strategies for OBSERVATION,
the connecting prewriting to the CONVERSATION AND
drafting stages of the writing process PRODUCT
Create a written or representative Purpose of Writing Treasure Hunt
draft BRAIDING THE STRANDS: As learners begin writing,
After the Teacher’s explanation of
revisit anchor/mentor texts introduced during Teacher
5.8 Write to match text to their each purpose for writing, the
Read Aloud or Shared Reading to provide learners with
brainstorm, planning and drawings learners’ understanding of the
opportunities to access their background knowledge and
concept will be assessed -
5.9 Begin to identify the topic, build interest for writing. Observe the
purpose, audience and form for Step 1: Learners gather pieces of
Bebopbooks.com illustrations in texts and let learners tell how these
writing writing in and around their school;
illustrations aid in their understanding of the texts.
for example, items on notice boards,
5.10 Begin to experiment with
signs, murals etc. When possible,
creating a draft in different forms e.g.
Page | 60
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
poems, invitations, excuses, informal learners use their devices to take Have discussions about the audience and purpose (friends, parents,
letters pictures of the items seen. teachers, etc.) for writing with examples e.g. to send a message, to
give information, to entertain.
5.11 Begin to experiment with Step 2: Learners explain the purpose
writing in simple sentences that may of the piece of writing to their Appreciation of our Nation: The outdoor community is an
include descriptive words or simple teacher and classmates. excellent source of ideas for writing and representing. Learners are
transition words (and, but, then etc.). encouraged to go out and make notes about what they see, hear,
- As each Treasure Hunt unfolds,
touch, etc. This is also a wonderful “homework” assignment for
5.12 Begin to organise sentences into the teacher observes, asks
whole families to participate in.
paragraphs by writing narratives with questions and provides feedback.
two or more appropriately sequenced - How do you know this is a list?
events and some sense of closure - Why is this list important?
INTEGRATING THE SUBJECTS Integrate with Social
- How do you know this is a story?
Studies (communities and directions) or Science (sound) Provide
5.13 With assistance, begin to
Who do you think will enjoy this
each learner with a Writing Notebook. Take the class out and face
become familiar with the keyboard
story?
North. Ask questions that prompt them to use all senses and talk
for individual or shared writing
- How do you know this
about them:
5.14 Work with a partner, in small information is true?
groups and independently, to create a - How can this information be Look up, down, to the right, to the left: What
do you see?
draft writing in both print and/or used?
Focus on listening: What do you hear?
digital format
OBSERVATION Focus on feeling: How does the air feel?
5.15 Continue to use role plays to Touch the ground; how does it feel? etc.
During the prewriting phase, the
assist with drafting process planning, Focus on smelling: Are there any scents in the air?
teacher observes learners as they
After this observation chat, provide time for learners to make notes
convey and enhance meaning
gather ideas and records to use for their writing. Have discussions about how special each
observations. Based on the sight described is. Repeat and face South, East and West.
recorded observations, the teacher
asks learners questions to guide their Starting with a Prompt and a Picture Poster (SCO 5.3)To
provide additional support to begin writing, the teacher and learners
Page | 61
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
oral, visual or written elaboration of discuss a writing prompt and learners make a poster with drawings
5.16 Apply lessons learned about ideas. about the person, object or event they will be writing about. Drawing
writing to record feelings, thoughts a picture before writing, instead of after writing is a successful
Prewriting and Drafting
and ideas during Independent or strategy to engage writers of all ages.
Observation
Journal writing time.
Remember that learners should have choices in writing topics. For
Learners will use the first two steps
example: For a piece of “How To” writing, the learner or a group of
of the writing process - prewriting
learners draws or takes a picture of their choice a topic for a piece of
and drafting and begin to organise
“how to” writing.
their ideas into sentences and simple
paragraphs. Brainstorming (SCO 5.4): An important component of prewriting
is the Brainstorming process. Learners participate in teacher directed
The teacher observes the process
brainstorming activities to generate ideas to write on a selected topic
unfold and provides feedback where
Learner generated ideas/words about the picture and ideas are
needed.
recorded.
Ask questions to generate ideas about a group of children on an
adventure e.g.
-Where are the children?
-Why are they there?
-What are they doing?
- How are they feeling?
-What can you see?
-What words can be used to tell about the activity?
-What do you think will happen next?
NOTE: See the Additional Resources section for sample
Brainstorming activities.
Page | 62
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Use organisational strategies to arrange thoughts to explore,
clarify and reflect on ideas, feelings and experiences
Peer Assessment
Organising the Brainstorm (SCO 5.5) Demonstrate how to
As a peer assessment, learners work
interpret the graphic organiser to place ideas in a logical order. For
in small groups and use a given
an extensive range of examples of graphic organisers to support
picture to create three to five
brainstorming a wide range of genres, visit: https://www.hmhco.com/blog/free-
sentences about what is happening
graphic-organizer-templates
in the picture. As the sentences are
developed, peers provide each other
with feedback about how the ideas
connect and the organization of the
ideas.
NOTE: Always demonstrate how to complete a graphic organiser
before assigning one.
Create a written or representative draft
Drafting (SCO 5.8,5.9)After the prewriting process and
brainstorming for ideas, begin the drafting process. Remind the
learners that during the drafting process, learners:
-use their pre-writing ideas
-write freely to get ideas on paper
- keep focus on writing a rough draft rather than on spelling and
grammar.
-ensure details are relevant
Page | 63
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Interactive Writing of a Draft (SCO 5.9, 5.10) Use Interactive
Writing to provide differentiated opportunities for learners to
contribute a letter, a word, a sentence, punctuation, capitals etc. to
demonstrate how to create a draft of a class or group story, poem or
nonfiction piece of writing. For a full description of the Interactive
Process and an example, visit the Useful Content Knowledge for the
Teacher about the Outcome section.
INTEGRATING THE SUBJECTS: Use Interactive
Writing to create a teacher and class
co-constructed summary of what
was learned in Mathematics, Science, Social
Studies, Art, etc.
Begin with sentences. Provide a demonstration
of how to organize and develop ideas in the brainstorm into a
sentence. Begin drafting sentences based on familiar ideas or
pictures/objects. e.g.
➢ Remind learners of their audience and purpose as they draft .
➢ Remind learners that what they say, can be written down and
read by others.
➢ Share with learners that writers can draft many times
➢ Encourage learners when writing sentences to use known
words, word walls, class charts and words encountered when
reading
➢ Provide support for different levels of writers e.g. use writing
Page | 64
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
➢ frames, checklists, conferencing.
Additional Resources and Materials
What is Interactive Writing? Interactive writing provides the teacher and the learners an opportunity to co-write. As the co-write develops, the
teacher engages the students in opportunities to help with word choice, spelling, punctuation, etc. Visit
https://www.readingrockets.org/article/interactive-writing for more information about Interactive Writing lessons and resources
Share poetry to encourage learners to think about how words and sentences create pictures
A Wet Day
Dark clouds in the sky
Raindrops on my tie
Pat, pat, patter
Lots and lots of water
It is wet and cold
I feel shivery and old.
Prompts for writing: The most engaging ideas for writing topics (prompts) come from the lived and imagined experienced of learners. If additional
ideas are required, visit https://www.journalbuddies.com/grade-1/ and https://www.education.com/worksheet/article/journal-writing-task-cards-1/ for sample prompts for writing
Page | 65
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
In addition to the suggestions in the ILS columns, this Sample Planning Template for a curriculum based Integrated Unit of Language Arts and
Social Studies may be useful as a guide to begin developing the focus and topics covered in the unit.
Sample Planning Template for Integrated Unit (Language Arts and Mathematics)
THEME: Grade One Problem Solvers
Subjects Specific Learning Outcomes
Language Essential Learning Outcome: Learners will generate, gather and SCOs: 5.5, 5.6,5.11,5.14,5.15
Arts organize thoughts to explore, clarify and reflect on ideas, feelings and
experiences as they create a written or representative draft, independently
and collaboratively, for a range of audiences and purposes.
Mathematics Essential Learning Outcome: This Integrated Unit may be used with This Integrated Unit may be used with any ELO or SCOs
any ELO or SCOs
Beginning date: End date:
Culminating project: Learners will plan, draft and revise a class booklet of short vignettes that reflect a real life application of a mathematical concept
Sample Materials to anchor and support lessons:
- Mathematical manipulatives
- Sample stories to model real life mathematical vignettes; for example https://www.countingwithkids.com/early-math/number-stories-joining-separating
- Book making materials
Overview of lessons:
Language Arts (Reading and Viewing) (Teachers will refer to the SCOs and ILS for ideas to a 1-2 sentence overview of
(Teachers will refer to the SCOs and ILS for ideas to insert 1-2 sentence overview of each proposed Mathematics curriculum based lesson to include in the theme.)
each proposed Language Arts curriculum based lessons to include in the theme. )
Overview of formative assessments
Conversations:
Observations:
Products:
Page | 66
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Writing instruction focuses on developing an understanding of the purpose and use of the Traits of Writing, which include Ideas/content,
Organization, Voice, Word Choice (vocabulary), Sentence Fluency (grammar), and Conventions (spelling, punctuation, tidiness and presentation)
http://issliteracy.weebly.com/six-traits-a-guide-for-parents.html
Page | 67
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Writing instruction is organized according to the stages of the writing process:
www.raisethebarreading.com
The Focus of the OHPC Writing ELOs
- ELO 5: Brainstorming and Writing the First Draft. Think your ideas out loud or draw them before writing them down so that the thoughts are
expressed clearly.
- ELO 6: Revising. After completing the first draft, reread it and perhaps share it before revising it.
-ELO 7: Editing. Writing the final version using best efforts at spelling and visual presentation.
Personal Professional Development for Teachers: As topics for writing are developed, it is important to ensure that each student has the topic
in his/her personal experience. Due to access, cultural and religious differences, it’s wise to avoid topics that reflect privilege, celebration of
birthdays or religious holidays, and writing about contexts unfamiliar to the learner, unless these topics are being studied as reflections of various
cultural celebrations in Social Studies, Science, etc.
Page | 68
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
What is Interactive Writing?
Visit https://eleducation.org/resources/k-2-skills-block-interactive-writing for a video about Grade One learners engaged in the writing process
and https://www.readingrockets.org/article/interactive-writing for a description of Interactive Writing.
Northwestern Illustrated Writing Rubric (sample pages) This rubric provides excellent examples of authentic learner writing from the initial
stages of lines and scribbles to more complex and accurate representations of writing. A follow up rubric is available for higher grades. The message
of this rubric is what the learner has under control at each stage of writing.
Prewriting Conversations:
Guide learners to ask questions: Why am I writing? Who am I writing to? What do I want to write about?
Model through “Think Aloud”- how to choose a topic for writing e.g. writing about things of interest, personal experiences, things learners love
and know a lot about, favourite characters etc.
Page | 69
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Create a list of topics and allow learners to participate in choosing what they would like to write about e.g. myself, pets, family, toys, friends, fruits,
animals, familiar pictures, birthday party, when you lost a tooth, when you got a pet, when you got a toy, beach picnic etc.
Model ways to plan for writing activities e.g. brainstorming ideas and representing through webbing, asking questions, making a list …
Writing about self, teachers ask questions e.g. What is your name? Are you a boy or a girl? Where do you live? What do you like to eat ? What do
you enjoy doing? Learners can respond orally before writing.
What is a Brainstorming Graphic Organizer? A brainstorming graphic organizer is a visual representation of ideas and concepts that help create
new ideas, solve problems, organize information, and communicate with others. Teachers use these graphic organizers to help students improve
their writing skills and organize their ideas. It also helps with idea generation and finding creative solutions for complex problems. Professionals use
these organizers to plan their research and create presentations. You can also use it to get out of writer's block and develop fresh ideas.
How to use a graphic organizer
-Start with picking a graphic organizer template and edit it with a diagramming software such as EdrawMax Online. Or you can grab a blank paper
to get started
-Enter the title or the main idea of your topic.
-Write your ideas and connect with other ideas to come up with something new.
https://www.edrawmax.com/article/brainstorming-graphic-organizer-examples.html
Morning Message - pre-writing activity The morning message is simply the plan for the day. The morning message lets students know what is
happening each day. It provides them much needed structure and routine and gives them a heads up about changes in schedule or new things
happening. The message can also give them some insight into what they will learn that day. And the morning message provides some academic
instruction as well. In Grade One, teachers may begin to leave out a word or a sentence and engage the learners in an Interactive Writing experience
to figure the spelling, spacing, capitalisation and punctuation.
Page | 70
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
OHPC Language Arts Grade One – WRITING AND REPRESENTATION
Essential Learning Outcome 6
Introduction to the Subject
Writing and Representing strategies and skills provide opportunities for learners to communicate with their peers and other meaningful audiences
within and beyond their community using paper and digital formats. The process of writing includes planning, organizing, revising, refining, and
sharing feedback. Throughout this process, ongoing problem solving and critical thinking strategies, applicable to subject areas and to life develop.
Essential Learning Outcome 6: learners will revise the organization, and language use (vocabulary and grammar) of drafted writing or
representation, collaboratively and independently, for a variety of purposes and audiences.
Grade Level Expectations:
Write for pleasure and personal growth
● use the writing process to share ideas with peers
● identify personal strengths as writers and search for new ways to explore ideas
Engage in the writing process
● understand that the printed word conveys a message
● participate in the plan, draft, revise, edit and share cycle
● use classroom tools and resources to improve writing
● communicate through a variety of written forms, for various purposes and to a specific audience.
● begin to notice and attempt to self correct some errors
● continue to develop a legible and efficient style of printing
● notice a variety of presentation style elements including print, script, fonts, graphics and layout
Explore language structures
● use a combination of home language(s) and English to share their ideas in writing
● use symbols, letters, images and words to communicate ideas about objects, pictures and events
● become aware of how language structure influence meaningful sentences
● begin to organize information around a central idea
● experiment with writing simple sentences in a variety of genres and formats
Page | 71
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Explore word solving
● focus on spelling words of personal importance
● continue to connect phonological awareness with phonemic information
● spell more high frequency words correctly
● further develop their use of sound symbol strategies, word structure and word meanings to spell unfamiliar words
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
By the end of Grade One, Suggestions for formative assessment Suggestions for Inclusive Learning Strategies for ELO 6
learners will be expected to: of ELO 6 that provide information
about learning
Revise organization styles The formative assessment strategies
of drafted writing and listed below not only provide
representation opportunities to determine learning prior
to instruction, observe learner progress
6.1 engage in teacher assisted and
during and after learning, they provide
peer collaboration to review the
the information needed to inform the
organisation of the written draft
next steps of instruction.
through the process of ARMS:
Add, Remove, Move, Substitute
6.2 revisit brainstorming and PRODUCT
illustration and illustration to add
On demand writing
details to and/or delete details. www.raisethebarreading.com
Writing is often a shared experience, so
6.3 Reread their draft and begin
every now and then throughout the
to recognize where they can make NOTE: The focus of ELO 6 is on revising the draft developed in
term, provide learners with opportunities
changes to better organise the ELO 5, using strategies that encourage learners to acknowledge their
to demonstrate what they have learned
beginning, middle, and end; first, progress as well as add, remove, move or make substitutions to the
about writing.
second third, etc.
Page | 72
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
6.4 Experiment with developing Learners will choose a topic of their Writing Traits of Ideas, Organization, Grammar (Sentence Fluency)
writing with a sense of flow choice or a topic chosen from the topic and Vocabulary.
bundle box. (A box that contains topics
6.5 Begin to establish a personal NOTE: Spelling, punctuation, tidiness and presentation are the focus
written on cards).
voice in their writing by using of ELO 7/
pictures and words that convey Learners write about the topic
Revise organization styles of drafted writing and representation
their attitude or feelings towards independently. Review the learner’s
the subject or audience writing and use a single point rubric to Going from good to better (SCO 6.1) Engage the class
record learner progress. The “got it” in a discussion about how we learn something and then
Develop language use when
column lists the SCO(s) being observed. learn more and get better. Compare this process to
revising written drafts
Place a check and a comment to reflect learning a sport, a game, a baby learning to walk, learning
(vocabulary)
the learner’s progress. Provide feedback to print, etc. Link the conversation to writing and how
6.5 Begin to extend writing to to the learner. the best authors write, make changes, and make more
include vocabulary learned during changes. It takes time, thought and help from our peers.
Getting there Got it Not yet
reading and conversation This example, taken from E.B. White’s first draft of
Charlotte’s Web, https://i0.wp.com/www.themarginalian.org/wp-
6.6 Experiment with using multi-
content/uploads/2013/10/charlottesweb_manuscript3.jpg?w=680&ssl=1 may
sensory words (hearing, smell), OBSERVATIONS
help to illustrate how even the best authors make lots of
taste, etc.) to improve writing
Writing in sequence changes and the best authors know that it takes a lot of
6.7 Begin to use comparison work to write a prize winning book.
After a lesson on writing in sequence,
words to distinguish one thing
the teacher checks in on progress. How do we go from good to better? (SCO 6.1, 6.2) Prepare a
from another—size, shape,
Learners will work together in pairs to simple sample of writing to share. For example: The day was windy. I
texture
create “How To Books”. Each pair like the wind. I see the trees in the wind. Read the sample to the
6.8 Become comfortable making writes 3 to 5 steps on how to perform a learners and engage them in a discussion about a windy day. First, ask
decisions about when to include specific task/activity then make drawings the learners to make a picture in their head about a windy day, then
Home Language and/ or Standard or use pictures to depict each step. Each share ideas about what happens on a windy day. As they share ideas,
English pair will create their book. Learners will jot them down on a chart paper. Once a few ideas are down; work
create books on the following topics: together to recreate the story of the windy day. Compare the new
story to the original story and share ideas why it was better:
- How to get dressed
- How to brush your teeth - We made a picture in our heads about the windy day.
Page | 73
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Develop language use when - How to fold clothes - We wrote the words we spoke
revising written drafts - How to tie your shoelace - We used ideas from others
(grammar and sentence - How to make your bed - We made it better!
As books are written, the teacher
fluency)
Provide time for learners to work with a peer(s) to follow this process
observes, makes anecdotal notes and
6.8 Monitor and revise writing to of revision.
provides feedback.
ensure simple but complete
Keeping it in order (SCO 6.3) Create a list of scrambled sentences
Self and Peer Assessment
sentences are meaningful
about an activity familiar to the learners (playing football, walking to
Provide learners with a checklist to
6.9 Develop more understanding school, an imagined story sequence, etc.). Discuss how to organise the
review their writing before beginning the
of how and when to use sentences into a meaningful order. Learners review their draft with a
revision process. Once complete,
descriptive or action words to peer and discuss how sentences could be moved to improve the flow
learners may wish to share their writing
extend meaning of draft of the writing. This serves as a good introduction to the concept of a
and their self assessment with a peer.
paragraph.
6.10 apply knowledge of spoken
Together, revisions to the original
language to know when to use Better writing everyday (SCO 6.3, 6.5, 6.6, 6.7, 6.8) As the
writing are made.
pronouns, plurals, and words revision process unfolds throughout the year, provide and repeat brief
Checklist includes:
indicating position (above, below, mini lessons on the traits of writing listed below. With each mini
under, etc.) lesson share examples of personal, student or published writing and
3 2 1
engage learners in discussions about how to make changes to improve
6.11 experiment with some variety
- Is my first sentence interesting? the writing. Topics for revisions include:
in first sentences (leads) of writing
- Do I use different types of
sentences? ➢ Ideas: How do add ideas to give more information OR
6.12 demonstrate understanding
- Do I use some interesting words? remove ideas that are repeated or unnecessary?
of the connection between word
- Does my writing let the reader “see” ➢ Organization: How do we make sure the writing starts at the
order and meaningful writing
what’s happening? beginning and takes on a path to the end.
6.13 Begin to use various types of - Do the events happen in order? ➢ Sentence Fluency: Can we add questions? Can we make it
- Etc.
sentences: declarative, question, exciting with exclamation marks?
and exclamation ➢ Voice: Does my writing sound like the way I talk?
➢ Word choice: Can I use more interesting words to describe
Develop language use when
what’s happening?
revising written drafts (voice)
Page | 74
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
6.14 Use techniques demonstrated After each mini lesson, learners review their drafts. Observe draft
by favorite authors (descriptive revisions for changes, make notes and share feedback with the learner.
words, funny words, short Visit https://www.smekenseducation.com/teaching-even-the-youngest-writ/ for lesson plan
sentences, long sentence, asking suggestions and https://www.geneva304.org/Downloads/six%20traits2.pdf for lesson
questions, etc.) plans that include suggested anchor texts.
6.16 Use expressive language to INTEGRATING SUBJECTS Begin the process of learning to
elaborate and create interest sequentially organise with images from a storyboard based
on a topic from Science (patterns of the moon), or Social
Studies (history of family). Mix them up and encourage learners to
make suggestions about meaningful order.
Develop language use when revising written drafts (vocabulary)
INTEGRATING THE STRANDS
Better words, better writing (SCO 6.5) Co-create a chart of
interesting words that come up when learners are reading or having
conversations in all subject areas. Add to the chart throughout the
year. Refer learners to this chart when they are looking for new words
to better describe the people, places and things in their writing. To
provide more engagement, encourage learners to use non-standard
examples. For example:
How big is it? How do I feel? How fast is it?
Huge Excited Slow as a turtle
Teeny weeny Nervous Speedy
Ginormous Giggly Super-fast
As learners are writing, ask if there’s a more exciting, funny, scary
word to use and refer them to the chart.
Page | 75
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Develop language use when revising written drafts (grammar
and sentence fluency)
NOTE: Grade One learners often write as they speak; at this stage,
their writing should be acknowledged as personal expression. The
learner’s grammar provides a good source of authentic information to
create a class thesaurus of different ways to say the same things.
Language Use lessons focus on different ways to express ideas, not
correct and incorrect ways. As their writing skills develop, learners
discover that we write for different audiences and adjust our language
use to fit the structure.
Begin at the beginning (SCO 6.9): Read aloud the first sentence of
various familiar stories. Make note of how the author writes the “lead”
sentence and provide learners with a list of options to make their
writing more interesting at the beginning. Suggestions include:
- Begin with a time: One day, Last week, When I woke up, etc.
- Begin with a question: Did you know? What was that noise?
Do you like to ______?
- Begin with a one-word exclamation: Wow! Crash!
As learners are writing, have conversations about their first sentence
and if there are other ways to begin. Learners choose among the
possibilities created.
Visit https://bit.ly/2DipPbW for examples of how to move from a simple
lead to an engaging lead. You may wish to adapt some of these
examples to fit the age and context of the learners.
Page | 76
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
BRAIDING THE STRANDS: During Independent Reading,
schedule time for learners to search through a variety of
fiction and nonfiction books to search for different types of opening
sentences (Leads).
Develop language use when revising written drafts (voice)
Who said that? (SCO 6.15)
BRAIDING THE STRANDS
Use suggestions from ELO 4 Teacher Read Aloud to discuss how
favourite local authors and international authors, such as Robert
Munsch, Bill Martin Jr. and Dr. Seuss write in a way that is very
identifiable.
Page | 77
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
The voice of cartoons (SCO 6.15, 6.16)
Use lessons in the writing trait of
voice to celebrate representing
various ways of communicating
information. Project and play some
paper based or digital comics and cartoons
to chat about how an author/illustrator’s
images are identifiable, how characters
speak and why they are enjoyable to watch.
Compare the language and grammar
choices of favourite characters with discuss how they are the same and
different. Images from Tayo and Bluey cartoons.
Author’s Chair (SCO 6.16) During Writing Workshop, provide
regular Author’s Chair sessions for learners who wish to share the
revised copy with peers. The learner reads fluently and expressively
and peers provide comments about what was good and perhaps a
suggestion about what could be added or changed. The reader
considers these suggestions as revisions evolve. NOTE: If a learner is
uncomfortable sharing with peers, the teacher will provide the
feedback.
INTEGRATING THE STRANDS: As learners solve
problems in Mathematics, they may wish to share their writing and
representations at a Mathematician's Chair.
Page | 78
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Include the parents in the writing process. Share https://youtu.be/pz8682lMF0c as an example of how to encourage
young writers to write their ideas, without an over emphasis on correct spelling.
Support for revising the trait of Organization https://app.lumi.education/run/ZhnQpC
Support for revising Vocabulary:
Examples of sensory words include:
smell (burnt, stink, rotten, smoky, fragrant, etc.)
sound (buzzing, humming, roar, hush, etc.)
taste (sweet, salty, sour, spicy, sugary, bitter, etc.)
sight (dim, dark, glowing, glossy, colourful, etc.)
touch (rough, coarse, smooth, hairy, warm, cold, slimy, etc.)
Link to sensory words usage worksheet:
https://www.education.com/download/worksheet/170727/fill-in-the-sensory-details.pdf
Each week, assign one of these suggestions for writing at home
https://www.readingrockets.org/reading-101-guide-parents/first-grade/writing-activities-your-first-grader For example:
List maker Ask your child to help you make a grocery list or a "to-do" list for weekend chores. Your child can dictate the list as you write, to model the
process. Then switch roles and ask your child to write the list as you dictate.
Family stories Ask your child to draw a picture of a family activity and then write a sentence about it below the picture. Encourage your child to say the
sentence and write letters to match the sounds in each word. Then have your child read what she wrote. Display the story on the refrigerator or a
bulletin board — and celebrate the work!
Bookmaker Turn your child's writing into books! Paste her drawings and writings on pieces of construction paper. For each book, make a cover out of
heavier paper or cardboard, and add special art, a title, and her name as author. Punch holes in the pages and cover, and bind the book together with
yarn or ribbon.
Page | 79
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Field notes Encourage your child to take notes on trips or outings, and to describe what she saw, using all of her senses. This could include a
description of a walk outside, a ride in a car or a bus, or other events that lend themselves to note taking.
Message board Hang a family message board in the kitchen and leave notes there for your child. Encourage your child to write a message back and
post it to the board.
Label it Young children love to name things! Ask your child to write out labels for the rooms and objects in your house. Don't worry about invented
spellings! Help your child safely tape them up for temporary display. See a real-life example in this blog post, Using but confusing, with laundry.
Writing to remember If your child likes a particular song, suggest that she learn the words by writing them down. Also encourage copying favorite
poems or quotations from books and plays.
Reader's theater Encourage your child to read her stories out loud. Listen carefully without interrupting, and give her positive feedback about her ideas
and her writing!
Make an “I can” book As your child learns to write, she’ll also be learning other new skills. Making an “I Can” book will let her practice writing skills
and keep track of her other accomplishments. Staple together a bunch of blank sheets of paper to make a book. As your child reaches a new milestone,
such as learning to tie her shoes or hit a baseball, she can draw a picture on a new page of the book. Younger kids can then write, “I can tie my shoes.”
Older kids can write a few sentences about what they’ve accomplished.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome
Personal Professional Development for Teachers:
What does Grade One Writing Look Like? Visit https://www.readingrockets.org/looking-at-writing/first-grade-writing-sample-1 for a useful overview of the expectations for
Grade One writing. An important point to note is that teachers view writing as a developmental process and always review writing from the
perspective of what a student has accomplished and what the next steps of learning should be.
What is revision? http://www.readingrockets.org/article/revision-writing-process Merely requiring learners to revise or just to spend more time revising will not
necessarily produce improved writing (Adams, 1991). Calkins (1986)recommends that learners discuss positive rather than negative aspects of their
Page | 80
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
writings. Ask them to find bits of their writing—words, lines, passages—which seem essential, and then ask them to explore why these sections are so
very significant?
Writing assessment: Teachers often struggle with writing assessment. “Spelling and mechanical errors (found in ELO 7) are obvious to see, and too
often become the focus of the assessment. It is important to consider other aspects of the sample and to include the writers themselves in the
assessment process. Learners work with a piece of writing, and guide it through four general stages: prewriting, drafting, revising/editing, and
publishing.” From: http://www.readingrockets.org/looking-at-writing
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Ideas for subject integration and integration among the strands are embedded throughout the curriculum with icons and explanations. Keep in mind
that all subject areas provide valuable sources of vocabulary for writing and text features to experiment with.
Page | 81
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
OHPC Language Arts Grade One – WRITING AND REPRESENTATION
Essential Learning Outcome 7
Introduction to the Subject: Writing and Representing strategies and skills provide opportunities for learners to communicate with their peers and
other meaningful audiences within and beyond their community using paper and digital formats. The process of writing includes planning, organizing,
revising, refining, and sharing feedback. Throughout this process, ongoing problem solving and critical thinking strategies, applicable to subject areas
and to life develop.
Essential Learning Outcome 7: learners will use their knowledge of spoken language, written language and writing conventions to refine the
precision and enhance the meaning and clarity of their written work.
Grade Level Expectations:
Write for pleasure and personal growth
● use the writing process to share ideas with peers
● identify personal strengths as writers and search for new ways to explore ideas
Engage in the writing process
● understand that the printed word (print and pictures/illustrations) conveys a message
● participate in the plan, draft, revise, edit and share cycle
● use classroom tools and resources to improve writing
● communicate through a variety of written forms, for various purposes and to a specific audience.
● begin to notice and attempt to self correct some errors
● continue to develop a legible and efficient style of printing
● notices a variety of presentation style elements including print, script, fonts, graphics and layout
Explore language structures
● use a combination of home language(s) and English to share their ideas in writing
● use symbols, letters, images and words to communicate ideas about objects, pictures and events
● become aware of how language structure influence meaningful sentences
● begin to organize information around a central idea
● experiment with writing simple sentences in a variety of genres and formats
Page | 82
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Explore word solving
● focus on spelling words of personal importance
● continue to connect phonological awareness with phonemic information
● spell more high frequency words correctly
● further develop their use of sound symbol strategies, word structure and word meanings to spell unfamiliar words
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
By the end of Grade One, learners will When assessing learner progress in Suggestions for Inclusive Learning Strategies for ELO 7
be expected to: ELO 7, remember to look for
progress and not perfection.
Develop and use traits of good writing
to enhance the meaning and clarity of Suggestions for formative
their written work. assessment of ELO 7 that
provide information about
7.1 Develop increased confidence, and
learning
accuracy willingness to try out various
strategies (risk taking) to increase spelling The formative assessment strategies
and punctuation accuracy, tidiness and listed below not only provide
presentation opportunities to determine learning
prior to instruction, observe learner
7.2 Write from left to right and from top
progress during and after learning,
to bottom consistently
they provide the information
7.3 Use some conventional spacing needed to inform the next steps of www.raisethebarreading.com
instruction. NOTE: The focus of ELO 7 is on Editing and Publishing. The
7.4 Continue to develop a relaxed hand
Conventions of writing: spelling, punctuation, tidiness and
while writing
presentation. Remember that while these conventions are
7.5 Attempt to make letter formation PRODUCTS important to share one’s writing with clarity, the learning that
readable by various audiences occurs in ELO 5 and 6, which focuses on the Writing Traits of
Spelling tests? It’s common
Ideas, Organisation, Vocabulary (Language Use) and Grammar
7.6 Monitor and check high frequency knowledge that although learners
(Sentence Fluency) provides the essence of the authors’ ideas,
words with the aid of: may do well in spelling tests, they
Page | 83
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
- environmental print often do not apply that expertise to thoughts and questions and their desire to engage their audience in
- word walls their daily writing. Researchers agree a shared experience with those thoughts, ideas and questions.
- personal dictionaries that it’s time to shift away from a
Develop and use traits of good writing to enhance the
heavy reliance on spelling tests.
7.7 Generate temporary and accurate meaning and clarity of their written work.
Try:
spelling based on phonological strategies
Set the tone for success
such as: - reviewing daily writing to
(SCO 7.1) Encourage
- using words posted on the word wall gather information about
learners to always show
and/or in an individual word book. the increasing number of
what they can do and not
- stretching out sounds or use sound words the learner is spelling
boxes. be afraid to take risks with
correctly.
-developing awareness of sequencing and their editing. As learners
- reviewing daily writing to
blending sounds (beginning, middle and edit their writing, have a
gather information about
ending of a word) conversation with a few individuals each day and ask each to point
areas of difficulty. This
- clapping syllables and spelling each out something in their writing that they are doing well and
information informs
syllable separately. something they’re not sure of. Provide verbal or written feedback
decisions about next steps in
-thinking about spelling patterns from
with note that provides an encouraging word.
known or rhyming words. spelling instruction.
http://northstarpaths.com/visuals/
- shifting from spelling lists of
Oops!(SCO 7.7, 7.8, 7.9, 7.10) Include a few spelling errors in the
7.8 Continue to develop spelling of single words to providing learners
morning messages. As you and they share read the message, tell
syllable words by applying knowledge of: with a few brief sentences
learners they should look out for spelling errors. Provide learners
- beginning and ending consonants on topics of interest to
with an “oops” card. When an error is noticed, the learner holds
- two-letter initial consonant blends write. Embed words that
up the “oops”card. Ask the learner which word has an error and
- beginning and some ending consonant
have been used regularly
then which letters are correct and incorrect. As a class, decide on
digraphs
throughout the week. As
how to correct the error and check that the correction is accurate.
- short and long vowel sounds
students write the sentences,
Demonstrate how to edit the word (draw a line through the word
- knowledge of vowel clusters
assure them that not all and write the correct spelling above), and check the correction by:
words have to be spelled - rereading and the sentence
7.9 Become increasingly familiar with
correctly, they just have to -looking at the corrected word and asking. “Does this look right
predictable letter patterns to spell more
write the letters they know. now?”
accurately:
- CVC (consonant, vowel, consonant) - Correct the spelling by -stretching out the word and asking, “Do our sounds match what
acknowledging parts of we know about these letters?”
Page | 84
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
- CVCC (consonant, vowel, consonant, words or entire words that -asking, “What is an important part of this word we should
consonant) are correct and then remember?”
-CVVC (consonant, vowel, vowel, elements that are incorrect. Repeat this activity throughout the year and focus on spelling,
consonant) Use the information to plan spacing, punctuation, capitalisation.
- CVCE (consonant, vowel, consonant, e)
next steps lessons.
INTEGRATING THE SUBJECTS: When
- Always provide feedback to
7.10 Apply letter and word knowledge introducing vocabulary related to a new topic in Social
the learner about what was
strategies during the writing process to Studies, Mathematics, Science etc., make an
completed correctly and
monitor (notice errors), edit errors and intentional spelling error and think aloud through the noticing and
what they will learn next.
check for correctness. correcting process.
Patterns of progress
7.11 Apply sight word knowledge gathered Actions help us learn to spell new words (SCO 7.7) When
through reading and writing to “try out” As learners prepare their final draft learners study spelling words, they often memorize a sequence of
different spellings of a word to see which in writing, make note of the words letters and forget the correct spelling once the test is over. Learners
one looks right. and letter patterns that cause the often try to memorize a spelling as if it were an arbitrary string of
most difficulty in the class. Share letters string, so, when spellings are understood as pronunciation
7.12 Begin to be aware of digital features
what you’ve noticed with the class maps, they are much easier to remember. Demonstrate these steps
such as spell check and create a special Wonky Word and provide regular opportunities to practice how playing with
7.13 Spell commonly used sight words and Wall for these troublesome words. letters sounds phonological awareness (ELO1), helps us to spell :
phonetically regular words with increasing Over time, as you notice certain ➢ Say the word
correctness in final copies words are being mastered, make the
➢ Stretch the word
removal of the word from the
➢ Chunk the word
7.14 Begin to add a few grade-level
Wonky Word Wall.
punctuation conventions: ➢ Draw a space for each letter and then fill in the spaces
-full stops while saying the word
-question marks ➢ Look at the word and say 3 sentences with the word in it
OBSERVATION
-exclamation marks ➢ Write the word
-capitals on names and at the beginning of
The Phonics checklist (see ELO
a sentence. Make note of learner progress in spelling and provide feedback.
3) provides an indication of how
learners are developing and applying Reading to learn spelling (SCO 7.10, 7.11) During Independent
phonological awareness strategies. Reading (ELO 2), ask students to write the word(s) and the
Relationships between this progress sentence containing the word they do not know in a notebook.
Page | 85
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
7.15 Develop hand created or digital and accurate spelling should be During Writing Workshop, provide opportunities for individual
presentation styles using various forms of visible. learners to choose one of these words and share it and the
hand or digitally generated: sentence with the class. The class discusses the word and clues as
- illustrations
Words Their Way Spelling
to how to remember the spelling and the meaning. Words can be
- titles Progress Checklist
added to the classroom word wall.
- fonts
https://bit.ly/2Xe4nMl provides
Error checker (SCO 7.10): As a small group activity, provide
teachers with detailed insight into
7.16 Participate in opportunities to share learners with a set of cards. Each card has a word that correctly
student spelling progress
(through in person or digital format) a spelled and incorrectly spelled. The learner decides which is
throughout the Primary grades.
chosen piece of writing with peers or an correct and why. Learners then explore a grade level dictionary,
invited audience
word walls and the spell check function on devices to confirm their
choice.
INTEGRATING SUBJECTS: Science (weather
vocabulary): Demonstrate how to look at each word and
determine which “looks right”. Then check in a
dictionary. Note: Pictures can be deceiving ( while these pictures may be obvious to the
teacher, some LEARNERS may see the pictures as of heart, lightening, and cloud, so talk
about the pictures to ensure learners are searching for the correct word.
clowd
cloud
claud
storm
sterm
sturm
Page | 86
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
rane
rain
rean
Be a spelling detective (SCO 7.10, 7.11,
7.13):
Grade One is an opportunity to think about spelling in a positive
light. Approach spelling lessons as opportunities to problem solve
using clues from looking, listening, speaking, reading and writing.
How do I teach spelling?Useful, meaningful and context based
spelling lessons include:
https://grammar.yourdictionary.com/word-lists/1st-grade-spelling-words.html
The creation of punctuation (SCO 7.14) YouTube has a wide
range of lesson suggestions to teach punctuation. To choose the
most appropriate for Grade One, choose lessons that ensure
punctuation is used in context. Check out
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x3XWoTGNoOE; this technique not only
reinforces punctuation, it teaches learners how to monitor for
errors. When videos offer information about a few punctuation
marks, such as https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LdCOswMeXFQ\ , use each as
an introduction and follow up with examples from reading and
writing experiences.
Page | 87
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Make a book (SCO 7.15:) Encourage learners to present their
writing in various formats: Search “folding paper to make a book”
for a variety of ideas about how to make a book. NOTE: making a
book could be used as a prompt for a writing project on writing in
sequence.
Online and Paper based options (SCO 7.15): Schedule
opportunities for learners to explore a range of paper based and
online texts:
- different fonts
- illustrations
- charts
- covers
Take pictures of the examples and co-create a class PPT of the
examples. As each mini lesson about presentation is taught, display
the slides that provide illustration. After learners create their final
draft and presentation style, add pictures of their work to the PPT.
I’m a STAR speller! (SCO 7.16)Share this video with learners
and encourage them to create their own short videos using the
same format for different spelling patterns, vocabulary related to
topics of interest, etc.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AwokkKaafrU
Author’s Chair (SCO 7.16) Author’s Chair provides an excellent
opportunity to braid the strands of listening, speaking, reading,
viewing, writing and representing When writing projects are
complete, learners may wish to share their work with peers, parents
or other classes. Writing can be shared as a Read Aloud or a
recording, PPT, etc.
Page | 88
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
The best resource for a learner who is struggling, is a teacher who understands that Grade One is an excellent opportunity to give all learners a sense of
“I CAN” do it!” Teachers who provide feedback that begins with an acknowledgement of what a learner has accomplished since the last observation
(no matter how minimal) and what the next goal will be, provide learners with the best possible mindset for learning.
Depending on the genre for the writing project, anchors and mentor texts that represent the local community and culture provide opportunities for
learners to write in formal and informal language.
Local authors appreciate talking to or receiving letters from young learners who have read the author’s book(s) and written their own.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Personal Professional Development for Teachers: One of the best resources for a teacher is the opportunity to share ideas and learn from school
professional learning communities. For example, share this video about learning to spell with teachers (and parents): https://youtu.be/QZiz12UYFfE
ELO 7 is focussed on editing spelling, punctuation, tidiness and creating a presentation. This is often referred to as the CUPS process.
https://www.teachingexpertise.com/classroom-ideas/writing-process-activity/
Page | 89
Grade 1 Language Arts Curriculum
Which words are Grade One learners expected to spell? While there is a great variety in the spelling progress of Grade One learners, the Dolch
word pre-primer, primer and grade 1 and grade two provide a developmental overview of expected spelling progress.
http://printables.atozteacherstuff.com/1103/printable-dolch-word-lists/
Page | 90
