November 2024
OHPC Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
OVERVIEW OF THE GRADE SIX OECS HARMONISED PRIMARY CURRICULUM
The Grade 6 mathematics curriculum is designed to solidify learners' fundamental mathematical understanding, skills, and values, building upon their
prior knowledge. This curriculum introduces more complex mathematical concepts, encouraging learners to apply logical reasoning and critical thinking
to a variety of mathematical problems. Learners will delve into topics such as number operations, fractions, ratios, algebra, geometry, and data analysis,
all of which are crucial for future mathematical studies. Through interactive activities, real-world problem-solving, and collaborative learning, the
curriculum aims to foster learners' interest and confidence in mathematics, equipping them with essential skills for success.
This Grade 6 curriculum provides school leaders, teachers, and parents with a clear overview of the learning experiences planned for learners at this grade
level. The curriculum emphasizes six core content areas: Number Sense, Operations, Patterns and Relationships, Geometric Thinking,
Measurement, and Data Handling and Probability. It also focuses on developing critical mathematical skills, such as problem-solving, reasoning,
communication, making connections, and representation. These skills enable learners to engage deeply with mathematical concepts, justify their thinking,
express their ideas, and link mathematical ideas across various contexts.
Instructional time in Grade 6 is focused on five key areas: applying multiplication and division to solve ratio and rate problems, developing a
comprehensive understanding of fraction division and introducing rational numbers, including negative numbers, creating and interpreting expressions
and equations, enhancing knowledge of area, surface area, and volume, and building an understanding of probability and statistical reasoning. While this
overview may not include every specific standard, all topics will be addressed during instruction.
In Grade 6 mathematics, learners will delve into various mathematical concepts such as:
• Ratios and Proportions: Solve real-world problems using multiplication and division with ratios and rates and connect ratios to fractions.
• Number System: Develop a deeper understanding of fractions, rational numbers (including negatives), and their placement on the coordinate
plane.
• Expressions, Equations, and Inequalities: Write and evaluate expressions, recognize equivalencies, and solve basic equations using equality
principles.
• Geometry: Calculate areas of shapes and surface areas of prisms and explore volume with fractional dimensions.
• Data handling and Probability: Analyse data sets for trends and patterns and create simple probability models to understand chance events.
2
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Number Sense
Introduction to the Strand:
Number sense provides an understanding of numbers, their relationships and properties. It helps learners acquire a foundation in numerical concepts, enhance
computation fluency and develop critical thinking skills. Through engaging activities and making reference to real world situations the learner will explore whole
numbers, prime numbers, composite numbers, and square numbers.
At the end of the unit learner will gain mastery in essential number skills and the foundational skills necessary to develop competence in mathematics.
Essential Learning Outcome: N1.1. Whole Number – Saying Number Sequence, Meaningful Counting and Skip Counting
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Demonstrate an understanding of the meaning of all whole numbers to seven digits model; identify and describe special sets of numbers (E.g., square,
prime and composite) sequence the number names and numerals up to 999 999 999
• State the place value of each digit in a numeral up to 999 999 999
• Round numbers to the nearest tens, hundreds, thousands and up to millions.
3
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge Think Pair Share Use Visual Aids and Manipulatives
1. Read and write numbers in words and Learners are given cards with different numbers written Display a place value chart to learners. Starting
figures up to 1 000 000 (seven digits) on them (e.g., 123,456) in figures. Learners take turns to with smaller numbers and progressively increasing
write the numbers in words. the size, e.g. 345, 3 451, 12 345 etc., place the
2. State the face value, place value and total digits in the correct position of the place value
value of any digit in a whole number up to 999 Learners are given cards with the worded form of chart. Demonstrate how to read the numbers
999 999. numbers (e.g., one hundred twenty-three thousand four paying close attention to the place values where
hundred fifty-six). Learners write in figures the numbers each digit is placed.
3. Identify and describe special sets of represented by the worded form.
numbers (square, prime and composite) Learners will be shown how to write numbers
using similar demonstrations with a place value
4. Arrange in sequence, whole numbers and chart.
special sets of numbers (square, prime and
composite).
5. Round off numbers to the nearest tens,
hundreds and thousands up to millions.
6. Create a number sequence formed by counting
on from any given number by 2’s, 5’s , 10’s, 100’s,
and 1000’s up to 10 000
Skills
https://www.teacherspayteachers.com/Product/5-Digit- https://kellis2015.blogspot.com/
7. Create a place value chart to show whole
Number-Cards-2264494
numbers up to 999 999 999.
Discussion
Worksheets
Values
Present learners with a place value chart and a
Learners are provided with worksheets with large number for example, 4 352 678.
8. Describe ways whole numbers up to a million
numbers printed on them.
are used in everyday life.
4
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
9. Examine the importance of rounding off whole Learners identify the face value, place value, and total Learners will place this number on the place value
numbers in everyday life and mathematical value for specific digits in each number. chart.
contexts by developing a sense of practicality and
accuracy in the use of numerical data. Teacher will then have a discussion with learners
on the terms face value, place value and total
10. Apply the concept of square numbers to the value.
application of real-life situations by engaging in
collaborative and communication activities.
Group Work
https://www.tes.com/teaching-
Square Numbers
resource/place-value-chart-to-10-000-000-
11365586
Learners are placed in small groups and provided with
squared paper. Learners are to shade squares to obtain all
Use of Manipulatives
square numbers up to 144.
Square Numbers
Prime and Composite Numbers
Provide learners with square tiles (or beads or
Learners are provided with a hundreds chart, three
squared paper). Learners form squares with the
crayons of different colours and beads or small square
tiles. Learners count the square tiles which form a
tiles. Learners will shade all prime numbers in one colour
square. The number of tiles counted is a square
and all composite numbers with another colour using
number. In addition, learners count the number of
manipulatives to help them determine the type of
squares in one row, and count the number of
number. The third colour will be used to shade the
squares in one column. Multiply the number of
number 1, as this is neither prime nor composite.
squares in the row by the number of squares in
the column. The product is a square number.
5
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
For example: 1X1 = 1^2 = 1
2 X 2 = 2^2 = 4
https://helpingwithmath.com/square-numbers/
https://shop.luckylittlelearners.com/product/classroom-
setup-math-bulletin-hundreds-chart/
Prime and Composite Numbers
Provide learners with a set of beads (or squares)
so that the number of beads would represent
square numbers, composite numbers and prime
numbers.
For the numbers given, learners must first try to
form squares. If a square is formed, the number of
beads used is a square number. If a square cannot
be formed, learners then try to form a rectangle.
All numbers that form a square or a rectangle are
composite numbers. If the set of beads or squares
cannot form a square or a rectangle then form a
straight line. The number is therefore a prime
number.
6
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Observation Tool
Learners will be observed during the activity to assess if
they have understood the concept.
CRITERIA Yes No https://www.iknowit.com/blog/number-
investigators.html
Learners are able to form squares,
rectangles or straight lines with the
manipulatives. Provide learners with exit cards at the end of the
lesson.
Learners complete the card below:
Learners are able to identify square
numbers
Place the various special numbers in ascending
order.
Learners are able to identify
composite numbers
(i) Square Numbers: ___, ___, ___.
Learners are able to identify prime
numbers
(ii) Prime Numbers: ___, ___, ___.
Learners are able to identify the
pattern for square numbers (iii) Composite Numbers: ___, ___, ___.
7
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Working in pairs/Using Manipulatives
Learners are able to identify the
pattern for composite numbers
Complete the sequence and identify the pattern
in the sequence
Learners are able to identify the
Square numbers ___, ____, ____
pattern for prime numbers
Composite numbers ___, ___, ___
Games Prime numbers ___, ___, _____
Rounding Relay
Learners are given bags containing different
Learners are placed in teams. Learners are given numbers
manipulatives (beads and square tiles).
and race to round off correctly to a given place.
Provide learners with a set of beads so that the
Scavenger Hunt
number of beads would represent square
numbers, composite numbers and prime numbers.
In small groups, learners are given a starting point and a
sequence to follow. Learners find numbers around the
(NB. Sets of beads must be able to form
classroom or school that fit their given sequence. special numbers following a given pattern e.g.
2, 4, 9, 16 …. Or 13, 17, 19…)
Flashcards
Learners form either squares, rectangles or straight
Present number flashcards to learners. Learners place lines with these manipulatives and fill out the
sequences stated and identify the pattern in the
them in order on a board or wall given a particular
sequence.
sequence and starting point.
8
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Worksheet Use of Video/Use of Technology
Match the items in Group A with their corresponding quantities in Learners will view this short video after which
they will round off numbers to the nearest 10 000,
Group B
100000 and 1000000.
Note: Teachers could adapt to other countries if desired.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AC3Ec
Group A Group B Mu_Ea8
St. Lucia’s national budget Hundreds
Number of tourists who visited Millions Using Manipulatives
St. Lucia in 2023
Present learners with number lines. Learners use
Number of people in St. Lucia Hundred thousands number lines to show how numbers increase by
2s, 5s, 10s, 100s and 1000s.
Number of schools in St. Lucia Thousands
Use of Rubrics
Learners' creative place value charts will be assessed
https://www.cuemath.com/numbers/skip-
using the following rubric.
counting-by-2/
Criteria 4 3 2 marks 1 mark
marks marks
Completene All 9 6 - 8 3 -5 1 - 2
ss place place place place
values values values values
are are are are https://www.learningstreet.co.uk/articles/what-
include include included include is-a-number-line/
d d d
9
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Labels All 9 6 - 8 3 - 5 1 - 2
place place place place
Learners use actual coins to count and observe
values values values values
sequences of 5s and 10s and play money for 100s.
are are are are
labelled labelled labelled labelled
correctl correctl correctly correctl
y y y
Neatness Chart is Writing
and Clarity neatly may be
presente hard to
d with read
https://www.banknoteworld.com/eastern-
clear
caribbean-1-cent-1-dollar-6-pieces-coin-set-2000-
and
km-10-13-mint-1.html
legible
writing
Different starting points
Reflections Number Walk
Learners write a short paragraph on how rounding off Engage learners in activities with numbers. For
whole numbers can be useful in their lives. Include example:
specific examples. Learners share their reflections with
the class. Number cards are placed on the floor. Learners
walk on the cards while counting by 2s, 5s and
Observation Checklist 10s.
Learners will be observed during their group activity to Count and Clap
assess if they have understood the concept of square
numbers. Learners start counting at a particular number (as
directed by teacher) and clap each time the next
number in the sequence (as directed by teacher) is
mentioned.
10
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Using Manipulatives
Criteria Yes No
Provide opportunities for learners to demonstrate
their creativity while using large numbers. For
Learners calculated
example, let learners design creative place value
the correct
charts up to Hundreds of Millions using Bristol
dimensions of the
board and markers.
square plot.
Learners measured
correctly and
placed pegs at the
appropriate points.
https://www.teacherspayteachers.com/Product/P
lace-Value-Anchor-Chart-Ones-to-Hundred-
Millions-7335172
Learners can also construct cards numbered 0 to 9
for use with the place value charts.
11
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Discussion
Invite learners to be engaged in a discussion of
various scenarios where whole numbers are
commonly used for example, population counts,
money, sports statistics, and distances.
Question learners about situations where they
have encountered large numbers.
For example:
Population:
● How does the population of this
city/country compare to others?
● What factors affect population growth or
decline?
● How does population impact resources
and the environment?
Money:
● Where does all this money come from?
● How is money used to solve problems?
● What is the impact of inflation on large
amounts of money?
Science:
● How do scientists measure such large
numbers?
● What tools do they use to count or
estimate these numbers?
12
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● How accurate are these large numbers?
Technology:
● How many people use this technology?
● How much data is created every day?
● How does this large number impact our
lives?
Discussion
Have learners work in small groups, and provide
learners with a set of monthly utility bills from a
household – electricity, telephone and water. For
example:
Learners estimate the total spent by rounding off
these bills to the nearest hundreds. Learners are
also provided with a monthly salary for an
individual and then estimate the amount left to
spend after the bills are paid.
Activity using Technology
Invite learners to engage in research of the
populations of some countries in the Caribbean.
13
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The population for each country is rounded off to
the nearest ten thousand. Learners will complete
the given table.
Country Actual Population
to Nearest
Population
Ten
Thousand
St. Lucia
St. Vincent
St. Kitts
Grenada
Dominica
Discuss with learners that instead of giving the
exact value of a population, rounding gives an
estimate of the island’s population. This is used to
simplify interpretation and presentation of data.
14
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Field Trip
Provide the opportunity for learners to go on field
trips, For example, have learners go out into the
school garden. In small groups, learners enclose a
given area (square) of land for planting. Learners
determine the appropriate dimensions and place
pegs at the four corners of the square and ropes
around the pegs.
https://sims.fandom.com/wiki/Garden_plot
Additional Resources and Materials
Abacus
Place value arrows
Digit cards
Place value mats
Magnetic digits and letters
Dice
15
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Books:
Sir Cumference and all the King’s Tens by Cindy Neuschwander
Monster Math by Anne Miranda
If You Made a Million by David M. Schwartz
A Dollar, a Penny, How Much and How Many? by Brian P. Cleary
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PI-uyxs-j4E
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Face Value is the digit itself, irrespective of its position in the number.
Place Value is the value of the position it holds in the number (ones, tens, hundreds, thousands, ten thousand, hundred thousand, millions)
Total Value is the digit multiplied by its place value.
4 x 1 000 000 = 4 000 000 000
3 X 100 000 = 300 000
Number patterns involve sequences of numbers that follow a specific rule or formula. By understanding number patterns learners can recognize relationships and
make predictions.
Integers are all the whole numbers and their negative counterparts, including zero.
Negative numbers are numbers less than zero and are represented with a minus sign (-).
Whole numbers are all non-negative integers, including zero. They do not include fractions, decimals, or negative numbers.
16
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
A square root of a number is a value that, when multiplied by itself, gives the original number.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Social Studies
● interpreting national budget
● understanding population size of countries and continents
● distances between places
Language
● Create story problems which involve numbers in figures and words, and rounding off numbers
Science
● data such as distances in space
● volume of waste produced
Art
● creative skills displayed in creating place value charts
● creating patterns in designs
Music
● recognizing patterns and sequences in notes and beats
Physical Education
● counting sequences for exercise repetitions, timing
17
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: N1.2. Whole Number – Representing and Partitioning Quantities
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Read, represent and partition any given number to 1 000 000 concretely, pictorially, and symbolically
• Read and write multi-digit whole numbers using base-ten numerals, number names, and expanded form to 1 000 000
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Observation Use of Manipulatives
Knowledge
Learners are each given a deck of cards where the face Invite learners to roll a die three times to form a
1. Express multi digit numbers up to 1 000 000 in cards are removed, and aces represent 1. three-digit number. Learners will then represent
expanded form (partition) that multi-digit number on a place value chart.
Learners draw 3 cards and form a three-digit number. Learners write the number in expanded form.
2. Recompose multi digit numbers written in Learner expresses that number in expanded form. This is
expanded form into standard form. repeated with 4 cards and four-digit numbers until 7 This is repeated with multi digit numbers up to 1
cards are drawn. 000 000.
Skills
3. Represent multi digit numbers up to 1 000 000
using manipulatives (place value charts, base ten
blocks) diagrams (number lines) and digital tools.
4. Convert multi digit numbers up to 1000 000
from standard, word and expanded forms. https://www.tes.com/teaching-resource/visual-
place-value-chart-millions-12765389
Values https://illustoon.com/?id=9547
18
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5. Cultivate an understanding of how to represent Show and Tell
numerical values up to 1,000,000 in standard,
word, and expanded forms. Observation Checklist Have learners take turns presenting multi-digit
numbers written in expanded form and converting
them to standard form for their classmates.
For example:
Criteria Yes No
On Styrofoam cups label the bottom of each cup
as ones, tens, hundreds, up to millions. Along the
Learners used edges of the ‘ones’ cup, write numbers from 1 to
manipulatives to 9. Along the edges of the ‘tens’ cup, write
place digits numbers from 10 +, 20 + etc. The same is done
correctly for the hundreds cups up to the million cups.
Cups are placed into each other, in the correct
Learners expressed place value order. The cups are pulled out slightly
numbers correctly to show a number in expanded form and then
in expanded form pushed back to show the number in standard
form.
Learners provided
accurate
explanations
Peer Assessment
Learners write numbers in expanded form and have their
peers write the numbers in standard form. Learners
discuss solutions with each other and present their work
to the class with appropriate explanations
19
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Presentations
Learners are given cards with a multi-digit number
written on it.
Each learner represents his digit using manipulatives of
his choice. This is presented to the classroom with
appropriate explanations.
Games
Number Matching Game
Learners pick cards from card decks with numbers in
expanded form, worded form and standard form.
Learners are to match numbers in standard form to their
equivalents in expanded form and word form.
https://tinyurl.com/4hmsmbvf
Hands on Manipulatives
Have learners explore numbers up to one million
https://www.mathcoachscorner.com/2013/08/number-
using a variety of tools and representations,
forms-place-value-match-up/
including place value charts, base ten blocks,
number lines, and digital platforms. They will
develop a deep understanding of place value by
physically manipulating place value disks and
20
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Observation connecting them to the visual and digital
representations.
Learners are observed as they perform the various
transactions. Base Ten Blocks
Observation Checklist Use the base ten blocks to represent each digit in
the number. E.g. 3 452: 3 cubes (each representing
1000) for 3000, 4 flats (each representing 100) for
400, 5 rods (each representing 10) for 50 and 2
units (each representing 1) for 2. Learners lay out
Criteria Yes No Follow- blocks in sequence to visually represent the
Up magnitude of the number.
Extend to multi digits up to 1 000 000.
Learner follows the
role play instructions
Learner writes the amount
correctly in standard form
https://edit.mathcurious.com/2020/09/13/repre
Learners writes the amount senting-numbers-using-base-10-blocks-6-digits-
correctly in word form printable-and-virtual-task-cards/
Place Value Disks
Learner writes breakdown in
budget correctly in expanded Use place value disks to represent each digit in the
form number. Learners place the disks on a line to
show the value. Count the disks to obtain the
number represented.
21
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Example, 85 967
Form stacks of eight 10 000 disks, five 1 000
disks, nine 100 disks, six 10 disks, seven 1 disks.
https://media.nagwa.com/627124648475/en/thu
mbnail_l.jpeg
Place Value Charts
Learners represent numbers up to 1 000 000 using
a place value chart. The digits in the number are
placed correctly under the correct place value in
the chart.
https://www.tes.com/teaching-resource/visual-
place-value-chart-millions-12765389
Number Lines
Number lines are drawn on strips of paper. Mark
and label specific points on the strip. Learners will
22
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
place pegs on the number line and find the
number that it represents.
https://classroomsecrets.co.uk/number-line-to-
1000000/
Digital Tools
Using GeoGebra, create a number line using the
tool’s feature to create a line covering the required
range. Learners use input bar or point tools to
insert points on the number line to represent
specific multi-digit numbers.
Manipulatives
Provide opportunity for learners to practice the
following conversions through various activities
and exercises:
Begin by reviewing place value concepts for
numbers up to 1,000,000. Use a place value chart
to visually represent different numbers and
emphasize the value of each digit based on its
position.
23
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
For example: Place Value Disks and Place Value
Mat
Present learners with a chart that matches digits
with their corresponding words (1000 = one
thousand; 10 000 = ten thousand etc.)
Standard to Word Form:
● Provide learners with a multi-digit
number in standard form (e.g., 345,789).
● Model how to write the number in word
form (three hundred forty-five thousand,
seven hundred eighty-nine).
● Guide learners to practice writing
numbers in word form independently.
Word to Standard Form:
● Present learners with a number written in
word form (e.g., two hundred fifteen
thousand, four hundred twelve).
● Demonstrate how to convert the word
form to standard form using a place value
chart.
● Have learners practice converting word
form to standard form with partners or in
small groups.
Expanded to Standard Form:
● Introduce expanded form using examples
(e.g., 300,000 + 40,000 + 5,000 + 700 +
80 + 9).
24
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Explain how to combine the values to
form the standard form number.
● Provide learners with expanded form
numbers to convert to standard form.
Standard to Expanded Form:
● Demonstrate how to break down a
standard form number into its expanded
form using place value understanding.
● Offer learners practice opportunities to
convert standard form to expanded form.
Invite learners to start off with a number written
in standard form. Learners represent the number
on a place value mat using place value disks.
Learners write the expanded form and the worded
form of the given number.
Learners use a number written in expanded form,
represent the number on the place value mat and
write the worded form and standard form of that
number.
Learners then use a number written in worded
form, represent the number on the place value
mat and write the standard and expanded form of
the number.
25
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.teaching.com.au/product/place-
value-discs-8211-set-of-280
https://www.tes.com/teaching-resource/visual-
place-value-chart-millions-12765389
Role Play
Bankers
Learners play roles as bankers – a customer and a
teller. Learners are provided with sample
withdrawal slips. Learners write up withdrawal
slips in standard form and in words.
Learners write cheques in standard form and word
form.
26
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Budget Breakdown
Learners break down a provided budget into
expanded form.
https://www.netbankstore.com/counter-
combination-savings-withdrawal-deposit-slips-
18999.html
https://www.shutterstock.com/search/blank-
check
27
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Place value mats
Expanded form cards
Digit and place value arrow cards
Linking cubes
Interactive digital tools
Book
The Best Vacation Ever by Stuart J Murphy
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication and division) of large numbers.
Writing multi-digit numbers in expanded notation
Number sequence
Rounding off numbers
Comparing and ordering numbers
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language:
● Create word problems that involve expanded form
● Write stories that include large numbers
Physical Education
● Use expanded form to keep scores or times
● Record steps taken in expanded form
Social Studies
● Use expanded form to break down population numbers in different regions
Science
● Recoding scientific data in word form or standard form
● Represent measurements in word, expanded or standard form
28
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: N1.3. Whole Number – Comparing and Ordering Quantities
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Read and write multi-digit whole numbers using base-ten numerals, number names, and expanded form to 1 000 000
• Compare two multi-digit numbers based on meanings of the digits in each place (to six place values)
• Use >, =, and < symbols to record the results of comparisons
• Apply strategies to contextual situations and create story problems involving the comparison of whole numbers.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
RATING SCALE CONCRETE MATERIALS
Knowledge
Assess each learner by asking him/her to represent a Invite learners to use manipulatives while they achieve these
1. Read and write up to seven-digit numbers using given number using base ten blocks (Dienes blocks). SCOs. Teacher acts as the facilitator in these learner-
base ten numerals and number names Use a rating scale such as the one below. centred activities. Ensure that mixed ability groups are
formed so as to ensure conceptual understanding by all
2. Identify the face value, place value and total learners.
value of any digit in a seven-digit number
LEARNER IS ABLE TO: 1 2 3 4
-Manipulate base ten blocks (Dienes blocks) in
3. Write a seven-digit number in expanded form pairs and/or small groups to represent given
1. Use the correct number of
numbers. Learners can create question cards to be
blocks to represent
Skills used with base ten blocks. Have them exchange
a) tens
cards with classmates. To cater for differentiated
b) hundreds
4. Use concrete materials and visual aids (such as instruction, ensure that all questions on cards do
c) thousands
place value charts) to compare two whole not include millions.
d) ten thousands
numbers up to seven digits, using appropriate
e) hundred thousands
symbols (<, >, =) Examples of cards:
f) millions
1. Write in words: 4 002 310
Values 2. Write in figures:
2. Represent any number
Five million, one hundred and five
correctly using dienes
5. Compare multi digit numbers up to seven digits thousand and ninety-nine.
blocks.
by creating and solving real-life story problems
29
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3. In the number below, state the face value,
place value and total value of each
3. Provide reasonable
underlined digit.
explanation for the number
8 070 426
of blocks used to represent
4. Write 7 628 029 in expanded form.
each digit in a number.
5. 8 000 000 + 50 000 + 60 + 5 =
_________.
4. Identify the face value of
any digit in a seven-digit
number.
5. Identify the place value of
any digit in a seven-digit
number.
6. Identify the total value of
any digit in a seven-digit SOURCE:
number. https://www.shutterstock.com/image-
vector/place-value-base-10-units-rods-
7. Write a seven-digit number 2223609409
in expanded form
- Invite learners to use place value charts/mats
1- No understanding
and place value discs to read and write numbers.
2- Little understanding
Teacher should model how to use place value
3-Moderate understanding
discs on a place value mat or chart. Have learners
4-Complete mastery
compose multi-digit numbers and have them
discuss the value of each digit. Introduce
Use the results from the rating scale to categorize
expanded form and guide learners to discover the
learners according to the following:
link between place/total value and expanded
form.
UNDERSTANDING -Learner provides the highest
level of response and accuracy in explanation. Can
Encourage peer tutoring and cooperative learning
represent any given number (including zeros) using
while engaging in this activity.
30
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
dienes blocks. Learner understands place value and
expanded notation.
CONSTRUCTION - Evidence of understanding, but
lacks consistency.
EMERGENT - Learner can represent numbers using
dienes blocks but cannot provide meaningful
explanation. Learner is unable to identify the face, place
or total value of digits in a seven digit number. Learner is
unable to write seven-digit numbers in expanded form.
SOURCE:
EXIT CARDS https://www.understood.org/en/articles/place-
value-disks-an-evidence-based-math-strategy
Have learners complete exit cards at the end of the
lesson. They must get at least three correct before
leaving. Use questions similar to those listed in ILS.
SOURCE:
https://www.shutterstock.com/image-vector/ten-
units-equal-one-rod-learning-2391519099
31
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
- Have learners form bundles using items in their
environment such as straws, tooth picks, popsicle
sticks and match sticks. To understand the
concept of place value, invite them to form
bundles of up to thousands. Millions may not be
possible but they can use thousands to
conceptualize what one million looks like. Use
understanding of place value and total value to
write given numbers in expanded form.
-Form bundles using play money to encourage
integration of mathematical concepts and to foster
better understanding. Use questioning techniques
to enable learners to see the relationship between
finding the total amount of money given various
notes and expanded notation.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zCpRPM91
_j8
32
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
GAMES
-Have learners rearrange number cards to form
Whole-group Class Discussion/Presentations numbers that are bigger or smaller than given
numbers.
Ask each group of three or four to create and solve a
word problem. Each group presents to the class and -Form groups of three or four. Provide each
discusses the reason for their answer. Use the group with a set of cards with a number written
observation checklist below to assess. on each. Teacher calls out a number and asks
learners to raise a card with a lower or higher
value. The group with the highest score wins.
PLACE VALUE CHARTS
CRITERIA YES NO COMMENT
Have learners write each digit in a number on a
place value chart and compare numbers based on
1. Problem involves a the value of their digits. Have them write the
real-life scenario. statements using the correct symbols (<, >, =).
2. Problem is simple Comparing Numbers to 1 000 000
and easy to
understand.
INTERACTIVE QUIZZES
3. Solution is correct Sample:
and uses correct https://www.iknowit.com/lessons/e-comparing-
symbols numbers-to-9999999.html
4. Justification of STORY PROBLEMS
solution is clear and
thorough and Create real-life story problems involving
demonstrates comparing numbers that learners can relate to.
understanding of place Have them read and solve these problems. This
value. activity can be done individually, in pairs or in
small, mixed ability groups.
5. There is
participation from all
33
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Invite learners the opportunity to create and solve
group members.
their own problems, then share with classmates.
Samples of problems:
1. Mr. Pete wants to buy a car for GYD $2
316 768. His friend wants to buy a car for
GYD $2, 361 769. Which car is cheaper?
2. The population of Country X is 6 060
006. The population of Country Y is 6
060 606. Which country has less people?
See more samples in link below.
https://www.khanacademy.org/math/arithmetic-
home/arith-place-value/arith-comparing-multi-
digit-numbers/v/comparing-multi-digit-numbers-
word-problems
Additional Resources and Materials
- base ten blocks
- place value charts/mats
- place value discs
- straws
- popsicle sticks/ toothpicks/matches
- play money
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Model and write numbers using base ten blocks
Reading and Writing Numbers Up to Hundred Thousand in Words and in Symbols
34
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
https://www.understood.org/en/articles/place-value-disks-an-evidence-based-math-strategy
https://classroomsecrets.co.uk/lesson/year-5-compare-and-order-to-a-million-lesson/
NOTE TO TEACHER:
When teaching place value, develop the understanding that in a multi-digit number, a digit in one place represents 10 times as much as it represents in the place to
its right and 1/10 of what it represents in the place to its left)
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Music- When counting beats in Music, large numbers are involved, for example, if a piece of music has 17 306 beats, learners can write this number in
words and expanded form.
Physical Education - Learners can run short distances and record measurements in mm or cm. They can write these distances in words and figures
and in expanded form.
Social Studies - Have learners’ record populations of countries in the world in words and figures.
Language Arts - Create story problems involving large numbers.
35
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: N1.4. Whole Number – Understanding Place Value
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Use place value understanding to round decimals to any place
• Represent the place value of numbers in base-ten groupings concretely, pictorially, contextually, verbally and symbolically
• Explain the pattern regularity of the place value system
• Identify the value of a digit as determined by its position.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
PRODUCT- THINK PAIR SHARE PLACE VALUE CHARTS/MATS
Knowledge -Invite learners to place all the digits in a given
Observe learners while using place value charts/mats and number in the correct position in a place value
decimal grids. Provide each pair or small group with chart.
1. State the place value of digits in a decimal question cards and have them discuss solutions with
number up to the thousandths place their partners. Have each group present to the class. -Engage them in reversible thinking by placing the
digits, then asking them to state the place value of
2. Round off a decimal number to the nearest Use an observation checklist such as the one below to selected digits. .
whole number, tenth, hundredth and thousandth assess learners.
-Have them discuss and compare the values of
3. State the value of any digit in a multi-digit digits based on their positions. For example,
number (up to seven digits), based on its position In the number 267.59, find the difference in value
between the two underlined digits.
Skills
4. Represent the place value of numbers in base-
ten groupings concretely, pictorially, contextually,
verbally and symbolically
Values
36
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5. Create patterns involving the place value system
using real life situations and concrete materials.
PRODUCT- EXIT TICKETS
Have each learner answer the question on his/her card at
the end of the class. Give questions according to the
learner’s ability. Slower learners can simply round off a
given number to the nearest tenth, hundredth or
thousandth. Others can be given word problems, some
of which involve money or measurement. Some of the
https://www.mathkidsandchaos.com/place-value-chart/
problems can be one-step while others can be two-step.
Post solutions on the classroom wall before leaving. DECIMAL GRIDS
-Provide learners with grids such as the following
INTERACTIVE GAMES as have them identify the numbers represented.
Guide them to discover the relationship between a
Provide learners with links for interactive games where number line and a decimal grid.
self-assessment can take place. Encourage them to surf
the web for more exciting games.
Examples:
SCOOTER QUEST.
SOCCER MATH
RING TOSS
37
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://gizmos.explorelearning.com/find-gizmos/lesson-
info?resourceId=1007
-Provide them with blank grids and have them
represent given numbers by colouring. Use base
ten blocks alongside decimal grids so that learners
can see the link between the concrete and pictorial
representations, before moving to the abstract
level. Build on this concept by inviting learners to
understand what happens when decimals are
added or subtracted.
https://34auburn.weebly.com/decimal-introduction.html
PROBLEM SOLVING
-Provide learners with scenarios involving money
and measurement where they have to apply the
skill of approximation.
For example,
1. Mom asks Peter to go to the
supermarket to buy 2 lbs sugar for
$2.85 and a can of milk for $2.08. How
much money would she most likely
give to Peter?
2. Ms. John wants to buy two pieces of
ribbon each measuring 96.5 cm.
38
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
a) How much ribbon does she need in
all?
b) If the store only sells ribbon in
multiples of 100, how much ribbon
does Ms. John buy?
Ask probing questions to introduce the
concept of rounding off.
https://www.mashupmath.com/blog/round-to-the-nearest-tenth
Additional Resources and Materials
place value chart/map
base ten blocks
decimal grids
39
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
play money
number lines
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
What is rounding off in math?
In math, rounding off is the process of approximating that involves changing a number to a close value that is simpler and easier to work with. Rounding is done
by replacing the original number with a new number that serves as a close approximation of the original number.
For example, if a new pair of basketball sneakers costs $99.88, you could use rounding to conclude that you will need $100 to purchase the sneakers. In this
example, you would be rounding to the nearest whole dollar and the purpose of rounding would be to replace the actual cost of “ninety-nine dollars and eight-
eighty cents” with an approximated value of “one hundred dollars,” since it is simpler and easier to work with.
40
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Figure 01: You could use rounding to say that a pair of sneakers that actually costs $99.88 has an approximate cost of $100, since one hundred is simpler and easier
to work with.
SOURCE: https://www.mashupmath.com/blog/round-to-the-nearest-tenth
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Food and Nutrition- Round off measurements to determine how much of each ingredient needs to be bought.
Language Arts- Write poems about place value of decimals and rounding off.
41
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: N2.1. Fractions, Decimals and Rational Numbers– Representing Fractions
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Interpret a fraction as division of the numerator by the denominator (a/b = a ÷ b)
• Solve word problems involving division of whole numbers leading to answers in the form of fractions or mixed numbers, e.g., by using visual fraction models or
equations to represent the problem;
• Understand a fraction as a ratio or rate.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Can it be Divided?
Knowledge Fraction Matching Bingo Game
Have learners engage in concrete learning
1. Explain a fraction as the division of the Provide each child with a fraction card with four pictorial experiences by using manipulatives like counters,
numerator by the denominator using concrete, representations of fractions. beads, playdough, pattern blocks and dominoes to
pictorial, verbal and symbolic representation. explore the relationship between fractions and
Invite learners to match the fraction read to its pictorial
division.
2. Express a whole number division equation as a representations when divided. Allocate enough time for
fraction. learners to work out the answer using concrete, pictorial For example: Learners will choose a domino from
or symbolic reasoning to find the answer. a set of six and express it as a fraction. They will
3. Explain a fraction as a ratio showing part to
then articulate the fraction in words (e.g. four-
part or part to whole relationship.
sixths) and as a division problem (four divided by
six) To solidify their understanding, learners will
Skills FRACTION DIVISION BINGO CARD
use playdough to model the fraction as the
division of the numerator by the denominator.
4. Create games, puzzles and real world problems
involving division of whole numbers expressing
3/5 as a fraction of a whole and 3 ÷ 5
solutions as fractions.
42
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5. Determine unknown values in equivalent ratios
by applying the concept of unit rate as a
multiplier.
Values
6. Appreciate the value of sharing by representing
real life applications as fractions and ratio
equivalence
Retrieved from:
7. Demonstrate sharing a total amount in a given https://roomtodiscover.com/fraction-visual-
Think Pair Share
ratio using part to whole relationship. models/
Invite each child to write a worded real life story
problem. Have them exchange their problems with
another learner and solve them. Provide opportunities Can we Share Equally?
for each pair of learners to discuss their solutions and
make corrections if needed. Have learners tackle division word problems
using playdough as a visual aid. They will
represent the division problem as a fraction to
deepen their understanding of the connection
Follow up Activity:
between the two concepts.
Use each child story problem to create a booklet.
For example: Four friends bought 3 pizzas to
share equally. How many slices of pizza will each
Exit Ticket
friend get?
In pairs, have the learners complete a worksheet. Invite
Have learners create and separate pizzas. Invite
them to compare and discuss answers with the other pair
learners to represent their division with an
of learners within their group.
equation, then provide their answer as a fraction.
43
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved From:
https://quizlet.com/365951139/ratios-and-
proportions-flash-cards/
Retrieved from:
As a part As a unit As a part As a https://thirdspacelearning.com/us/math-
to part rate fraction to whole Fraction resources/topic-guides/number-and-
ratio ratio of the quantity/fractions-as-division/
whole
Provide other opportunities for practice. Ensure
that you use questions where the dividend is
greater than the divisor. Provide manipulatives
1. 1. 1. 1.
where they can use wholes or sets to represent
division. For example:
2. 2. 2. 2.
Observation
Learners will be observed as they solve real life problems
and assessed using an observational checklist
Criteria Yes No
44
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1. Learners identified
the ratio
2. Learners identified
the unit rates of each
part of the ratio.
3. Learners used a unit
rate to create a diagram
or used manipulatives
to find the missing part
of the ratio.
Investigating Fractions as a ratio
4. Learners provided
accurate explanations Part to Part
for their answers.
Present learners with a fraction and ratio
representation. Invite learners to use counters to
represent them.
Peer Assessment
Give each group a story problem. Invite learners to solve
the problem individually, then exchange with their peers
for correction and feedback.
45
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Have learners explain what the fraction 3/2
represents.
Example:
There are 3/2 red balls to every 1 yellow ball.
Using their knowledge of fractions as division,
have learners divide 3 by 2. Invite learners to use
play dough to show division.
1 ½ red balls to 1 yellow
3 red balls to 2 yellow balls
Have learners swap the values in the ratio to
represent yellow balls to red balls. Invite them to
create the fraction and explain the value of each
unit rate.
Part to Whole
46
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Using the same diagram, ask learners to represent
each colour as a fraction of the whole.
Whole : 5
Red Balls : 3/5
Yellow Balls: 2/5
Application of Part to Part Ratio
Invite learners to work collaboratively to explore
the concept of unit rates. After a brief review of
part-to-part ratios, groups will be given two
different items and tasked with determining the
unit rate for each.
Retrieved From:
https://brainly.com/question/11816632
Example:
Football to rugby ball 2: 6
Baseball to football 6:2
Football is 2/6 of the rugby ball
47
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
To every 1/3 of football, you have 1 rugby ball
Baseball is 6/2 of football
To every three-rugby ball, you have 1 football
Extending knowledge
Using the ratio of 2:6, if there are 30 rugby balls
how many footballs are there?
Invite learners to draw a diagram, or use
manipulatives to represent the solution to the
problem by using the unit rates of football to
rugby ball. Pay careful attention to the strategies
used. If necessary, use guided questioning to
direct learners to the correct solution.
Example:
1. What is the unit rate of rugby balls to
football?
2. How many groups of three rugby balls can
you get from a total of 30 balls?
3. If each group of 3 represents 1 football, how
many footballs will we have?
48
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved From: https://www.morrant.com/136-
gilbert/rugby_balls/4370_0b.html
Using the unit rate of 3 to 1, for every three balls
circled, learners will draw one football. This will
give them a total of 10 footballs.
30 divided by 3 = 10
Using the second unit rate of 1/3 football to 1
baseball. Dividing the 30 in thirds
10 10 10
Football is 1/3 of baseball, therefore football is 10
or 1/3 x 30 = 10
49
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Provide learners with other examples to practice
in their groups.
Can I Share in a given Ratio?
Present learner with manipulative and a story
problem: Dora shared some sweets in the ratio 3:5
among Tom, Dick and Harry. What fraction of
the sweets did each child get?
In groups, invite learners to use different coloured
counters to represent each part of the ratio. Invite
learners to represent each part of the ratio as a
fraction of the whole. Listen as learners explain
what each fraction represents.
Retrieved From: https://www.hope-
education.co.uk/product/curricular/mathematics
/numicon/numicon-coloured-counters-pack-of-
200/he1803877
Using the same problem, add 80 sweets and ask
learners to calculate each person’s share. Guide
50
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
learners to use both methods to find the solution.
Invite them to use manipulatives or diagrams to
help them.
a. Multiplying the part to whole fraction by the
total amount
b. Finding unit rate.
Example:
80 sweets to 8parts
Unit rate : 80/8 = 10/1
10 sweets to every part.
10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10
51
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Material
Material
Playdough
Fraction cards
Counters
Beads
Dominoes
Popsicle sticks
Books
‘If you hopped like a frog’ by David M. Schwartz
Ratio and proportion by David A Adler
Websites
https://www.mathplayground.com/grade_6_games.html
https://www.commoncoresheets.com/rate-language/817/download
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Ratio: A comparison of two numbers or quantities. They are measured in the same or similar units. Example: The ratio of adults to children is 3:5.
Rate: A special ratio that compares two quantities measured in different types of units. Example: The water dripped at a rate of 2 litres every 3 hours.
Unit Rate: A rate with a denominator of 1. Example a car travelled at 60 mph. 60 miles/1hr
52
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Understanding Fractions as Division (mathteachercoach.com)
 Ratios represent part-to-whole and part-to-part relationships.
 Fractions represent a part-to-whole relationship.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Art and Craft
creating bingo games
creating puzzles
Creating shapes
Creating Charts
Science and Technology
Experimenting: Measuring ingredients in fractional quantities and discussing the unit rate or ratio of one quantity to another.
Social Studies
Work effectively in groups, accepting responsibility for their part of a task
Voting and representation: Calculating the fraction of vote a political party or candidate receives during an election
53
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Demographics: Using ratio to represent the different demographic groups within a population
Language Arts
Determine how long it will take to read a book by calculating the unit rate of pages per hour.
54
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: N2.2. Fractions, Decimals and Rational Numbers – Comparing and Ordering Fractions
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Compare fractions as ratios. Read, represent, compare, and order decimal numbers up to thousandths, in various contexts.
• Describe relationships and show equivalences among fractions and decimal numbers up to thousandths, using appropriate tools and drawings, in various
contexts.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Product: Completing the Ratio Equivalence Board. Present learners with strip cards of two different
colours representing the number of people who
Knowledge In pairs, play a game of completely covering the board as
dine in and order takeout at a restaurant on
a whole class activity.
Saturday. Instruct pupils to symbolically give a
1. Explain equal fractions and ratios as
representation of the cards as a ratio and a
To play the game, create a board with the answers to the
proportions using visual fraction models.
questions given. Ensure that the answers are written in fraction.
the form of a fraction. Then, give each pair of learners a
2. Examine the difference between proportional
card with a real-life story problem:
and inverse proportional relationships.
Example:
3. Determine the multiplicative relationship
between two quantities by expressing part -to-part The ratio of orange juice to sugar in a jug of juice is 200
ratios as unit rates in fraction form and ml to 3 tbsp. of sugar. If a mother wants to use 9 tsp of
comparing them. sugar to make juice, how much orange juice should she Retrieved From:
use if she wants the juice to have the same taste? https://study.com/skill/practice/using-tape-
diagrams-that-represent-ratios-to-find-equivalent-
4. Solve real life story problems involving inverse
Invite learners to discuss and solve the problem. After
ratios-questions.html
proportional relationships.
finding the answer, learners will use the sticky paper to
cover the answer on the equivalent fraction board.
3: 7 = 3/7
5. Represent a decimal number up to thousandths
using concrete, pictorial, verbal and symbolic
Using the scenario; On Sunday the restaurant dine
representations.
in number was doubled while the number of take-
out increase proportionately. Ask them to use
55
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6. Compare decimal numbers up to thousandths Think, Pair, Share strip diagrams to show the number of dine in and
as fraction equivalence using >, < or = signs. take out for Sunday.
In pairs, invite learners to write an inverse proportion
real-life question. Then invite them to create a diagram to
7. Explain the relationship between fractions and Have learners write their ratio in the box below
help explain their solution. Provide them with the
decimals up to thousandths using concrete, and compare the increase in the numbers. Help
opportunity to share with class.
pictorial, verbal and symbolic representations. learners make the comparison between equivalent
ratio and equivalent fractions.
Skills
Have learners write their ratio in the box below.
8. Create games, puzzles and real-life story
problems involving comparing and ordering Continue to add increases to dine in and take outs
decimals up to thousandths. proportionately for 5 days
9. Construct diagrams to show equivalence
among fractions and decimal numbers up to 3 6
thousandths.
7
Values 14
10. Justify the relationship which exists among a Have learners examine the numbers in each ratio
ratio, fraction and a decimal using real life and describe any patterns they notice between the
problems. first numbers(antecedents) and the second
numbers( consequents)
Provide opportunities for learners to show the
values of the ratios by representing them as
fractions and compare.
Through a series of questions, guide learners to
discover the concept that both parts of a ratio
56
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
must be multiplied or divided by the same number
to maintain equivalence.
Examples of questions may include:
1. If we double the number of marbles, what
happens to the number of red marbles to keep the
ratio the same?
2. How can we represent this new number of
marbles as a fraction?
3. What did we do to the numerator and
denominator of the original fraction to get the
new fraction?
4. If we halved the number of red marbles, what
would happen to the number of blue marbles?
5. How can we represent his new number of
marbles as a fraction?
6. What did we do to the numerator and
denominator of the original fraction to get the
new fraction?
More to More, More to Less
Invite learners to use visual aids, manipulatives, or
real-world examples to help learners understand
the concepts.
57
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Example of a real-life story:
It takes 2 people 3 hours to mow 5 acres of grass.
Assuming that the people are working together at
the same time and the same steady pace, how
many acres will 6 people mow in the same 3
hours?
Invite learners to use diagrams or concrete
manipulatives to represent the information in the
problem.
5 acres
5 acres 5 acres 5 acres
Retrieved From:
https://www.freepik.com/premium-vector/man-
male-young-person-icon_3155307.htm
58
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Exit Ticket
Guide learners through questioning to explain the
In pairs, invite learners to use any of the methods taught answer.
to compare each ratio. Provide learners with the
opportunity to discuss and present their solutions.
Example of Questions
1. What happened when the number of people
Which is Greater?
increased?
Class A has 9 boys Timmy ordered 2
2. Can the increase be considered as direct
and 12 girls and class pieces of salmon and
proportion?
5 pieces of lobster.
B has 7 boys and 10
Henry ordered 3
girls. Which class has
Using the same question, have learners explore
pieces of salmon and
a lesser ratio of boys
6 pieces of lobster. the relationship between the number of people
to girls? Whose order has a and the time taken to mow the same number of
greater ratio of acres.
salmon to lobster?
How long will it take 6 people to mow the same 5
acres of grass?
3hr 3hrs each = 6hrs in total to mow the
grass
59
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Play a game of show and tell
6 hrs divided by 6 = 1 hr per person
Give each group two sets of ten cards. One with fraction
equivalence and the other with diagrams representing Example of Questions
decimals. Instruct learners to turn the cards one at a time.
Invite learners to take turns to identify the diagram 1. What happened when the number of people
shown on the card as a decimal and find the matching
increased?
fraction.
2. Can the increase be considered as direct
Retrieved from:
proportion? Give reasons for your answer.
https://mathcurious.com/2020/09/28/representing-
decimal-numbers-using-base-10-blocks-printable-and-
digital-activity-cards/ 3. If twice as many people (4) were used to
complete the same job, how much time would it
take them?
Lucky Dip for Three
4. What will happen to the time taken if one
person was to complete the same job?
In pairs, invite learners to dip for three decimals. Instruct
them to draw a diagram or use base ten blocks to
Guide learners to make the generalizations.
represent each decimal. Have learners represent decimals
as fractions and order them in ascending order. Provide
1. In inverse proportion, if the number of
opportunities for learners to explain their solutions.
people increases, the time taken decreases and
vice versa. Additionally, if there are twice as many
people then it takes half as long to complete the
task and ½ the number of people take twice as
long to complete the task.
60
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Shopping Smart
Banana Bargain
Invite learners to compare the price of items at
two different stores. By determining the unit price
(cost per item) at each store, they will decide
which store offers the better deal. For example:
At Jay’s supermarket the price of bananas is 5 for
$2 whereas at Kay’s minimart, bananas are sold at
a price of 8 for $4. Which supermarket is offering
the best price?
Have learners analyse the pricing of bananas at
two different stores. They will explore the various
strategies to determine which store offers the
better deal. Encourage learners to represent the
price information as ratios and unit rates.
Facilitate class discussion about different solution
methods and the efficiency of using ratios and
unit rates for comparison.
Ask learners to compare the two unit price rate
fractions to determine which supermarket offers
the better deal on bananas. Discuss the meaning
of the comparison: Which fraction represents the
lower cost per banana?
61
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
For Example:
Make calculations and compare unit price rate
fractions. Jay’s Supermarket Unit Price rate : 2/5
40 cents for 1 banana
Kay’s Supermarket Unit Price rate: 4/8 50 cent
for 1 banana
Therefore, 2/5 is less than 4/8
Extend learners' knowledge by exploring
alternative methods to compare ratios.
https://youtu.be/E38yxW10Mfs
https://youtu.be/jVr5s9fxbGc
Representing Decimals
Provide each group of learners with base ten
block, 100 block worksheet and crayons.
62
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Creating a Real-Life Story Booklet
https://www.mathcoachscorner.com/2015/09/m
In pairs, Invite learners to write their real-life story ultiplying-decimals/
problems. Learners are to create a pictorial representation
of their story problem and show how the ratio, fraction,
Invite learners to use the blocks to represent the
or decimal can be represented to show equivalence
decimal 0.32. Direct learners' attention to the
between the three concepts.
relationship between 3/10 in the decimal as three
groups of 10 out of the total of 10 groups.
Collect each pairs’ work to create a class booklet
Through questioning, get learners to realize that
these 3 groups of tenths can also be represented
as 30 /100, whereas the 2 is 2/100. This can also
be written as a total of 32/100. Provide learners
with other examples for practice.
Provide learners with a hundred block worksheet
and crayons to represent decimals up to
thousandths by shading the using coloured pencil
to represent each decimal value. Invite learners to
write the total as a fraction.
63
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
More, Less or Equal
Organize learners into groups and provide each
group with a visual representation of a decimal.
Example:
Invite learners to represent this diagram as a
decimal and a fraction.
0.7 7/10
Have learners work collaboratively in groups to
interpret diagrams representing decimals. Using
their understanding that each block within the
diagram equals 0.01 or 1/100, groups will express
the visual representation as both a decimal and a
fraction out of one hundred.
0.70 70/100
Building on their previous work, invite learners to
extend their understanding of decimals and
64
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
fractions by converting the diagram into both
decimal and fraction forms using the thousandths
place. Remind learners that each hundredth block
can be divided into ten thousandth parts.
0.700, 700 /1000
Invite learners to compare the three decimals and
fractions and record their observations. Guide
learners to make the generalization that a decimal
can be written as tenths, hundredths or
thousandths with equal value.
Retrieved From:
https://www.slideserve.com/crete/modeling-
decimals-with-base-10-blocks
In groups provide learners with these two
diagrams. Ask learners to represent diagrams as
decimals and fractions. Using the diagram as well
as decimal and fraction ask learners to compare
65
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
the decimals using >, <, = signs. Provide
opportunities for learners to justify their answer.
Provide learners with two decimals with place
value up to thousandths and one with place value
of tenths.
2.3 And 2. 336
Ask learners to write these decimals as fractions
and compare them. Use probing questions to get
learners to recall how to compare fractions with
unlike denominators. Direct learners’ attention to
tenths represented as hundredths and thousandths
equivalence.
2 3/10 2 336/1000
2 300/1000 < 2 336/ 1000
Have learners begin the lesson by tackling a real-
word problem that involves decimals.
Example;
On a test out of a hundred Tom got the following
score. Represent Tom’s score as a fraction, ratio
and decimal. Invite learners to explain each of the
methods used.
66
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Tom got 0.37 of the answers correct.
This means that he got 37/100 , 37 correct
answers out of the total of 100 marks
It also means that he got 37: 63; 37 correct
answers and 63 wrongs.
Provide learners with other examples for further
practice.
67
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Material
Material
base ten blocks
hundred block chart
counters
decimal grid
fraction strips and bars
bingo card
decimal cards
Books
The Hershey’s Milk Chocolate Fraction Boob by Jerry Pallotta
Sir Cumference and the Fraction Faire by Cindie Neuschwander
Websites
https://www.mathsisfun.com/decimal-fraction-percentage.html
https://www.khanacademy.org/math/cc-sixth-grade-math/x0267d782:cc-6th-rates-and-percentages
68
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Equivalent Ratios: Equivalent ratio can be obtained by multiplying and dividing the numerator and denominator with the same number.
Comparing ratios using unit rate: First, find the value of one unit and then the value of the required number of units. Example: Two pants cost $60. What will
be the cost of 5 pants?
Unit rate: $60/2 = $30 per pants Therefore: 5 x $30 = $150
Comparing ratio using cross multiplicative comparison:
a/b =c/d
a x d = b x c
If a x d > than b x c, then a/b is the greater unit.
Example: Tom and David went bike riding on the weekend. Tom rode 6 miles in 2 hours and David rode 10 miles in 4 hours. Did Tom and David go the same
rate of bike riding?
Tom a/b ; 6/2 ; 3/1
David c/d; 10/4 ; 5/2
3 x 2= 6 , 1x 5= 5
3/1 > 5/ 2 , Tom’s riding rate was faster than David’s
Comparing Ratio as Fractions using L.C. D
Example: Tom 6/2 ; 3/1
David 10/ 4, 5/2
L.C. D = 2
69
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Tom : 3 x 2/2 = 6/2
David : 5/2
6/2 > 5/2
Proportion: An equation of two equivalent ratios. Example: 5 pounds of sugar cost $4. How much does a pound of sugar cost? $⅘ = n$/1
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Art and Craft
Creating Art projects where learners divide shapes into fractional parts and represent them as decimals and ratios
Use proportion to scale up or down a pictures or shapes
Science and Technology
Use fraction and decimal to analyse data and to make statements of comparison.
Relate fraction and decimals to the use of scientific measurements of volume, temperature etc.
Social Studies
Explore the concept of equality and fairness through the concept of comparing fraction, decimals and ratios.
Language Arts
Have learners write explanations or stories using decimals and fractions
Invite them to create riddles based on comparing and ordering decimals
70
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: N2.3. Fractions, Decimals and Rational Numbers – Representing Decimals
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Represent decimals using concrete materials and pictorials (tenths, hundredths, thousandths); Describe decimals in context, verbally and symbolically;
• Use decimal notation for fractions with denominators 10, 100 or 1 000.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Observation: Monitor learner participation and Use a visual model (like a decimal grid) to
understanding during group work and individual illustrate tenths, hundredths, and thousandths
Knowledge practice. places and introduce the terms.
1. Represent decimals using concrete Worksheet: Collect and review the conversion worksheet
materials and pictorials for tenths, for accuracy. Demonstration how to use base-ten blocks and
hundredths, and thousandths. Exit Slip: Have each learner write one fraction with a decimal grids to represent decimals like 0.1, 0.01,
denominator of 10, 100, or 1,000, convert it to a decimal, and 0.001
2. Demonstrate understanding by retrieving and describe the relationship (e.g., “When the
and representing decimals using pictorials denominator is 100, the decimal has two places”).
for given fractions. Extensions
3. Describe decimals in real-world contexts
both verbally and symbolically.
https://youtu.be/yDa0ytNgbJI?si=f5xve9jryj__ze
4. Convert fractions with denominators 10, gh
100, or 1,000 into decimal notation.
Give learners decimal cards (e.g., 0.2, 0.05, and
5. Analyse the relationship between fractions 0.003) and have them use base-ten blocks and
and decimals with denominators of 10, grids to represent each value.
100, or 1000. Check for Understanding: Move around to
observe learners' representations and guide as
6. Create a visual representation that needed.
showcases the conversion of fractions Show the connection between fractions and
with denominators of 10, 100, or 1000 decimals (e.g., 1/10 = 0.1, 1/100 = 0.01). Use
into decimal form. examples on the board.
Values
71
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Provide worksheets with fractions, and ask
7. Apply knowledge of decimal learners to convert these fractions to decimals and
representations to solve real-world represent each with pictorial grids (e.g., shading
problems. tenths, hundredths).
Have a few learners share their pictorial
8. Justify the importance of understanding representations on the board to reinforce the
decimals in everyday life situations. concept.
Ask learners where they see decimals in real life
(e.g., money, measurement in cooking,
temperature).
Demonstrate converting fractions with 10, 100,
and 1,000 denominators into decimals (e.g., 3/10
= 0.3, 45/100 = 0.45). Learners convert fractions
together and then independently practice on a
worksheet.
Discuss and identify the relationship between
fraction denominators and decimal places. In
small groups, learners convert fraction cards and
observe that 10, 100, and 1,000
denominators have 1, 2, and 3 decimal places,
respectively. Groups share observations.
Demonstrate fraction-to-decimal conversions
using decimal grids (e.g., shade 3/10 as 0.3).
Learners practice shading grids to represent
converted fractions and then present their grids to
explain their conversions.
72
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Whiteboard and markers
Decimal grids (tenths, hundredths, thousandths)
Fraction-to-decimal conversion chart
Visual aids/posters showing fraction-to-decimal examples (e.g., 1/10 = 0.1, 1/100 = 0.01, etc.)
Blank decimal grids for learner practice
Coloured pencils or markers
Worksheets with conversion exercise
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
The place value of the first position to the right of the decimal point is tenths. The second position to the right of the decimal point is hundredths. The third
position to the right of the decimal point is thousandths.
Decimal numbers can be less than one (e.g., 0.654) or greater than one (e.g., 24.723).
The one whole needs to be shown or explicitly indicated when decimal numbers are represented visually since their representation is relative to the whole.
Decimal numbers can be represented as a composition or decomposition of numbers according to their place value. For example, decimals can be written in
expanded notation 3.628 = 3 + 0.6 + 0.02 + 0.008, or 3 × 1 + 6 × 0.1 + 2 × 0.01 + 8 × 0.001.
Decimal numbers can be compared by their place value. For example, when comparing 0.8250 and 0.845, the greatest place value where the numbers differ is
compared. For this example, 2 hundredths (from 0.825) and 4 hundredths (from 0.845) are compared. Since 4 hundredths is greater than 2 hundredths, 0.845 is
greater than 0.825.
Numbers can be ordered in ascending order – from least to greatest or can be ordered in descending order – from greatest to least.
Note
Between any two consecutive whole numbers are decimal thousandths. For example, the number 3.628 describes a quantity between 3 and 4, more precisely,
between 3.6 and 3.7, and between 3.62 and 3.63.
Decimals are sometimes called decimal fractions because they represent fractions with denominators of 10, 100, 1000, and so on. Decimal place value columns are
added to describe smaller partitions. Decimals, like fractions, have a numerator and a denominator; however, with decimals, only the numerator is visible. The
denominator (or unit) is “hidden” within the place value convention.
Decimals can be composed and decomposed like whole numbers. Expanded notation shows place value subdivisions (e.g., 3.628 = 3 + 0.6 + 0.02 + 0.008, or 3 ×
1 + 6 × 0.1 + 2 × 0.01 + 8 × 0.001).
The decimal point indicates the location of the unit. The unit is always to the left of the decimal point. There is symmetry around the unit column, so tenths match
tens, and hundredths match hundreds. Note that the symmetry does not revolve around the decimal, so there is no “oneth”:
A chart with the names of the place-value columns from left to right: thousands, hundreds, tens, ones, tenths, hundredths, and thousandths. A line of symmetry is
drawn at one, showing the symmetry around the one column.
73
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Between any two places in the base ten system, there is a constant 10-1 ratio, which is true for decimals. As a digit shifts one space to the right, it becomes one-
tenth as great, and if it shifts two spaces to the right, it becomes one hundredth as great. So, 0.005 is one-tenth as great as 0.05, one hundredth as great as 0.5, and
one-thousandth as great as 5. This also means that 5 is 1000 times as great as 0.005.
As with whole numbers, a zero in a decimal indicates that there are no groups of that size in the number:
5.007 means that there are 5 wholes, 0 tenths, 0 hundredths, and 7 thousandths.
5.100 means that there are 5 wholes, 1 tenth, 0 hundredths, and 0 thousandths.
5.1 (five and one tenth), 5.10 (5 and 10 hundredths), and 5.100 (5 and 100 thousandths) are all equivalent (although writing zero in the tenths and hundredths
position can indicate the precision of a measurement; for example, the race was won by 5.00 seconds and the winning time was 19.29 seconds). Writing zero in the
tenths, hundredths, and thousandths position can indicate the precision of a measurement (e.g., baseball batting averages are given to the nearest thousandths).
Decimals are read in a variety of ways in everyday life. Decimals like 2.5 are commonly read as two point five; in math, the term pi (π) is commonly approximated
as three point one four; the decimal in baseball averages is typically ignored. However, to reinforce the decimal’s connection to fractions, and to make visible its
place value denominator, it is recommended that decimals be read as their fraction equivalent. So, 2.573 is read as “2 and 573 thousandths.”
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics and Science: Use measurement and data analysis in experiments; reinforce fractions, decimals, and graphing with scientific data.
Mathematics and Social Studies: Apply ratios and percentages to historical economics and population trends; integrate geography with mapping coordinates and
statistics.
Mathematics and Language Arts: Use narrative-based word problems; explore symmetry and sequences in poetry.
Mathematics and Physical Education: Analyse fitness stats with averages and percentages; connect geometry to body movement in sports and dance.
Mathematics and Art: Study symmetry, scaling, and proportions through art projects; apply geometry for realism in visual works.
Mathematics and Technology: Use digital tools for data analysis and graphing; introduce coding with logical patterns and sequences.
Mathematics and Music: Explore rhythms as fractions and scales as sequences, connecting math with music theory.
These integrations make math more engaging and relatable across subjects.
74
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: N2.4. Fractions, Decimals and Rational Numbers – Comparing and Ordering Decimals
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Compare two decimals to thousandths based on meanings of the digits in each place, using >, =, and < symbols to record the results of comparisons
• Order decimals to thousandths based on place value understanding.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Ask learners what they would enter on a calculator
Conversation: to generate the number sequence 7, 0.7, 0.07,
Knowledge Present the following situation: 0.007. Support them in recognizing that each
number is one-tenth the previous one and that
1. Describe the process of comparing two Books from the library must be returned to the shelves dividing by 10 shifts a digit to the right. To extend
decimals to thousandths. according to their Dewey decimal number, with smaller their thinking, have learners see if they can create
codes first. this sequence using multiplication (i.e., × 0.1) and
Ask learners to consider the following: discuss why multiplying 7 by 0.1 (which is the
Skills same as dividing 7 by 10) produces a smaller
2. Demonstrate using the >, =, and < A learner says code 599.3 should go before 599.234 number.
symbols to compare different decimals to because 3 is smaller than 234. Her friend disagrees. Who
thousandths. do you think is correct and why? Explain your reasoning
Product
3. Generate a set of decimal numbers to Introduce comparing decimals with different place values
thousandths and arrange them in
ascending and descending order to show
their understanding of ordering decimals
Provide learners with a series of numbers, such as
to thousandths.
those below, and have them determine which is
the greatest in each set and explain their thinking:
Values
4328 or 434 or 48
4. Solve comparison problems involving two
43.6 or 4.25 or 345
decimals to thousandths using >, =, and
8.3 or 8.257 or 8.45
< symbols.
5.008 or 5.09 or 5.7
5. Analyse the similarities and differences
75
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
between ordering decimals and comparing Listen to learners as they explain the reason
decimals to thousandths. behind their choice, particularly those who have
made an incorrect choice. Encourage them to use
their number sense and guide those who need
support to recognize that having more digits after
the decimal point does not mean a greater
number.
Decimal numbers can be represented as a
composition or decomposition of numbers
according to their place value. For example,
decimals can be written in expanded notation
3.628 = 3 + 0.6 + 0.02 + 0.008, or 3 × 1 + 6 ×
0.1 + 2 × 0.01 + 8 × 0.001.
Decimal numbers can be compared by their place
value. For example, when comparing 0.8250 and
0.845, the greatest place value where the numbers
differ is compared. For this example, 2
https://www.mathworksheets4kids.com/comparing-
hundredths (from 0.825) and 4 hundredths (from
decimals.php
0.845) are compared. Since 4 hundredths is greater
than 2 hundredths, 0.845 is greater than 0.825.
Think Pair share multiple-choice worksheets:
Numbers can be ordered in ascending order –
from least to greatest or in descending order –
from greatest to least.
76
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.commoncoresheets.com/decimal-
worksheets/sbh/comparing-decimals
Have learners create word problems involving decimal
comparisons
Additional resources
Whiteboard and markers
Place value chart (up to thousandths)
Worksheets with decimal comparison and ordering exercises
Decimal number cards
Small group activities handouts
Exit slips for assessment
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Numbers with the same units can be compared directly (e.g., 72.5 cm2 compared to 62.4 cm2).
Sometimes numbers without the same unit can be compared, such as 6.2 kilometres and 6.2 metres. Knowing that the unit kilometre is greater than the unit metre
can invite one to infer that 6.2 kilometres is greater than 6.2 metres.
Sometimes numbers without the same unit may need to be rewritten with the same unit in order to be compared. For example, 1.2 metres and 360 centimetres can
be compared as 120 centimetres and 360 centimetres. Thus, 360 centimetres is greater than 1.2 metres.
Whole numbers (zero and positive integers) and decimal numbers can be compared and ordered according to their place value.
Benchmark numbers can be used to compare quantities. For example,
5/6 is greater than ½ and o, 25 is less than ½ so 5/6 is greater than 0.25.
If two fractions have the same denominator, then the numerators can be compared. In this case the numerator with the greater value is the greater fraction because
the number of parts considered is greater (e.g., 2/3>1/3)
If two fractions have the same numerators, then the denominators can be compared. In this case the denominator with the greater value is the smaller fraction
because the size of each partition of the whole is smaller (e.g., 5/6<5/3)
Having more digits does not necessarily mean that a number is greater. For example, −7528 has four digits but it is less than +3 because −7528 is less than zero
and +3 is greater than zero.
77
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Any positive number is greater than any negative number.
When comparing positive numbers, the greater number is the number with the greater magnitude. On a horizontal number line, the greater number is the farthest
to the right of zero. On a vertical number line, the greater number is the farthest above zero.
When comparing negative integers, the least number is the negative integer with the greater magnitude. On a horizontal number line, the lesser number is the
farthest to the left of zero. On a vertical number line, the lesser number is the farthest below zero.
Numbers can be ordered in ascending order – from least to greatest – or can be ordered in descending order – from greatest to least.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Here are ways to integrate decimal comparison and ordering across subjects:
Science & Geography: Compare and order measurements (e.g., temperatures, distances, and elevations) for real-world data analysis.
Financial Literacy: Use decimals in budgeting, price comparison, and calculations involving taxes or savings.
Art & PE: Apply decimals for accuracy in scale drawings and in tracking progress in timed activities.
Technology & Data Analysis: Work with precise measurements in design software and interpret real-world data using decimal comparisons and ordering.
These integrations make decimal skills relevant across disciplines, reinforcing their real-world applications.
78
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: N2.5. Fractions, Decimals and Rational Numbers – Decimal Place Value
Grade Level Expectation:
• Extend the positional structure of the place value system to include decimals (tenths, hundredths, thousandths); Read and write decimals to
thousandths using base-ten numerals, number names, and expanded form, e.g., 347.392 = 3 × 100 + 4 × 10 + 7 × 1 + 3 × (1/10) + 9 × (1/100) +
2×(1/1000)
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Observational Checklist for reading decimal numbers. Use of Video and Place Value Chart
The learner is Engaged learners in viewing the
Knowledge video attached in the link below to reinforce
Checklist for Reading Decimal Numbers
reading decimal numbers up to hundredths and
1. Read and write decimals to thousandths extend their knowledge of reading decimal
using base-ten numerals, number names, Criteria Comments numbers up to thousandths.
and expanded form, e.g.,347.392 = 3 × https://youtu.be/Kdu3CEAq7V0
100 + 4 × 10 + 7 × 1 + 3 × (1/10) + 9 ×
Then the learners are engaged in reading decimal
(1/100) + 2×(1/1000)
The learner reads the whole
numbers up to thousandths with the aid of a place
number part of the number
value chart.
2. Represent base ten numerals up to
correctly.
The number 6945.372 is represented on a place
thousandths in a place value chart using
value chart as shown below. The learners study
numerals and place value counter
The learner reads the numbers
the position of the values. After they are taught
representations.
after the decimal point
how to read a decimal number up to thousandths
correctly.
with the steps explained by their instructor.
Skills
The learner demonstrates
How do we read the following number shown on
3. Convert the given expanded form of understanding of the place
the place value chart below?
decimal numbers from millions to values of the digits in the whole
thousandths as their base-ten numeral number part of the numeral.
representations.
The learner demonstrates
4. Interpret the decimal representation up understanding of the place
to thousandths using a place value chart values of the digits after the
decimal point.
79
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
and place value counter as a
written numeral and expanded form. Assessment Rubric for writing decimal numbers.
The learner All the digits were written in 4
Values
demonstrates t he correct place value
understanding of
5. Justify the correct expanded form
place value of Less than 100% but more 3
representations of decimal numbers up to
whole numbers than 75% of the digits were
thousandths among incorrect decimal
written in the correct place
representations. 1. Read the whole number
value
Six thousand, nine hundred, forty five
2. At the decimal point say and
More than 50% but less 2
Six thousand, nine hundred, forty five and
than 75% of the digits were
3. Read the number after the decimal point as the
written in the correct place
whole number you see.
value.
Six thousand, nine hundred, forty five and three
hundred, seventy two
Less than 50% of the digits 1
4. At this point look at the place value of the digit
are written in the correct
farthest from the decimal point and say that place
place value.
value.
The learner All the digits were written in 3 Six thousand, nine hundred, forty five and three
demonstrates the correct place value hundred, seventy two thousandths.
understanding of
place value of 2/3 of the digits were 2 As the number is read they are asked to write in
numbers after the written in the correct place words what they are saying. Through this exercise
decimal point. value the learners should realize that they write what
they say in words to write the number in words.
⅓ of the digits was written 1
in the correct place value. Provide the opportunity for learners to reinforce
the concept of decimal place value. For example,
Teacher’s Comments have. The learners recite the following poem to
reinforce the concept.
80
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Class Presentation
The learner present their place value chart representation of
a given number to the class. They explain to the class the
reason placing the digits in the place value options they
choose.
The class provides feedback to the learner. They state if the
representation is correct and if not they state where the
learner went wrong with an explanation.
Talking Circles
The learners sit in a circle to discuss how they were able to
convert numbers written in expanded form to standard
form. The learner with the given stick, makes the
contribution while the other learners listen. Every learner Learners write numbers in expanded form
gets to share their process, In this way if any other strategy using the place value chart through guided
was developed, the learners can learn from each other. discussion
The objective of the activity is to:
1. Understand whether the learners can correctly identify the
total values of the digits.
2. Correctly find the sum of the total values
3. Correctly state the standard form of the number.
The learners will be able to use the white board to explain
any point they need to elaborate on.
Game
The learners are placed into four equal teams. If the teams
have five players, they are numbered from 1 to 5. All How to write numbers in expanded form?
number ones get a chance at the same turn, Number two’s
play with number twos etc. 1. Identify the standard form.
The objective of the game is to determine the number • 7634103.362
represented on the place value counter chart. The teacher
changes the number representation on the place value 2. Identify the place value of each digit.
counter chart, after every turn.
• 7 - million
81
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
At start, the teacher presents the learners with the counter • 6 - hundred thousand
representation. The first number 1 player to put up their • 3 - ten thousand
hand, get the chance to get the points for the correct • 4 - thousand
answer. If the first player does not get the answer, another • 1 - hundred
number 1 player from another team gets the chance to get • 0 - ten
the point. This continues until the first representation is
• 3 - one
matched to the correct number.
After decimal point take the face value of the
Then number 2 players of every team gets the next chance.
number
This process continues until every player get a chance at a
• .3 - tenths
turn.
• .06 - hundredths
When you get to the last player of the teams, round two
• .002 - thousandths
begins at number one again. The game can have as many
rounds as the teacher wishes. The team with the most
3. Write an addition number sentence with all the
correct answers wins the game.
digits multiplied by their place value
• (7 x 1 000 000) + ( 6 x 100 000) + (3 x 10
Class Presentation
000) +(4 x 1000) + (1 x 100) + (3 x 1) + (
The objective is for the learner to justify the expanded form
3 x 1/10) + (6 x 1/100) + (2 x 1/1000)
chosen for the given number. In the presentations the
learners must explain why the chosen option correct and
Using the above steps the learners are guided in
what makes the other options incorrect. The learners can
writing several numbers in expanded form.
use strategies of their choice. Every learner in the group gets
to explain one card.
Place Value Chart
Assessment Checklist to Justify Expanded Form of
Have the learners representing numbers in a place
Numbers
value chart.
They start with the first number on the left of the
decimal point to find the place values of the digits
in the whole number. They continue left until they
have aligned the digits with its correct place value.
After, they move to the first number on the right
• and continue right until they have identified the
The learner has the correct option. place values of the decimal number digits.
82
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The place value chart below represents the
position of the digits. The learners should use the
decimal point as their guide to accurately position
the numbers.
•
Provide opportunities for the learners to represent
The reasons for choosing are valid.
the decimal number on the place value chart like
shown below.
7 634 103.362
•
The explanation for not choosing the other options
demonstrates understanding of place value.
•
The learner demonstrates understanding of the value of the
position of the numbers.
Invite the learners to practice representing
numbers ranging from millions to thousandths on
a place value chart like the one shown above.
•
The learner made effective use of the strategies learnt to SCO 3
Convert from expanded form to standard form
explain the option chosen
through guided discussion
Teacher’s Comments
Engage the learners in activities learn on how to
_______________________________________________ convert numbers from expanded form to standard
_______________________________________________ form.
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________ Firstly the learners recap what is meant by the
____ term standard form of a number?
83
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Standard Form :( Standard form of a number is
the normal way we write numbers, with the largest
place value on the left and working towards
smaller place values at the right of the number.
This form includes a comma at every 3 digits from
the right, for example, to separate hundreds from
thousands).
Demonstrate to learners how to write numbers
in standard form step-by-step.
How to convert decimal numbers
from expanded form to standard form?
1. Identify the expanded form of the decimal
number.
• (7 x 1 000 000) + (6 x 100 000) + (3 x 10
000) +(4 x 1000) + (1 x 100) + (3 x 1) + (
3 x 1/10) + (6 x 1/100) + (2 x 1/1000)
2. Find the products of the equations in each
bracket.
• (7 x 1 000 000) = 7 000 000
• (6 x 100 000) = 600 000
• (3 x 10 000) = 30 000
• (4 x 1000) = 4 000
• (1 x 100) = 100
• (3 x 1) = 3
• ( 3 x 1/10) = 0.3
• (6 x 1/100) = 0.06
• (2 x 1/1000)= 0.002
3. Find the sum of all the products.
7 000 000
600 000
84
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
30 000
4 000
100
3
0.3
+ 0.06
0.002
7 634 103.362
Using the above steps the learners are guided in
converting numbers from expanded notation to
standard form.
SCO 4
Provide opportunities for learners to Interpret
place value counter chart to identify the number
presentation representation.
For example:
1. The learners study a place value counter chart
with a number representation.
2. The learners, starting with the highest place
value column, identify the number represented in
each place value column.
85
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
After, all the values are added to determine the
number represented.
For example: Studying the diagram above;
300 000
20 000
5 000
400
30
6
0.20
0.03
0.002
325 436.232
Using Place Value Count Chart number
representation to write a number in expanded
notation.
1. The learners study the place value counter
chart.
2. Starting from the column with the highest place
value, each column in represented as the number
of counters times the place value.
86
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
For example:
3 x 100 000
2 x 10 000
5 x 1 000
4 x 100
3 x 10
6 x 1
2 x 0.1
3 x 0.03
2 x 0.002
3. The representations for each place value are
placed in brackets and separated with the addition
sign to write the number in expanded form.
(3 x 100 000) + (2 x 10 000) + (5 x 1 000) + ( 4
x100) + (3 x 10) + (6 x 1) + (2 x 0.1) + ( 3 x 0.03)
+
( 2 x 0.002) = 325 436.232
SCO 5
Differentiating examples from non-examples
on flash cards.
Provide the opportunity for learners to collaborate
in groups. For example, place The learners are
placed in groups of four. Each group is given four
flash cards. Each flash card contains an objective
type question where the learners have to
determine the expanded notation representation
of a given number.
The learners then share their responses with the
class explaining the reason for each choice. The
learners choose the tool and strategy of their
87
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
choice to find the matching expanded form for
the given numbers.
Examples of flash cards:
88
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Additional Resources and Materials
Decimal flash cards, decimal place value blocks and chart.
89
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Standard Form: Standard form of a number is the normal way we write numbers, with the largest place value on the left and working towards smaller place
values at the right of the number. This form includes a comma at every 3 digits from the right, for example, to separate hundreds from thousands.
To write the expanded form of a number, identify the place value of each digit. Then multiply each digit by a corresponding multiple of 10 and add them. To
convert numbers in expanded form to the normal form, place the digits in the proper places.
F or e.g. 300 + 20 + 6 = 326 because 300 is 3 hundreds, 20 is 2 tens, 6 is 6 ones.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Literacy: Write explanations for decimal concepts to build vocabulary and clarity in communication.
Science: Use decimals in measurements (e.g., volume, temperature) to emphasize precision.
Art: Create visual grid representations for decimals, fostering creativity in understanding place value.
Technology: Utilize digital tools (like spreadsheets) to reinforce decimal operations and conversions.
Financial Literacy: Apply decimals to money for budgeting and understanding financial calculations.
90
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: N3.1. Integers – Representing Integers
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Understand that positive and negative numbers are used together to describe quantities having opposite directions or values (e.g., temperature
above/below zero, elevation above/below sea level, credits/debits, positive/negative electric charge)
• Use positive and negative numbers to represent quantities in real-world contexts, explaining the meaning of 0 in each situation.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners are expected to: Conversation Whole-Class Discussion on Integers:
Have students create poems, songs, advertisements, or
Knowledge: monologues to identify key points of using positive and Begin with a discussion about integers, recording
negative integers, placing zero in real-world contexts, and what learners already know.
1. read and represent integers using a variety interpreting numbers on a number line. List their examples, such as -20°C for cold
of tools and strategies, including weather or +57°C for extreme heat.
horizontal and vertical number lines Discuss the meaning of zero in each context (e.g.,
Oral questioning: 0°C as the freezing point).
2. Identify and Interpret Positive and Ask questions to assess comprehension, such as, “What
Negative Values does a negative value represent in a bank account?” or
“How does zero act as a balance point?”
3. Use Positive and Negative Numbers in Which does not belong and why?
Context
4. Explain the Role of Zero in Real-World
Scenarios
Skills Product:
5. Demonstrate opposing Quantities Using Exit Ticket:
Plot these integers on vertical and horizontal
Number Lines
number lines.
Values Have learners write a short response to the question:
Financial Context of Integers
6. Analyse Contextual Scenarios Involving “Explain a real-world situation where you would use
Positive and Negative Numbers positive and negative numbers and why zero is
important.”
91
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Explain “credit” as positive and “debit” as
negative in a bank context.
Create scenarios where learners log credits for
tasks and debits for “purchases” in a bank register.
Have learners calculate their final balance to
practice combining positive and negative
numbers.
Personal Number Lines
Have learners draw horizontal and vertical
number lines in their notebooks.
Encourage them to plot integers from real-life
examples, such as elevator levels or temperatures.
Integer Representation with Physical and Visual
Models
Classroom Floor Number Line: Place tape on the
floor with zero as the start and markers for
positive and negative values. Learners step
forward or backward as directed, reinforcing
integer movement and zero pairs.
92
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Two-Colour Integer Tiles: Provide tiles in two
colours (e.g., red for negative, yellow for positive)
to represent integers like -4 (four red) or +2 (two
yellow). Have learners combine tiles to see how
integers can balance to zero, supporting number
line concepts. For example:
Analysing Contextual Scenarios
Provide scenarios (e.g., a hiker starting at sea level
going up and down, temperature changes in a
day).
Divide learners into groups to analyse each
scenario, identifying the positive and negative
changes and the role of zero (e.g., sea level,
freezing point).
Have each group share their scenario
interpretation and explain how positive and
negative values represent real-world changes.
93
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Number line posters (horizontal and vertical)
Markers
Two-colour counters or integer tiles (e.g., red for negative, yellow for positive)
Tape for floor number line
Real-life integer scenario cards (e.g., temperature changes, bank account balances)
Chart paper and markers for group work
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Integers include whole numbers and their opposites, with zero as a neutral point (neither positive nor negative). On a horizontal number line, positive integers
appear to the right of zero, and negatives to the left; on a vertical line, positives are above zero, and negatives below.
Each integer has an opposite, equidistant from zero (e.g., +4 and -4). Zero pairs, such as (+3) and (-3), balance each other to make zero. Integers represent
quantities relative to a reference point; for example, in temperature, +10°C is 10 degrees above freezing, while -10°C is 10 degrees below.
Using real-world contexts like temperature changes, bank transactions, and elevations helps learners understand integers and their opposites. In the Cartesian plane,
positive and negative values on horizontal and vertical lines are used to plot points, adding context for understanding positive and negative integers.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics and Science
Temperature Studies: Use temperature data to illustrate positive (above zero) and negative (below zero) integers.
Physics: Discuss integers in the context of vectors, showing magnitude and direction (e.g., forces).
2. Mathematics and Social Studies
Financial Literacy: Teach credits (positive) and debits (negative) through budgeting lessons.
Historical Analysis: Use historical temperature records and statistics to illustrate changes over time.
3. Mathematics and Art
Coordinate Graphing: Have learners plot points on the Cartesian plane to create visual art.
Symmetry: Explore how integers relate to symmetry and reflections in art.
4. Mathematics and Physical Education
Sports Statistics: Analyse game scores using positive and negative integers.
Movement Activities: Engage learners in activities that involve forward and backward movement on a number line.
5. Mathematics and Technology
Coding: Use programming to teach conditional statements based on integer values.
Game Development: Create simple games that incorporate integer mechanics.
94
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
6. Mathematics and Language Arts
Storytelling: Encourage learners to write narratives using positive and negative integers.
Vocabulary Development: Introduce math terms through reading and comprehension activities.
7. Mathematics and Environmental Studies
Climate Change: Discuss data on sea levels and temperature changes using integers.
Geography: Examine elevations above and below sea level with integers.
These integrations help learners understand the relevance of integers in various contexts.
95
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: N3.2. Integers – Comparing and Ordering Integers
Grade Level Expectation:
• Interpret statements of inequality as statements about the relative position of two numbers on a number line diagram. For example, interpret -3 > -7 as a
statement that -3 is located to the right of -7 on a number line oriented from left to right.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Conversation: Oral questioning Begin with a quick review of numbers and their
placement on a number line. Ask learners to share
Knowledge: 1. Is a temperature of -11 degrees warmer or what they know about comparing numbers.
1. Explain the concept of inequalities and colder than a temperature of -15 degrees?
their significance in comparing numbers. 2. Is an elevation of -10 feet closer or farther from Explain what inequalities are and the symbols
2. Accurately interpret statements of the ocean's surface than an elevation of -8 feet? used (>, <). Provide examples using simple
inequality on a number line. 3. It was 8 degrees at nightfall. The temperature numbers (e.g., 2 > 1).
dropped 10 degrees by midnight. What was the
Skills temperature at midnight? Visual Representation: Display a number line on
3. Create and analyse number line diagrams 4. A diver is 25 feet below sea level. What is his the board. Show examples of inequalities such as -
to represent inequalities. elevation after he swims up 15 feet toward the 3 > -7 and illustrate their positions on the number
4. Use mathematical language to describe surface? line.
relationships in inequalities. Product: Discuss Relative Position: Explain that the
5. Apply understanding of inequalities to Worksheet Activity: Distribute worksheets with a mix of number on the left is less than the number on the
real-world contexts. inequality statements and number line diagrams. Learners right. Highlight how -3 is located to the right of -7
will: on the number line.
Value Interpret the inequalities and place them on the number Group Activity: Divide learners into small groups.
6. Evaluate and compare different inequality line. Provide each group with a set of inequality cards.
statements for accuracy. Use comparative language to explain their placements. Have them place the cards on a number line
Evaluate given statements to determine their accuracy. poster or the floor number line, discussing the
relative positions as they do so. For example,
Decide whether each inequality statement is true or false.
Explain your reasoning.
1. -5>2
2. 3>-8
96
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3. -12>-15
4. -12.5>-12
Plot each of the following numbers on the number line.
Label each point with its numeric value.
https://classful.com/product/comparing-and-
0.4, -1.5, - 1 7/10, - 11/10 ordering-integers-task-cards-6th-grade-2/
Class Discussion: Have each group present one
inequality and explain the reasoning for the
placement on the number line.
Real-World Scenarios: Provide learners with real-
world context cards. For example, "The
temperature is -3°C and -7°C. Which temperature
is warmer?" Learners will create their inequalities
and plot them on number lines.
97
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Whiteboard and markers
Number line posters or tape on the floor to create a large number line
Inequality cards (e.g., -3 > -7, 2 < 5, 0 > -1)
Graph paper
Rulers
Worksheets with inequality problems and number line diagrams
Real-world scenario cards involving inequalities
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Inequalities are similar to equations because they provide information about the relationship between two numbers or expressions (which may include variables).
However, unlike equations, inequalities do not indicate equality; instead, they show that one expression is greater than or less than another.
While equations use the equal sign, inequalities use four distinct symbols to represent these relationships.
.
An inequality indicates that one value is either less than or greater than another.
For example, if we know the temperature is below 3°F but not the exact value, we can express this with the inequality:
t < 3
On a number line, this temperature can be represented graphically. Any point to the left of 3 signifies a possible value for t. The open circle at 3
indicates that t cannot equal 3, as the temperature must be less than 3°F.
98
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Here’s another example: A young traveller must be at least 16 years old to fly on an airplane without an adult accompanying them.
Let a represent the traveller’s age. Any age greater than 16 is a valid value for a, and 16 itself is also acceptable. This can be illustrated on a number line by placing a
closed circle at 16, indicating that a 16-year-old can travel alone. From this point, we draw a line extending to the right.
An inequality and equation can be written to show possible values for a:
a>16
a=16
99
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
1. Science: Model temperature ranges and measurement tolerances with inequalities.
2. Geography: Use inequalities to compare elevations above/below sea level.
3. Economics/Finance: Set financial goals and spending limits through inequalities.
4. Physical Education: Represent fitness targets, such as minimum lap counts.
5. Art/Design: Apply inequalities to set spatial limits for design projects.
These integrations make inequalities practical, showing how they express real-world constraints and relationships across disciplines.
100
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Operations with Numbers
Introduction to Strand
This strand focuses on building a solid foundation in number operations, explicitly understanding and applying addition and subtraction with decimals. Teaching
decimal operations enhances learners' mathematical proficiency and real-life problem-solving skills. Decimal usage is integral to daily activities, from managing
finances and budgeting to measuring in fields like cooking, science, and engineering. Mastery of decimal calculations enables learners to perform precise
computations, a skill that supports careers in finance, technology, and engineering.
Understanding decimals also prepares learners for advanced math topics, fostering critical thinking and logical reasoning skills. With a firm grasp of decimal
concepts, learners are positioned for academic achievement and practical, real-world application. Therefore, it’s essential that educators cultivate a comprehensive
understanding of decimal operations, aligning with the vision and essential competencies of mathematical education to support both present and future success.
Essential Learning Outcome O1.1: Additive Thinking – Understanding the Meaning of Addition and Subtraction and how They Relate
Grade Level Expectation:
• Add and subtract decimals to thousandths, using concrete models or drawings and strategies based on place value, properties of operations, and/or the
relationship between addition and subtraction; relate the strategy to a written method and explain the reasoning used.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: 1. Formative Assessments EXPLICIT INSTRUCTIONS :
Observation
Skills Concrete Models and Manipulatives (Base-
Observations and Anecdotal Records
ten blocks)
1. Add decimals up to the thousandth place.
Observe learners as they work with concrete models,
Invite learners to use base-ten blocks to represent
drawings, and number lines.
2. Subtract decimals up to the thousandth units, tenths, hundredths, and thousandths.
place.
Take notes on their problem-solving processes, strategies
Example: To add 0.3 and 0.9.
used, and any difficulties encountered.
101
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Knowledge Learner Information ● Have learners select three rods for 0.3 and
nine rods for 0.9.
3. Use properties of operations and explain ● Name: ● Combine the blocks and count them
the inverse relationship between addition ● Date: together (12 rods, which equals 1.2).
and subtraction. ● Observer: ● One flat base 10 blocks is used to
represent the whole then 2 rods to
4. Use mathematical vocabulary to explain Checklist Categories represent 2 tenths.
the strategies applied in solving problems
involving decimals.
Value
5. Recognize and explain the importance of
the inverse relationship between
operations, such as addition and
subtraction, when solving problems with
decimal numbers.
Product
Exit Tickets
Strategy:
● At the end of a lesson, ask learners to solve a Interactive digital manipulatives: Use Online
problem or explain a concept in writing. tools that simulate physical manipulatives for
Example: “Add 0.456 and 0.389 using a number line.
Explain your steps.”
102
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Inclusion Tactics: learners who benefit from technology-based
● Invite learners to choose between writing, learning
drawing, or orally explaining their answer.
● Provide sentence starters or guiding questions to Multi-sensory Learning
support learners who struggle with open-ended
responses. Strategy:
Real-life objects: Invite learners to use money or
Product measurement tools to solve problems involving
Summative Assessments decimals in a practical context.
Apply addition and subtraction of decimals in real-life
contexts, such as measurements, money, and other Example Activity:
practical situations.
● Money Manipulation: Invite learners to
Quizzes and Tests use coins and bills to simulate decimal
addition and subtraction, helping them
Include a mix of question types: multiple-choice, short see the practical application.
answer, and practical problems involving concrete
models or drawings. Example: “Subtract 0.754 from 1.231 Example - $ 20.00 +$ 2.00 + $ 0.50 + $ 0.20 +$
using a place value chart. Show your work.” 0.10 = $ 22. 80
https://www.k5learning.com/free-math-
worksheets/sixth-grade-6/decimals-addition-subtraction
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/math/203962
Product
Decimal Matching Activity
How: Create cards with different addition and
subtraction decimal problems (up to the thousandths).
Learners have to find pairs of cards that demonstrate the
103
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
inverse relationship (e.g., 2.356 + 1.234 = 3.590 and
3.590 - 1.234 = 2.356).
Why: This tactile, matching approach works well for
kinesthetic learners and learners who need more hands-
on interaction with the material
Product
Reflective Journals
Learners keep a journal where they reflect on their
learning, challenges, and strategies used.
Inclusion Tactics:
● Invite learners to use a combination of drawings,
https://www.globocambio.co/en/currencies-of-
words, and numbers to express their reflections.
the-world/east-caribbean-dollar
● Provide sentence starters or guiding questions
for learners who need more structure
Visual Representations
Number Line
Invite learners to use number lines to provide
visual and concrete representation of decimal
subtraction, helping learners, especially those with
learning difficulties, understand the relationship
between numbers. It allows them to see how the
values are spaced and how subtraction involves
moving left along the line.
Incorporating number lines as a strategy can
provide multiple entry points into understanding
104
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
decimal subtraction, supporting a range of
learning abilities and preferences
Subtract 4.8 – 0.9 =3.9
https://mathgeekmama.com/add-subtract-
decimals-number-line/
Auditory Supports: Have learners compose
songs, rhymes, or mnemonic devices to help
Journal Presentation
remember rules for decimal operations. For
example:
● Did I organize my journal entries in a clear and
logical manner?
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oChQzB8nr
● Did I use proper grammar, spelling, and
YU
punctuation throughout my entries?
● Did I include diagrams, charts, or drawings to
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WP_f4EXp
illustrate my points where applicable?
-Mg
● Did I review and revise my journal entries to
improve clarity and completeness?
Math Centres with Tiered Activities
Provide math centres with varying difficulty levels
to cater to different levels of understanding.
Activities range from manipulatives for decimal
addition to advanced word problems applying
105
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
inverse relationships, inviting learners to engage at
their readiness level.
Performance-Based Learning: Choice Boards:
Let learners pick activities that match their
interests, enhancing engagement and ownership,
especially for those less motivated by traditional
tasks.
Game Design: Learners design and play a board
game involving decimal operations up to the
thousandths place.
Real-Life Scenarios: Learners write stories using
decimal operations in daily tasks (e.g., shopping,
cooking).
Art Projects: Learners create artwork with
patterns incorporating decimal addition and
subtraction.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
For teachers, additional content knowledge for teaching fractions and decimals includes using real-life objects (e.g., pizzas, money) to introduce these concepts and
show how wholes are divided into parts. Clear definitions are essential: fractions represent parts of a whole with a numerator and denominator, while decimals
represent parts of a whole using a decimal point. Visual aids like fraction bars and grids can help students see these relationships. Highlight the link between
fractions and decimals, such as how 1/2 equals 0.5, and explore place value in decimals to clarify tenths, hundredths, etc. Emphasize real-world applications (e.g.,
measurements, recipes) to demonstrate relevance, and use interactive activities and regular assessments with feedback to reinforce understanding and address
misconceptions.
Additional Resources and Materials: Virtual Base 10 Blocks, Digital Number Lines, Interactive Place Value Charts, Money Manipulation, Number Line.
Guidelines for using digital manipulatives:
106
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
When teaching decimal addition, select an interactive digital tool that will help learners visualize and understand the concept. Look for tools with features like these:
Virtual Base 10 Blocks: Tools that include base 10 blocks for representing decimals. These allow learners to physically manipulate blocks to see how decimals
combine in real-time.
https://mathtechconnections.com/2020/03/04/using-manipulatives-to-represent-decimals/
Digital Number Lines: Choose a tool with a number line where learners can place markers or move points to visually represent the addition of decimals. This helps
learners see the incremental increase as they add each decimal.
https://www.mathlearningcenter.org/apps/number-line
Interactive Place Value Charts: Opt for charts that let learners manipulate digits in various place value positions. This feature enables them to directly see the effect
of adding each decimal place, reinforcing understanding of place value in decimal operations.
https://www.teacherspayteachers.com/Product/FREE-Interactive-Place-Value-Chart-Progression-5947290
107
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Using these tools can make decimal addition more engaging and provide hands-on experience, enhancing learners' comprehension of decimal operations.
https://shelleygrayteaching.com/teaching-decimals-hands-on/
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the curriculum)
SCIENCE
Learners are given the task to calculate total cost of items when prices are in decimal form.
Plan a budget for a school event or personal project.
Planned, designed, and constructed valuable items from discarded objects and materials.
Design, construct, and demonstrate a device's use to determine water's turbidity.
Construct and use models of various systems in humans.
SOCIAL STUDIES
Plan a budget for a school event or personal project.
Identify areas of business where youth may wish to be engaged (e.g., hair salons, locally designed and made clothing, cash crops, art and craft for tourism).
LANGUAGE
● Ask learners to write about their own word problems that incorporate multiplying or dividing decimals. This enhances their comprehension and allows
them to practice math in a narrative context.
● Produce clear and coherent writing in which the development, organization, and style are appropriate to task, purpose, and audience.
Vocabulary Building:
● Introduce math-specific vocabulary like "product," "quotient," "decimal point," and "place-value" within reading assignments. Encourage learners to use
these terms correctly in their writing.
108
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
● Write an expository essay on the steps to multiply or divide decimals
● Write jingles or poems on the steps to multiply or divide decimals
109
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: O1.2. Additive Thinking – Compute Fluently Using Operations (+,-)
Grade Level Expectation:
• Fluently add and subtract multi-digit decimals and fractions using a standard algorithm for each operation.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Conversation Use of Anchor Charts
Skills Peer Review Visual Reminders:
1. Align multi-digit decimals by Demonstrate and guide learners in creating anchor charts
place values (tenths, Format: Have learners exchange their work with a peer that display the steps for aligning decimals. Hang these in
hundredths, thousandths, etc. for review. Each learner checks their peer's alignment the classroom as a continual visual reminder for learners.
of decimals and provides feedback.
Knowledge Assessment: Assess both the accuracy of the
2. Use varied strategies to add alignment and the learner's ability to critically evaluate
subtract multi-digit decimals another's work.
3. Use varied strategies to subtract Oral Explanations with demonstrations
multi digit decimals.
Format: Ask learners to verbally explain the process of
4. Add and subtract fractions with aligning multi-digit decimals. They should describe the
like denominators importance of aligning the decimal points and the
significance of each place value.
5. Add and subtract fractions with Assessment: Evaluate the learner's understanding of
unlike denominators using the concept and their ability to articulate the steps
different strategies involved.
6. Add and subtract mixed Product
numbers
Project Based Learning
https://www.teacherspayteachers.com/Product/Adding-
Value Learners given projects to test their ability to add and
and-Subtracting-Decimals-Anchor-Chart-4925005
subtract decimal numbers up to the thousandth place.
For example,
110
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
7. Create real life problems The woodwork learners are required to write an estimate for the Integrated Technology
involving the addition and construction of a coop with specified height, width and length for
subtraction of fractions with like the school's poultry farm. Learners will be expected to calculate Use videos that demonstrates the steps in aligning digits
and unlike denominators the total amount of materials that are needed up to thousandth’s when adding or subtracting decimals up to thousandths
place as well as the total cost and change
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zNfO09maGPU
Rubric
Integrated technology
Use interactive whiteboards to visually demonstrate the
addition and subtraction of decimals. Write problems on
the board and use tools to highlight and move decimal
points, showing how alignment works.
Guided Discovery
Present pupils with a problem
Invite learners to manipulate the blocks to find a sum
Teacher scaffolds learners as they manipulate and identify
the steps
https://wippich.weebly.com/2017-2018-blog/ordering-
decimals
Introduce the Concept of Place Value with Base Ten Blocks
Provide opportunities for learners to review Place Value:
using questioning have learners explain that each type of
base ten block represents a different place value:
○ Unit cubes = 0.001 (thousandths)
111
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product ○ Rods = 0.01 (hundredths)
Games and Puzzles: ○ Flats = 0.1 (tenths)
○ Large Flats = 1 (ones)
Use educational games and puzzles to make learning Invite learners the opportunity to observe as well as
fractions fun and interactive. engage in demonstrations with examples: Showing how
numbers like 1.234 can be represented with base ten
blocks: 1 large flat, 2 flats, 3 rods, and 4 unit cubes.
Like and unlike denominator Fraction Matching Represent the Decimals to be added
Materials: Cards with fraction addition/subtraction Example: add 1.354 and 2.673 using base ten blocks.
problems and corresponding answers. Have learners use the blocks to represent the given numbers
How to Play: Shuffle the cards and lay them face down.
Players take turns flipping over two cards, trying to
find matching problems and solutions. The player with
the most matches at the end wins.
Create a Maze Layout:
● Design a simple maze with multiple paths
leading from the start to the finish.
● At each junction or decision point in the maze, https://wippich.weebly.com/2017-2018-blog/ordering-
include a fraction problem that learners must decimals
solve to determine the correct path.
● Include a variety of fraction addition and Combine the Base Ten Blocks
subtraction problems, ensuring that some
require finding a common denominator.
SCO5
Conversation/ observation
See Rubric below:
112
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4. 0 2 7
Answer =4.027
SCO 6
Product
WRITING PORTFOLIO
Components
Pre-Assessment: Include an initial assessment to
gauge learners' prior knowledge of fractions and their
ability to perform basic operations with them.
Work Samples: Classwork and Homework: Collect
various assignments that show learners' work on adding
and subtracting fractions with like and unlike Visual aids
denominators. Engage learners in hands-on activities to explore fractions
Problem-Solving Tasks: Include problems that using materials like fraction strips or circles.
require learners to apply their knowledge in different Apply fractions to real-life scenarios, such as cooking or
contexts, such as word problems or real-life scenarios. dividing items, to see how fractions are used daily.
Projects: Assign a project where learners create their
own word problems or real-world applications
involving fraction operations.
113
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Reflections: Encourage learners to write reflections on Use visual aids like charts and diagrams to make learning
their learning process, describing what they found easy fractions clearer and more meaningful.
or difficult and how they have improved over time.
Portfolio Assessment Criteria
● Accuracy: Correct use of the standard
algorithm to add and subtract fractions.
● Understanding: Demonstration of
understanding through explanations and https://whalenhoganteam.wordpress.com/math-2/add-
reflections. and-subtract-fractions/
● Problem-Solving: Ability to apply fraction
operations in various contexts and solve
complex problems.
● Growth: Evidence of progress and learning
over time.
● Communication: Clarity and completeness in
explanations and reflections https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/addition-of-fractions/
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1EEUaIM6NuY
Number Line
Invite learners to represent fractions on a number line for
subtraction, they move to the left. This helps them
visualize how fractions can be reduced.
114
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The subtrahend is
2/8. So, it means that we have to subtract two parts out of
7/ 8.Two parts are removed, so we’ll have to “jump”
backwards two steps from the minuend
https://byjus.com/us/math/addition-and-subtraction-of-
fraction-using-like-denominators/
Storytelling:
Have learners create word problems (e.g., “You used 2/5
of grapes, and a friend used 3/6. How much did you use
together?”) to contextualize fractions, making the learning
experience more relatable and engaging. HTTPs
Have learners solve real-life problems and scenarios
involving fractions. For example:
The Tale of the Magical Cupcake:
In the lively village of Fraction Ville, Mrs. Fraction owned
a bakery famous for her magical cupcakes. As the Summer
Festival approached, she prepared to bake a special batch.
The recipe required 1¼ cups of batter, but she needed to
reserve ⅔ cup for a topping. Concerned she wouldn't have
enough, Mrs. Fraction called for help. Luckily, a group of
115
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Grade 6 learners passing by came to her aid. Let’s find out
what they did!
Fraction Tiles
Have learners use fraction tiles to model finding the
common denominator and finding a standard fraction tile
that can be used to match both ¼ and ⅙ exactly.
Area Model: Encourage learners to apply the area model
for problem-solving.
https://mathcurious.com/2021/07/23/adding-and-
subtracting-fractions/
116
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.mashupmath.com/blog/tag/subtracting+fra
ctions+with+unlike+denominators
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nh7maVysqG8
Subtract 3 ¼ from 1 ⅗
117
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://mathcurious.com/2021/07/23/adding-and-
subtracting-fractions/
Simulation of Addition and Subtraction with Mixed
Numbers
Engage learners in Real-World Addition/Subtraction:
Participate in a simulated environment with real-world
scenarios that involve adding or subtracting mixed
numbers.
Hands-On Problem-Solving: Invite learners to solve
practical problems within contexts like cooking or
construction. For example, calculate, "If a recipe calls for 3
1/2 cups of flour and you only have 2 2/3 cups, how
much more do you need?"
Collaborative Application: Have learners work with peers
to apply addition and subtraction of mixed numbers, using
practical examples to enhance understanding.
Additional Resources and Materials: Number lines, place value blocks
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Prerequisites
Addition of Decimals Using Different Strategies
Pupils should have an in depth of understanding of place value and alignment of digits when adding and subtracting decimals
Decimals can be added like the way we add whole numbers. There are different ways of adding decimals.
Number lines, fraction strips and bars can be used to aid understanding of the algorithm
1. Lining them using place values
2. Using properties of numbers (Commutative property and Associative property)
3. Using number line
4. Using partial sum
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4mwl8s1P2e8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XsW8HJutIgM 118
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LR2S0TOJimc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zRs_9sC2u4k
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Lining them using place value
Write down the numbers one under the other, with the decimal points lined up
Add zeros to the right of the number so that the number to be added are of same digits
Then add using column addition and remember to put the decimal point in the answer
For example,
Add 3.456 to 2.4
Step 1: Line up the decimals
Step 2: Add zeros to the right side of the number if needed
Step 3: Add using column addition
Using properties of numbers
The two properties of numbers are:
Commutative property of addition
Associative property of addition
Commutative property of addition means that you can switch the order of any of the numbers in an addition, the answer remains the same.
For example:
Sum of 4.2 + 3.5 = 7.7
119
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
By changing the order of the addends, 3.5 + 4.2 = 7.7
That is, 4.2 + 3.5 = 3.5 + 4.2 = 7.7
● Associative property of addition means that you can change the groupings of numbers being added and it does not change the result.
For example, (2.3 + 4.6) + 7.4 = 2.3 + (4.6 + 7.4)
Let us check
LHS = (2.3 + 4.6) + 7.4 = 14.3
RHS = 2.3 + (4.6 + 7.4) = 14.3
⸫ (2.3 + 4.6) + 7.4 = 2.3 + (4.6 + 7.4) = 14.3
Using number line
To add decimals using number line, labelling the number line with decimals is very important. We know how to label a number line using whole numbers.
120
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
The number line with decimals will look like this
Here, we started labelling the number line with zero and increase by 0.1. We can label the number line increased by 0.25 or 0.5 or 0.75 etc. We can also start
the number line with the numbers given in the question.
For example:
Add 3.6 + 0.8
Draw and label the number line starting with 3.6 and increase by 0.1
Then start adding 0.8 to 3.6, we get 4.4
⸫ 3.6 + 0.8 = 4.4
Using Partial sums
In this we use what we already know about adding decimals. But in partial addition, we break the numbers up in the individual places and add.
For example:
Add 4.65 + 2.76 using partial addition
121
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
https://www.turito.com/learn/math/strategies-to-add-and-subtract-decimals-grade-5
How to add decimals?
● When using the standard algorithm to add or subtract fractions with unlike denominators, start with related denominators e.g. 2 and 4; 3 and 6; 2, 4
and 8;
● Write the numbers in a vertical list, lining up the decimal points.
● If the numbers have a different amount of digits, there may be some gaps in the columns. Fill in any gaps with a zero so that each number has the same
number of decimal places.
● Start at the right, the column with the least place value
● Add or subtract the numbers as if they are whole numbers
● Place decimal point in the sum or difference answer space, lined up with the others.
Or subtracted.
EXAMPLE 1: Add 0.56 + 9 + 6.287
0.560
9.000
+ 6.287
15.847 ← Place the decimal point in the sum so that it lines up vertically.
https://www.palmbeachstate.edu/prepmathlw/Documents/operationswithdecimals.pdf
https://wippich.weebly.com/2017-2018-blog/february-12th-2018
Lining them using place values
122
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
This is the same as addition. But instead of adding, we subtract the decimals.
To subtract decimals by lining them using place values, we follow the following steps:
Step 1: Line up the decimal points in a column. When needed add a zero to the left of the number to match the number of digits.
Step 2: Start on the right, and subtract each column in turn. Remember, we are subtracting digits in the same place value position.
Step 3: If the digit you are subtracting is bigger than the digit you are subtracting from, you have to borrow a group of ten from the column to the left.
For example:
Subtract 4.65 – 2. 49
Example A
2.536
− 0.590
1.946
https://thirdspacelearning.com/us/math-resources/topic-guides/number-and-quantity/adding-and-subtracting-decimals/
Using number line
To subtract decimal numbers using a number line. Start on the far-right side on the number line and label it backwards by tenths. This is nothing but
counting back.
For example:
Subtract 4.8 – 0.9
Draw the number line labelling backward starting from 4.8
123
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Then count backwards by tenths, 9 times
⸫ 4.8 – 0.9 = 3.9
https://www.turito.com/learn/math/strategies-to-add-and-subtract-decimals-grade-5
ADDING AND SUBTRACTING FRACTIONS WITH UNLIKE DENOMINATORS
1/3 + 3/6
When fractions have unlike denominators, a common denominator must be found
https://www.istockphoto.com/photos/green-plus-sign
https://openclipart.org/detail/271722/fraction-56
https://www.splashlearn.com/math-vocabulary/subtraction/subtract-fractions-with-unlike-denominators
METHOD 2 CROSS MULTIPLICATION
https://www.myqbook.com/MathConcept/495/Adding-and-subtracting-fractions-using-cross-products
124
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
https://www.tes.com/teaching-resource/adding-and-subtracting-fractions-crossbow-method-11865525
FINDING THE LOWEST COMMON DENOMINATOR
¾ + 1/6
https://vimeo.com/427840033
Find the lowest common denominator
Make equivalent fractions with the new denominator:
and
Add the numerators:
125
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
https://mathgoodies.com/lessons/adding-subtract-unlike-fractions/
Another way of finding LCD
Determine the value of 1 ¾ +2 ⅚
Method 1
Convert all mixed numbers to improper fractions.
1 ¾ = 4x 1 +3 = 7/4 2 ⅚ =6x2 +5 =17/6
We now have the two fractions 7/4+17/6
Ensure the fractions have a common denominator.
These fractions have different denominators, therefore we need to use equivalent fractions to write them with a common denominator. The common
denominator we should use will be the lowest common multiple of the denominators.
7/4+17/6 12/4 = 3 3x 7 = 21 12/6 =2 2x 7 =14
21 + 34 = 55/12
Change to a mixed number 55/12 = 4 7/12
METHOD 2
1 ¾ +2 ⅚
Add or Subtract the whole numbers 1+2 =3
Find the LCD LCD is 12
126
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
1 ¾ +2 ⅚ 12/4 =3 3x 3 =9 12/6 =2 2x5 =10
9 + 10 = 3 19/12
Change to a mixed number 19/12 = 1
Add 1 to 3 = 4 4 7/12
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Social Studies
Learners will carry out a survey on the villages in the parish to determine the fraction of people engaged in various professions. They will find out the
fraction of people in each village who do each job and then calculate the total fraction of the parish involved in each profession.
Learners will analyse population changes in different regions, adding and subtracting fractions with unlike denominators.
Science
Learners will practice adding and subtracting fractions by mixing different solutions in a science experiment.
Instructions:
Provide learners with different liquid solutions measured in fractions with unlike denominators (e.g., 1/3 cup of vinegar, 1/4 cup of baking soda solution).
Have learners combine the solutions and calculate the total volume.
Language Arts
Write an expository paragraph on how to add and subtract fractions with unlike denominators
Write an expository paragraph on how to add and subtract decimals through thousandth
127
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: O1.3. Additive Thinking – Make a Reasonable Estimation When Using Operation
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Addition/subtraction of tenths, hundredths, and thousandths; Mentally adding and subtracting tenths, hundredths, and thousandths
• Estimating with addition and subtraction of hundredths and thousandths.
Specific Curriculum Outcome: Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Observation Checklist Explicit instructions
Use this checklist during classwork, homework, quizzes, Use Place Value knowledge (Visual Aids and
Skills tests, etc. to observe learners' performance. Manipulatives)
1. Use place value knowledge to Differentiation: Modify checklist items or expectations based How: Help to reinforce learners’ knowledge of the
represent and compare decimals on individual learner needs. place value system by using visuals like place value
charts, grids, or base-ten blocks.
2. Create mental strategies for adding
and subtracting decimals with tenths,
Have learners break down decimals into tenths,
hundredths, and thousandths.
hundredths, and thousandths (e.g., 0.234 = 2 tenths +
3. Perform addition and subtraction of 3 hundredths + 4 thousandths). They can then
decimals accurately. mentally add or subtract by focusing on one place
value at a time.
128
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcome: Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://thirdspacelearning.com/us/blog/what-are-
base-ten-blocks/
Differentiated Tasks:
Tiered Assignments: Offer assignments with varying levels
Estimation and Rounding
of complexity or scaffolding to accommodate different
How: Teach learners to round decimals to the nearest
learning levels.
tenth or hundredth for quick mental calculations.
After estimating, learners can adjust their answer if
Tier 1: Low Complexity
needed. For example, 0.456 + 0.237 can be estimated
Objective: To reinforce basic understanding of decimal
as 0.5 + 0.2 = 0.7, then adjusted to reflect the exact
place value and practice adding and subtracting decimals
value.
with simpler numbers.
Task: Shopping Scenario
Decimal Story Problems
Scenario: Imagine you are shopping online. Calculate the total
Provide story problems involving decimals and have
cost of two items with prices like $4.50 and $3.25. Then,
learners create their own, explaining solutions and
subtract a discount of $1.20.
exchanging with classmates to build math and literacy
skills.
Tier 2: Medium Complexity
Objective: To apply addition and subtraction of decimals in
Mathematics - Shopping Spree
real-life contexts with multiple steps and varying decimal
Using online shopping sites, learners plan a shopping
places.
spree within a budget, adding and subtracting decimal
Task: Cooking Challenge
prices to stay within limits.
129
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcome: Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Scenario: You are planning a recipe that requires adding and
subtracting ingredient quantities. For instance, add 1.25 cups STEAM - Scientific Measurements
of flour, 0.75 cups of sugar, and then subtract 0.50 cups for Provide decimal-based scientific data for learners to
adjustments. analyse and calculate, linking to experiments or data
analysis (e.g., adding volumes, subtracting
Tier 3: High Complexity measurements).
Objective: To extend understanding by solving complex
problems involving decimals with larger numbers and real- Technology and Digital Learning
world applications. Use educational apps and interactive sites for decimal
Task: Budgeting Project practice with instant feedback, supporting
Scenario: Plan a budget for a school event or personal personalized learning paths. Examples: Math
project. Playground, Splash Learn.
Calculate expenses involving decimals (e.g., $125.75 for Examples of interactive sites :
venue, $45.25 for decorations) and subtract from a set https://www.mathplayground.com/ASB_Hungry_P
budget of $500.00. uppies_Decimals.html
https://www.splashlearn.com/s/math-games/add-
Rubric for Assessing Addition and Subtraction of Decimals decimals-less-than-1-using-model
in Real-Life Scenarios
Criteria Excellent (4) Proficient (3) Basic (2) Below Basic
(1)
Mathematical Accurately Mostly Demonstrat Shows little
adds and accurate in es partial understandin
subtracts adding and accuracy in g of how to
Accuracy decimals in subtracting adding and add and
various real- decimals in subtracting subtract
life scenarios, real-life decimals, decimals in
demonstratin scenarios, with real-life
g deep with minor noticeable scenarios,
understandin errors that errors that resulting in
g of the do not occasionally frequent and
operations significantly affect the significant
and their affect the correctness errors.
application overall of the
solution. solutions.
Application Applies Generally Demonstrat Shows little
of Decimals decimals applies es understandin
130
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcome: Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
appropriately decimals inconsistent g of how to
in real-life correctly in application apply
contexts, real-life of decimals decimals in
showing a contexts, in real-life real-life
clear with contexts, contexts,
understandin occasional with several resulting in
g of when misapplicatio instances of frequent
and how ns that do misapplicati misapplicatio
decimals are not hinder on that ns that
used in understandin affect significantly
practical g or solution understandi affect
situations. accuracy. ng or understandin
solution g and
accuracy. solution
accuracy.
Problem Effectively Generally Shows Has
Solving identifies and identifies partial ability difficulty
interprets and to identify identifying
real-life interprets and interpret and
problems real-life real-life interpreting
that require problems problems real-life
addition or that require that require problems
subtraction addition or addition or that require
of decimals, subtraction subtraction addition or
providing of decimals, of decimals, subtraction
thorough providing with of decimals,
and logical solutions solutions providing
solutions. that are that may solutions
mostly lack that are
thorough thoroughnes often
and logical. s or logic. incomplete
or illogical.
Communicati Clearly Mostly Communica Struggles to
on of communicat communicat tes the communicat
Solution es the es the process and e the process
process and process and reasoning and
reasoning reasoning with limited reasoning
behind behind clarity or behind
adding or adding or detail, adding or
subtracting subtracting making it subtracting
decimals in decimals in difficult to decimals in
real-life real-life follow the real-life
scenarios, scenarios, steps taken scenarios,
using with some lacking
131
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcome: Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
appropriate gaps in to arrive at clarity and
mathematical clarity or the solution. detail.
language. detail.
Use of Effectively Generally Shows Has
Mathematical selects and selects and partial ability difficulty
Strategies applies applies to select and selecting and
appropriate appropriate apply applying
mathematical mathematical appropriate appropriate
strategies strategies, mathematica mathematical
(e.g., with l strategies, strategies,
estimation, occasional with often
checking for instances instances choosing
reasonablene where where ineffective
ss) to add or strategies strategies strategies or
subtract chosen are chosen are not applying
decimals in less effective ineffective them at all
real-life or not fully or not fully
s cenarios. utilized. utilized.
Overall Consistently Demonstrate Demonstrat Shows
Performance demonstrates s es partial limited
thorough understandin understandi understandin
understandin g and ng and g and
g and proficiency proficiency proficiency
mastery of in adding in adding in adding
adding and and and and
subtracting subtracting subtracting subtracting
decimals in decimals in decimals in decimals in
real-life real-life real-life real-life
scenarios, scenarios, scenarios, scenarios,
with with with with
solutions solutions solutions solutions
that are that are that are that are
accurate and mostly somewhat often
well- accurate and accurate and inaccurate
reasoned. well- occasionally and poorly
reasoned. well- reasoned.
reasoned.
Conversation
Think-Aloud Assessments
Why: Think-aloud assessments allow teachers to hear how
learners approach problems and make decisions. This is
132
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcome: Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
particularly helpful for assessing learners’ mental strategies
and can provide insights into misconceptions or areas of
struggle.
How: Have learners perform a mental math task while
thinking aloud and explaining their thoughts. For example, a
learner could add 0.375 + 0.125 and explain how they
mentally combined tenths, hundredths, and thousandths.
133
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: O2.1. Multiplicative Thinking – Understanding the Meaning of Multiplication and Division and How They Relate
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Understandings of multiplication to multiply a fraction or whole number by a fraction
• Apply and extend previous understandings of division to divide unit fractions by whole numbers and whole numbers by unit fractions
• Multiply and divide decimals to thousandths, using concrete models or drawings and strategies based on place value, properties of operations, and/or the
relationship between multiplication and division; relate the strategy to a written method and explain the reasoning used
Specific Curriculum Outcome Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Observation Use Visual Models and Discussion Using Manipulatives:
Knowledge 1. Observational Assessment Objective: Provide learners with a tangible way to
understand multiplication of fractions.
1. multiply whole numbers by proper Objective: Assess learners' ability to use fraction strips
fractions, using appropriate tools or number lines to model the multiplication of whole
and strategies numbers by fractions.
Method: Observe learners as they use visual models to
2. Divide whole numbers by proper solve problems. Look for:
fractions using appropriate tools ● Correct alignment and placement of fraction
and strategies strips or number lines.
● Accurate representation of the multiplication
3. Divide unit fractions by whole process.
numbers ● Ability to explain their reasoning verbally.
Example Task: Ask learners to demonstrate
Skills 3×2/5 using fraction strips and describe how https://www.mathswithmum.com/multiply-fractions-
they arrived at the answer. whole-numbers/
4. Use multiple strategies to model
multiplication of decimals up to the Product
thousandths
Performance Tasks:
Real-Life Scenarios
134
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcome Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5. Use multiple strategies to illustrate
division of decimals to the Create problems that relate to real-world contexts.
thousandths. For example, "You are having a birthday party for your
child and you have bought 8 pizzas of which you
6. Multiply and divide decimals up to want to give each person attending ¼. How many
the thousandths place using the slices of pizza will be shared?
varied strategies (including standard
algorithm) Conversation
Reflection and Explanation
Objective: Encourage learners to articulate their
understanding and the reasoning behind their
methods.
Task: Ask learners to write a reflection or
explanation about a division problem they solved,
focusing on their use of visual models.
● Questions:
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/math--
Question 1: Explain how using a fraction bar helped
229050331024920248/
you understand dividing 1/4by 3.
Question 2: Describe a strategy that helps you divide
Use pattern blocks or relational rods to create problems
a whole number by a unit fraction. Why is it
that involve multiplying a whole number by a fraction,
effective?
such as the following:
Observation
A green triangle covers 1/3 of a trapezoid:
Modelling Multiplication with Explicit
Explanation
Objective: Learners model the multiplication of two
A red trapezoid pattern block with one green triangle
decimal numbers using base-ten blocks and grid
paper.
pattern block placed on top of it. Next to it is another red
trapezoid pattern block.
Instructions:
Multiply 1.23 by 0.45 using base-ten blocks.
135
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcome Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Use grid paper to draw and label the blocks as you How many whole trapezoids can you cover with 10 green
model each step. triangles? (10 × 1/3=10/3); they will cover three
Start by multiplying the tenths, then hundredths, and trapezoids, plus one third of another).
so on. One blue rhombus covers 2/3 of a trapezoid:
Rubric for Assessment of the assessment above
(modelling with explanation)
Criteria 4 - 3 - 2 - 1 -
Excelle Good Satisfa Needs Place one blue rhombus (2/3 of a trapezoid) on each red
nt ctory Improv trapezoid pattern block. With 20 rhombuses, learners find
ement they cover 13 full trapezoids plus 1/3 of another (20 ×
2/3 = 40/3, or 13 1/3). As they work, have them write the
Represe Accurat Repres Represe Significa
multiplication sentence, identify the relationship between
ntation ely ents nts nt
factors and product, and recognize that 20 two-thirds
of represe most some errors in
equals 40 thirds in total.
Decimal nts all decimal decimal represe
s decimal s s nting
Encourage learners to predict with similar pattern block
s with accurat accurat and
problems (e.g., if one green triangle is 1/3 of a trapezoid,
base-ten ely with ely, labelling
then 8 triangles would cover 8/3, or 2 2/3 trapezoids).
blocks few with decimal
and errors several s.
Fraction Strips:
labels in labellin
correctl labellin g
Objective: Help learners visualize how a fraction of a whole
y. g. errors.
number is obtained.
Modelli Models Models Models Fails to
Activity: Use fraction strips to show repeated addition. 5 x
ng multipli multipli multipli model
2/3.
Multipli cation cation cation multipli
cation accurate mostly with cation
ly using accurat some correctl
base-ten ely with underst y.
blocks, minor anding
demons errors. but
trating makes
136
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcome Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
clear signific
underst ant
anding. errors.
Accurac Calculat Calcula Calculat Incorre
y of es the tes es with ct
Calculat product produc errors calculati
ion correctl t with and on and
y and minor struggle verificat
https://fractionbars.com/Grades5to8/FracBarOperations
verifies errors s to ion.
/Multi.html
with a but verify.
calculat verifies
or. and
correct
s them.
Explana Provide Provide Provide Provide
tion and s a clear s a s a s
Reflecti and mostly basic unclear
on detailed clear explana explanat
explanat explana tion ion and
ion with tion with lacks
thought with little reflectio
https://yanyulius.weebly.com/class-projects-and-
ful some reflecti n.
assignment/math-multiply-fraction-using-fraction-bar
reflectio reflecti on.
n. on.
Have learners explore the following scenarios:
Conversation Birdseed: Filling bird feeders with 3/4 cup requires 9 cups,
Group Discussions and Peer Teaching allowing for 12 feeders.
137
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcome Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Task: Have learners work in pairs or small groups to Wool: Making beanie hats takes 2/3 of a ball; with 6 balls,
solve problems and explain their methods to one learners can make 9 hats.
another.
Example: "Solve 3.6 ÷ 0.4 together and discuss how Salt: Creating playdough needs 3/8 cup per batch, so 3
you approached the problem." cups yield 8 batches.
Expected Response:
Learners can share different methods (direct Paint: Covering walls requires 5/8 of a can; 5 cans can
calculation, tape diagram, or models) and discuss the cover 8 walls.
advantages of each approach.
SCO6 Rice: A large pot holds 12 cups; with each serving at 4/5
cup, there are 15 servings.
Product
Learners should visually represent each situation using
drawings or number lines and write division statements to
Decimal Bingo
reflect the scenarios. Encourage them to use addition or
Objective: Decimal multiplication and division
subtraction for their strategies, highlighting the
through a fun and interactive bingo game.
relationship between repeated equal groups and division.
Materials Needed:
Division
● Bingo cards with decimal products and
quotients
● A set of problem cards with multiplication
and division problems
● Markers or chips
How to Play:
1. Each learner receives a bingo card with
answers to decimal multiplication and
division problems.
2. The teacher draws a problem card, reads it
https://www.onlinemathlearning.com/divide-number-
aloud, and learners solve the problem.
fraction.html
138
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcome Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3. Learners mark the answer on their bingo
card if they have it.
4. The first learner to mark five in a row
(horizontally, vertically, or diagonally) calls
out "Bingo!" and wins.
https://teachablemath.com/dividing-with-fractions/
Variations:
● Use different levels of difficulty by including
more complex decimals.
● Create themed bingo cards based on
classroom topics.
5. Online Decimal Games
Objective: Use digital platforms to practice decimal
multiplication and division.
https://www.onlinemathlearning.com/divide-fractions-
Recommended Websites: 5nf7a.html
Math Playground: Offers interactive decimal games
and puzzles.
Khan Academy: Provides practice problems and
interactive exercises.
SplashLearn: Features engaging games for decimal
operations.
https://www.khanacademy.org/math/cc-fifth-grade-
math/divide-fractions/imp-dividing-unit-fractions-by-
139
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcome Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
whole-numbers/e/dividing-fractions-by-whole-numbers-
introduction
Multiplication and Division of decimals
Have learners represents decimal multiplication and
division with manipulatives. For example:
140
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcome Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ddhJIZdXRGU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L2oWQZaJxNo
Representational Stage:
https://www.maneuveringthemiddle.com/6-strategies-for-
multiplying-decimals/
Transition to using drawings on grid paper. Learners
sketch base-ten blocks and label each section to visualize
multiplication.
Use coloured pencils or markers to highlight different
decimal places (tenths, hundredths, thousandths).
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8B2CpiJO-uI
141
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcome Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Abstract Stage:
Move to using numbers and the standard algorithm.
Emphasize aligning decimal points and understanding
place value.
Have learners write out each step and solve without
physical aids.
https://thirdspacelearning.com/us/math-resources/topic-
guides/number-and-quantity/multiplying-decimals/
142
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcome Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://desertdesigned.net/2021/10/10/multiplying-
decimal-models-how-to-teach-learners-to-multiply-
decimals/
SCO 4
Guided Practice:
Work through problems step-by-step with the class,
emphasizing the importance of aligning decimal points and
carrying digits correctly.
Use colour coding to highlight different place values and
steps in the algorithm.
SCO5
NUMBER LINE
Provide learners with a division equation that has the
decimal point missing, such as 4.389 ÷ 2 = 21.945.
143
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcome Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Ask them to estimate where the decimal point should be
placed and then solve related problems:
43.89 ÷ 2 =?
438.9 ÷ 2 =?
0.4389 ÷ 2 =?
Learners should justify their estimates and check their
answers with a calculator, analysing any errors to adjust
their reasoning. Emphasize the importance of estimation
for correctly placing decimal points in division problems
involving decimals (up to thousandths) divided by whole
numbers (up to 10).
Additionally, explain that dividing 4.2 by 0.3 asks how
many times 0.3 fits into 4.2.
Marking Intervals: Use a number line to add 0.3 repeatedly
from 0 until reaching or exceeding 4.2.
Count Steps: Determine how many intervals of 0.3 it takes
to reach 4.2, which in this case is 14.
Finally, clarify that the number of intervals (14) represents
the quotient, so 4.2 ÷ 0.3 = 14.
144
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcome Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.ck12.org/user:bs10zwftqgljc3ouy2g./book/i
ntegrated-mathematics-i-myp1/section/5.9/
145
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcome Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Area Models
https://mathmonks.com/decimal/how-to-divide-
decimals
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=
mL4OFKTa9i0
146
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcome Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Represent the decimals on a grid
Repeatedly take out 0.25
Count the number of times 0.25 is taken out
Guide learners from concrete to abstract understanding:
Concrete Stage: Use base-ten blocks to represent decimals
(e.g., 1.234 as one "hundred block," two "ten blocks,"
three "one blocks," and four "tenths blocks") for hands-on
multiplication and division.
Representational Stage: Transition to drawing models,
such as grid paper and number lines, to visualize
multiplication (area models) and division (repeated
subtraction).
Abstract Stage: Teach the standard algorithm, focusing on
aligning decimal points and positioning the decimal
correctly based on place value.
Additional Resources and Materials
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=GLRJ25qZr5w
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=2gFCEY9Hxas
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bWJizgCMO7Q
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cgCe9wenawI
147
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
There are two things to remember when dividing fractions. The first is that we can solve the problem by using the inverse operation. The inverse or opposite of
division is multiplication. The second is that we will multiply by the reciprocal of the divisor. Remember that the reciprocal of a fraction is a fraction with the
numerator and denominator change places.
Thus, dividing a fraction by a whole number is the same as multiplying the fraction by the reciprocal of the same whole number.
Here is the division problem again.
1/3÷2
First, change the operation to multiplication and change 2 to its reciprocal. 2 can be written as the fraction
2/1.
The reciprocal of 2/1 is 1/2. 1/3÷2=1/3×1/2
Then, multiply the fractions to solve 1/3×1/2=/16
The answer is the same as the diagram above.
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-cbse-maths-class-7/section/2.4/primary/lesson/division-of-fractions/
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Multiplication of fractions by whole numbers with fractions
148
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
When you multiply a fraction by a whole number, you can think of the problem as repeated addition.
⅖ x 3 is the same as ⅖ + ⅖ +⅖ = 6/5
The same quantity is added 3 times therefore we can multiply ⅖ by 3
https://www.ixl.com/math/lessons/multiplying-fractions-and-whole-numbers
Multiplying fractions and whole numbers
How do you multiply a fraction by a whole number?
You can follow these steps to multiply a fraction by a whole number:
Write the whole number as a fraction with a denominator of 1.
Multiply the numerators.
Multiply the denominators.
Simplify, if needed. If your answer is greater than 1, you may want to write your answer as a mixed number.
Let's try it with ⅖ X 3
First, write the whole number as a fraction with a denominator of 1. 3/1 = 3
Now, multiply the numerators and the denominators.
⅖ ×3/1= 2×3
5X 1 = 6/5 = 1 1/5
Last, simplify. Since 6/5
is greater than 1, change it to a mixed number.
A fraction of a whole number
Let's say there are 8 apples in a basket, and ½ of those apples are red. How many of the apples are red? Finding 1/2 of 8 is the same as multiplying ½ ×8. Follow
the steps above to solve! ½ X 8/1
1X 8
2X1 =4 So, 4 of the apples are red.
https://www.ixl.com/math/lessons/multiplying-fractions-and-whole-numbers
Division of a Fraction by a Whole Number
Think about what is happening when we divide a fraction by a whole number. We are taking a part of something and splitting it up into more parts. Here is a
division problem.
149
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
1/3÷2
This problem is asking us to take one-third and divide it into two parts. Here is a picture of one-third.
[Figure 1]
Divide each third into two parts.
[Figure 2]
Each section is ⅙ of the whole. One-third divided by 2 is 1/6.
∴/13÷2=1/3×1/2 It means that dividing ⅓ by 2 is the same as multiplying ⅓ by 1/2
(Where ½ is the reciprocal of 2).
CK-12 Interactive: Division of a Fraction by a Whole Number
INTERACTIVE
Dividing a Fraction by a Whole Number
Try It
150
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Division of a Whole Number by a Fraction
Sometimes you will need to divide a whole number by a fraction. Here is an example.
3÷1/2
In the problem, it is asking for how many
1/2
s are in 3. Here is a diagram of 3 whole.
[Figure 3]
Divide each whole into equal halves.
[Figure 4]
Clearly, there are 6 one-halves in 3 wholes. So 3÷1/2=6 Also,
151
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
3×2=6∴3÷1/2=3×2/1
We learnt that when you divide a fraction by a whole number, we instead multiply by the reciprocal of the divisor. The same applies to dividing a whole number
by a fraction. Change the operation to multiplication and change the divisor to its reciprocal.
Here is the division problem again.
3÷1/2
First change the operation to multiplication and ½ to its reciprocal. 3÷1/2=3×2/1
Then, multiply. Remember that any whole number can be written as a fraction,
𝑛=𝑛/1.
3/1×2/1=6/1=6
The answer is the same as the diagram above.
Steps to Divide a Whole Number by a Fraction
We can use the following steps to divide a whole number by a fraction:
Step 1: Convert the whole number to an improper fraction.
Step 2: Find the reciprocal of the second fraction (divisor).
Step 3: Change the division sign to a multiplication sign and multiply.
Step 4: Express the fraction in the simplest form. If the answer is an improper fraction, change it into a mixed fraction.
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-cbse-maths-class-7/section/2.4/primary/lesson/division-of-fraction
152
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Division of Fractions with Whole Numbers
For the division of fractions with whole numbers, we need to multiply the denominator of the given fraction with the given whole number. In the general form, if
x/y is the fraction and a is the whole number, then x/y ÷ a = x/y × 1/a = x/ya.
Let us take an example and divide 2/3 with 4.
2/3 ÷ 4 = 2/3 × 1/4
= 1/6
https://www.cuemath.com/numbers/division-of-fractions/
MULTIPLYING DECIMALS USING THE AREA MODEL
https://lessons.unbounded.org/content_guides/6/number-operations-in-base-ten-unbound-a-guide-to-grade-5-mathematics-standards
In order to multiply decimals using the standard algorithm.
● Stack the number with the most digits on top.
● Multiply as if the numbers were multi-digit whole numbers, regrouping when necessary.
● Count the number of digits after the decimal point for each factor.
153
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
● Place point on the right side or behind the last digit and move the number points the number of decimals in the factors
● Put the same number of digits after the decimal point for the product.
https://thirdspacelearning.com/us/math-resources/topic-guides/number-and-quantity/multiplying-decimals/
EXAMPLE
https://www.math-only-math.com/multiplication-of-a-decimal-by-a-decimal.html
DIVISION OF DECIMALS
AREA MODEL
154
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
https://www.showme.com/sh/?h=Hw4I8bw
When dividing decimals and the divisor is decimal, it must be converted to a whole number.
To convert the divisor to whole number must be multiplied by its denominator
E.g. 12 / 0.6 0.6 is the same as 6 /10. The denominator is ten therefore 0.6 is multiplied by 10 to make it a whole number. This means that the decimal is
moved 1 place to the right.
Anything done to the divisor must be done to the dividend AS SHOWN IN THE FIGURE BELOW
https://slideplayer.com/slide/5964854/
Divide as usual
If the dividend has a point., place point in quotient as you multiply
155
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
https://mathmonks.com/decimal/how-to-divide-decimals
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Social Studies
Learners will carry out a survey on the villages in the parish to determine the fraction of people engaged in various professions. They will find out the fraction of
people in each village who do each job and then calculate the total fraction of the parish involved in each profession.
Learners will analyse population changes in different regions, adding and subtracting fractions with unlike denominators.
Science
Learners will practice adding and subtracting fractions by mixing different solutions in a science experiment.
Instructions:
Provide learners with different liquid solutions measured in fractions with unlike denominators (e.g., 1/3 cup of vinegar, 1/4 cup of baking soda solution).
Have learners combine the solutions and calculate the total volume.
Language Arts
Write an expository paragraph on how to add and subtract fractions with unlike denominators
Write an expository paragraph on how to add and subtract decimals through thousandth
156
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
E ssential Learning Outcome: O2.2. Multiplicative Thinking – Compute Fluently with Operations (x&÷)
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Multiply and divide multi-digit whole numbers, decimals and fractions using the standard algorithm for each operation.
• Use the properties of operations, and the relationships between operations, to solve problems involving whole numbers, decimal numbers, fractions,
ratios, rates, and whole number percentages, including those requiring multiple steps or multiple operations
• Represent composite numbers as a product of their prime factors, including through the use of factor trees
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Conversation Visual and Concrete Representations
Knowledge Open-Ended Questions Base-Ten Blocks: Have learners use physical manipulatives to
Include open-ended assessment tasks where help them understand multiplication of whole numbers.
1. Multiply multi-digit whole learners must explain different strategies for solving
numbers. a multi-digit multiplication problem. This
encourages critical thinking and allows you to assess
2. Multiply multi-digit decimals their conceptual understanding.
using the standard algorithm
for each operation.
Conversation
3. Multiply fractions using the Error Analysis
standard algorithm for each Present learners with multiplication problems that
operation. have been solved incorrectly. Ask them to identify
and correct the errors. This allows learners to
4. Divide multi-digit whole demonstrate understanding by recognizing common
numbers using the standard mistakes, such as incorrect decimal placement or https://youtu.be/HVQqdLABsGo?t=119
algorithm for each operation. misaligned digits.
157
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5. Divide multi-digit decimals Product
using the standard algorithm Real-World Application Problems
for each operation. Contextual Word Problems: Assess learners using
word problems that apply fraction multiplication to
6. Divide fractions using the real-life situations, like cooking, sharing items, or
standard algorithm for each measuring. Encourage learners to explain their
operation. reasoning and show their work.
Group Projects: Give learners a project where they
7. Apply the concept of ratios must apply fraction multiplication in a scenario, like
and unit rates to solve real- adjusting a recipe. Assess both the final product and
world and mathematical their problem-solving process.
problems. Product
Skills Scaffolder Assessments:
Provide learners with partially completed division
8. Solve problems involving problems, inviting them to focus on specific steps
whole number percentages, (e.g., completing the division of the final digits).
https://wegrowthinkers.weebly.com/5nbt5-multiply-multi-digit-
using the distributive property
whole-numbers.html
to simplify calculations where Use step-by-step questioning to guide learners
multiple steps are needed. through the division process and assess their ability
to explain their thinking at each stage.
9. Apply proportional reasoning
to solve problems involving Written Explanations: Invite learners to write about
ratios, rates, and percentages, their process and reasoning in working out the
recognizing and using the division problem
properties of operations.
Conversation
10. Solve problems that involve Reflective Assessment:
calculating percent increases After solving a problem, ask learners to explain or
or decreases, reflect on how they applied the division algorithm,
particularly focusing on the handling of decimal
11. Represent composite numbers points. This can be done verbally or in written https://virtualnerd.com/common-core/grade-7/7_NS-number-
as a product of their prime form. system/A/3/decimal-multiplication-method
factors, including through the SCO6
use of factor trees Product
158
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Self-Assessment:
Provide checklists or rubrics that guide learners in
evaluating their own work on dividing fractions.
Encourage them to reflect on whether they applied
the algorithm correctly and understood the
outcome.
Step Yes No Comments
1. Did I correctly identify
the division problem?
2. Did I keep the first
fraction the same (do not
change it)? https://www.wikihow.com/Multiply-Decimals
3. Did I change the division
sign to a multiplication
sign?
4. Did I correctly flip (find
the reciprocal of) the
second fraction?
5. Did I multiply the
numerators correctly?
6. Did I multiply the
denominators correctly?
7. Did I simplify the
fraction if needed?
8. Did I check my answer
by multiplying the result by
the divisor (reversing the https://flipbarnwell.weebly.com/unit-1.html
operation)? Video explaining process.
https://youtu.be/WcpRmQfFzFY
Step-by-Step Guided Practice
159
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Explicit Instruction: Break down the steps of multiplying
fractions into clear, small steps. Have learner’s complete one step
Product at a time, checking their understanding at each point.
Number Line Assessment: Color-Coding: Use colours to differentiate between numerators
Goal: Assess learners' understanding of how ratios and denominators when multiplying fractions. This helps learners
scale up visually. visually track each part of the operation.
Instructions:
• Provide a blank or partially filled number
line with increments of sugar (2, 4, 6, 8
cups).
• Ask learners to plot the corresponding
flour amounts (3, 6, 9, 12 cups) for each
sugar value on the number line.
• Encourage them to explain in words or
draw arrows between points to highlight
the proportional relationship between sugar
and flour.
Assessment Criteria:
Accurate Representation: Correct placement of https://www.showme.com/sh?h=rhkBr3A
sugar and flour values on the number line.
Use of Inverse Operations: Demonstrating the
connection between multiplication and division as
the ratio scales up (e.g., "I multiply the cups of
sugar by 2, so I need to multiply the cups of flour
by 2").
Verbal or Written Explanation: Encouraging
learners to verbally explain their thinking or write a
brief sentence about the relationship they see
between sugar and flour.
Product
Visual Models and Manipulatives Example:
Problem: Find 30% of 120 using the distributive
https://www.mightyowl.com/units/multiplying-fractions-using-
property.
area-models-and-standard-algorithm
160
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Assessment Task: Provide learners with a 100-grid Use of Mnemonics:
or a number line. Ask them to break down the Provide learners with a mnemonic such as "Does McDonald's Sell
percentage: Cheese Burgers?" (Divide, Multiply, Subtract, Check, and Bring
30%=10%+10%+10% down) to help them remember the steps of the division
Then, find 10% of 120 (which is 12) and multiply algorithm.
by 3 to get 36.
Visual: Learners can shade 10% of the grid three
times and count the total to get the answer.
Assessment: Grade learners on how well they use
the model to represent the problem and correctly
apply the distributive property.
• Reinforce that breaking down percentages
into smaller, more manageable parts (10%)
and using visual tools (the grid or number
line) helps simplify multi-step percentage
problems.
• You can assess learners based on how well
they break down the problem, their correct Scaffolder Practice:
use of the visual model, and whether they Start with simpler division problems (e.g., 3-digit by 1-digit) and
gradually increase the complexity (e.g., 4-digit by 2-digit) as
arrive at the correct final answer.
This approach visually and conceptually reinforces learners gain mastery.
Provide guided practice with teacher support before moving to
how 30% of a number can be calculated by finding
independent practice.
smaller chunks, making it easier for all learners to
grasp the concept.
Estimation:
Teach learners to estimate answers before solving division
Conversation
Error Analysis problems with decimals. This helps them develop number sense
Task: Present a completed but incorrect solution to and verify the reasonableness of their results.
the problem. For example: "A learner found that
the car travelled 280 miles in 7 hours by dividing
120 by 7."
Assessment: Ask learners to identify the error,
explain what the mistake was (wrong operation),
161
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
and how they would correctly solve the problem
using the properties of multiplication and division.
Assessment Criteria: Assess how well learners can
recognize mistakes and articulate the correct
solution process.
Product
Diagnostic and Formative Assessments:
Pre-Assessments: Before starting a unit on percent
increases and decreases, assess learners' prior
knowledge of percentages and their ability to use
multiplication and addition in basic percent https://www.mathswithmum.com/estimating/
problems. Use this information to guide
differentiated instruction and provide scaffolds for Interactive Whiteboards: Use these to demonstrate the algorithm
learners who need additional support. dynamically.
Exit Tickets: At the end of a lesson, provide short
problems related to percent increases or decreases
to quickly assess learner understanding. For
example, “If a $200 item is discounted by 15%,
what is the new price?” Review the exit tickets to
adjust the next lesson based on learner progress.
Product
Differentiated Assessments
Tailored Assessments: Provide different levels of
difficulty for factorization problems based on
learner readiness. Assess understanding with simpler
composite numbers for those needing more support
and more complex numbers for advanced learners.
https://flipbarnwell.weebly.com/unit-1.html
Choice Boards: Create a choice board with
Video: https://youtu.be/DFvPnh5jnvY?t=26
different activities related to prime factorization and
factor trees, inviting learners to select the tasks that
resonate with them.
162
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Step-by-Step Breakdown: Clearly outline each step of the
standard algorithm, using worked examples. (Use Keep Change
Flip -KFC)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XWodZTKtezU
http://www.mr-vango.com/prime-
factorization.html
Steps:
After KCF use the multiplication of fraction steps.
Ratio, rates and percentage:
Visual Representation (Visual Learners)
Have learners engage with various situations involving ratios,
rates, and percentages, such as those outlined below. Support
them as they model the situation with diagrams, counters, ratio
tables, or double number lines, in order to help visualize the
relationships between the quantities and understand the problem.
For example, a learner trying out cross-country running practiced
4 out of every 5 days during her training period. If she practiced
28 days, how many days was her training period?
163
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
It takes 32 strawberries to make 4 smoothies. How many
strawberries will it take to make 6 smoothies? If there are only 24
strawberries, how many smoothies can be made?
The cost of a sweater at a department store was $45. During a
sale, it was marked 30% off the original price. What was the price
of the sweater during the sale?
Discount = $13.50 sale price = $45.00 − $13.50 = $31.50
Guide learners to write the appropriate multiplication or division
equation for their model and support them in seeing how these
operations can be used to represent and solve ratio problems.
Ratio Table or Chart: Create a simple chart that shows the
relationship between the amount of sugar and flour:
164
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Sugar (cups) Flour (cups)
2 3
4 6
6 9
8 12
Number Line: Use a number line to show the scaling of the
ratio, highlighting that for every 2 cups of sugar, you add 3 cups
of flour. Move up the number line until you reach 8 cups of sugar
and 12 cups of flour.
Visual Models Example: use visual models like grids or arrays
to represent percentages. This helps learners visualize how
percentages can be broken down and distributed. For example,
25% of a number can be shown as dividing a grid into four equal
parts.
• Problem: Find 25% of 80.
• Approach: Use a grid with 80 squares, and split it into
four equal parts (each representing 25%). By colouring in
one part (25%), learners can see that 25% of 80 is 20.
Explicit Instruction with Think-Alouds:
• Model solving problems involving whole number
percent using the distributive property through think-
alouds. For example, explain:
"I know that 35% of 200 can be broken into 30% + 5%.
I’ll first find 10%, which is 20. Then I’ll multiply by 3 for
165
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
30%, giving me 60. Finally, I’ll find 5% (half of 10%) and
get 10. Adding 60 and 10 gives me 70."
• Encourage learners to use think-alouds during problem-
solving to verbalize their thought process.
Visual Aids:
A car travels 120 miles in 3 hours. How far will it travel in 7
hours?"
Find the Unit Rate (Miles per Hour):
• First, determine how many miles the car travels in 1 hour
by dividing the total distance by the total time:
Unit rate=120 miles 3 hours=40 miles per hour
120 \3 = 40
• This shows that the car travels 40 miles in 1 hour.
Use the Unit Rate to Find the Distance for 7 Hours:
• Car travels 40 miles per hour, multiply the unit rate by
the number of hours (7 hours):
40 miles per hour×7 hours=280 miles
• Use a bar model or ratio table where learners can see the
relationship between hours and miles. Create a table
showing how many miles the car travels for each hour:
Hours: 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7
Miles: 40 | 80 | 120 |160 | 200 | 240 | 280
This shows a clear linear relationship and helps learners visualize
multiplication as repeated addition.
SC010
Step-by-Step Scaffolding:
Provide structured problems with clear steps that scaffold the
process of calculating percent increases or decreases:
1. Identify the percent change (increase or
decrease).
2. Convert the percent to a decimal.
166
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3. Multiply the percent by the original value to
find the change.
4. Add or subtract the change from the original
amount.
• Include visual aids (like a chart or checklist) to support
learners who need additional guidance.
https://www.mashupmath.com/blog/tag/calculating+percent+i
ncrease
167
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
SCO 11
Visual Representation with Factor Trees
Step-by-Step Visuals: Use large posters, digital slides, or
handouts that show a clear step-by-step process for constructing
a factor tree. Start with the composite number at the top, and
break it down into two factors until all the prime factors are
found.
Colour Coding: Use different colours to highlight prime
numbers as they emerge. This helps learners visually differentiate
between composite numbers (which are broken down further)
and prime numbers (which end the factor tree).
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/how-to-find-the-prime-factors-
using-factor-tree--229120699783305670/
168
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials:
Place value blocks
Number lines
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Multiplication and Division of Multi-Digit Whole Numbers
Standard Algorithm for Multiplication: When teaching multiplication of multi-digit whole numbers, it is essential to ensure learners understand place value.
The standard algorithm involves multiplying each digit of the multiplicand by each digit of the multiplier and adding the partial products. Teachers should model
the steps carefully:
• Line up the numbers by place value.
• Multiply each digit of the bottom number by each digit of the top number.
• Add the products, being careful to keep track of place value.
Standard Algorithm for Division: For division, the long division method is commonly used. Teachers should emphasize:
• Dividing the dividend by the divisor starting with the highest place value.
• Multiplying the quotient by the divisor and subtracting the result from the dividend.
• Bringing down the next digit and repeating the process until all digits are used.
• Understanding the remainder, and interpreting it as a decimal or a whole number depending on the context of the problem.
Multiplication and Division of Decimals
Multiplying Decimals: Teachers need to emphasize:
• Ignoring the decimal point initially and multiplying the numbers as if they were whole numbers.
• Counting the total number of decimal places in the factors and placing the decimal point in the product so that it has the same number of decimal places.
• Example: 2.35×1.2=2.820, where the total number of decimal places in the factors is 3 (2 from 2.35 and 1 from 1.2), so the product has 3 decimal places.
Dividing Decimals: Key steps include:
Moving the decimal point in the divisor and dividend to make the divisor a whole number, then using the standard long division algorithm.
Placing the decimal point in the quotient directly above the decimal point in the dividend.
Example: To divide 6.75÷1.5, first multiply both by 10 to get 67.5÷15=4.5
Multiplication and Division of Fractions
Multiplying Fractions: The key to multiplying fractions is multiplying the numerators and denominators:
Example: 2/3×4/5=8/15.
Teachers should also introduce simplifying fractions before multiplying if possible, by finding common factors in the numerator and denominator across the
fractions.
Dividing Fractions: When dividing fractions, use the reciprocal of the divisor and multiply:
Example: 2/3÷4/5= 2/3×5/4= 10/12= 5/6
Teachers should ensure learners understand the rationale behind "multiplying by the reciprocal" and model the steps carefully.
Use the Properties of Operations and Relationships Between Operations
169
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Understanding the properties of operations is fundamental for solving problems with whole numbers, decimals, fractions, ratios, rates, and percentages. These
properties include:
Properties of Operations
Commutative Property: This property states that the order in which two numbers are added or multiplied does not affect the result. This property holds for
addition and multiplication, but not for subtraction and division.
Example: 3+5=5+3 or 4×7=7×4.
Associative Property: This property refers to the grouping of numbers in addition or multiplication without changing the result. Like the commutative property,
it holds for addition and multiplication, but not for subtraction and division.
Example: (2+3)+4=2+(3+4) or (3×4)×5=3×(4×5).
Distributive Property: This property is essential for simplifying expressions and solving multi-step problems. It states that a(b+c)=ab+ac.
Example: 3(5+2)= 3×5+3×2= 15+6= 21
Using Relationships Between Operations
Inverse Relationships: Understanding the inverse relationships between operations (e.g., multiplication and division, addition and subtraction) allows learners to
check their work and solve equations.
Example: To solve 12÷4=3, learners can check by verifying 3×4=12.
For decimals and fractions, learners can see how multiplying by a number’s reciprocal reverses division.
Multi-Step Problem Solving
When solving problems involving ratios, rates, and percentages, learners often need to apply the properties of operations to simplify and solve equations.
Ratios and Rates: Solving problems that involve comparing two quantities using multiplication or division.
Example: "A car travels 120 miles in 3 hours. How far will it travel in 7 hours?" Use unit rates to find the answer.
Percentages: Use properties like the distributive property to break down calculations involving percentages.
Example: Finding 15% of 80 can be broken down as 10%×80+5%×80= 8+4= 12.
Representing Composite Numbers as a Product of Prime Factors (Prime Factorization)
Prime Factorization:
Prime factorization involves breaking down a composite number into a product of prime numbers. For example, the number 60 can be expressed as
60=2x2x3x5=60
Factor Trees:
• Teachers can use factor trees to visually represent the prime factorization of a number.
• Start by dividing the number by the smallest prime factor.
• Continue breaking down each factor until all remaining numbers are prime.
Example: 60⟶2×30⟶2×15⟶3×5 Thus, the prime factorization of 60 is 2x2x3x5.
Using Prime Factorization to Find GCF and LCM:
• Greatest Common Factor (GCF): The GCF of two numbers can be found by comparing their prime factorizations and taking the lowest powers of the
common primes.
• Least Common Multiple (LCM): The LCM can be found by taking the highest powers of all primes that appear in the factorizations of the numbers.
170
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Measurement in Experiments: Use fractions and decimals for precise measurements in science.
Mathematics and Technology:
Digital Graphing: Input data to create graphs, showing math applications.
Prime Factorization: Essential for engineers in gear design.
Mathematics and Social Studies:
Historical Figures: Learn about mathematicians like Euclid and their impact.
Economics: Use percentages and ratios to analyse trade and finance.
Mathematics and Literature:
Storytelling: Incorporate math into narratives through word problems.
Poetry: Connect patterns in poetry to math concepts.
Mathematics and Art:
Artistic Designs: Use prime factorization and ratios for creative work.
Mathematics and Music:
Fractions in Music: Understand rhythms through fractional notes.
P atterns: Explore musical scales and ratios.
171
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
E ssential Learning Outcome: 2.3. Multiplicative Thinking – Make Reasonable Estimation When Using the Operation (x&÷)
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Mentally dividing with 2-, 3-, and multi-digit numbers- quick division, no regrouping by a 1-digit number; Estimating with division of 2-, 3-, and multi-
digit numbers by a 1-digit number.
• Understand the divisibility rules and use them to determine whether numbers are divisible by 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, and 10
• Use mental math strategies to calculate the percent of whole numbers, including 1%, 5%, 10%, 15%, 25%, and 50%, and explain the strategies used
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Product Modelling and Guided Practice
Oral Assessments
Skills Speed Drills: Conduct timed oral quizzes where learners Demonstrate Strategies: Show various mental math
quickly answer division questions. For example, ask strategies for division, such as breaking down numbers
1. Mentally divide with 2-, 3-, and questions like "What is 56 ÷ 7?" and keep track of how (e.g., 72 ÷ 8 can be thought of as 64 ÷ 8 + 8 ÷ 8). Use clear
multi-digit numbers- quick many they get right in a set time. step-by-step modelling.
division, no regrouping by a 1-
digit number. Think-Pair-Share: Have learners work with a partner to Guided Practice: Work through problems as a class,
verbally explain their mental division strategies, fostering inviting learners to contribute ideas and methods.
2. Use divisibility rules to determine discussion and collaborative learning. Gradually release responsibility, moving from teacher-led
whether numbers are divisible by to learner-led practice.
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, and 10. Bingo and domino game created by teachers and learners
in dividing with 2-, 3-, and multi-digit numbers- quick Visual Aids and Graphic Organizers
division (no regrouping). A record of learner’s correct
3. Use mental math strategies to answers and incorrect answers is noted for future work Fact Families: Use fact family charts to illustrate
calculate percent of whole with the learners. relationships between multiplication and division. For
numbers, including 1%, 5%, example, for 56 and 7, show that 7×8=56 and 56÷7=8.
10%, 15%, 25%, and 50%, and
explain the strategies used Division Charts: Create visual charts that list common
division facts. Display these in the classroom as reference
tools for learners.
172
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.commoncoresheets.com/division-
worksheets/sbh/visual-division
Direct Instruction
Conversation Explain Each Rule: Start with clear, concise explanations
Peer Assessments of each divisibility rule. For example:
Peer Review: Invite learners to exchange their work on Divisibility by 2: A number is divisible by 2 if its last digit
divisibility problems and assess each other’s understanding. is even (0, 2, 4, 6, or 8).
They can provide feedback on clarity and accuracy. Divisibility by 3: A number is divisible by 3 if the sum of
Teach-Back Sessions: Pair learners and have them teach its digits is divisible by 3.
each other about a specific divisibility rule. Assess their Divisibility by 4: A number is divisible by 4 if the last two
ability to explain concepts clearly and accurately. digits form a number that is divisible by 4.
Divisibility by 5: A number is divisible by 5 if its last digit
Product is 0 or 5.
Differentiated Tasks
173
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Tiered Assignments: Create tasks with varying Divisibility by 6: A number is divisible by 6 if it is
complexity levels based on learners' abilities. For instance, divisible by both 2 and 3.
some learners can work on calculating basic percentages
(e.g., 10% of a number), while others tackle more complex Divisibility by 8: A number is divisible by 8 if the last
percentages (e.g., 15% of a larger number). three digits form a number that is divisible by 8.
Choice Boards: Offer a selection of activities related to
calculating percentages. Learners can choose how they Divisibility by 9: A number is divisible by 9 if the sum of
want to demonstrate their understanding, whether through its digits is divisible by 9.
worksheets, presentations, or creative projects.
Divisibility by 10: A number is divisible by 10 if its last
Choice Activity Description
digit is 0.
Real-World Percentages: Find an item on
sale online. Calculate the original price if the Collaborative Learning
1
item is discounted by 10%. Present your
findings to the class. Group Work: Have learners work in small groups to create
examples and non-examples for each divisibility rule. They
Percentage Poster: Create a poster showing
can present their findings to the class.
examples of different percentages (1%, 5%,
2 10%, etc.) using visuals like pie charts or bar Division by 100: Used to find 1%.
graphs to represent these percentages in real-
life scenarios. Example: To find 1% of 200, divide 200 by 100. So, 1%
of 200 is 2.
DIY Percent Problem: Write a short story
that includes a percentage problem (e.g., "If
Division by 10: Used to find 10%.
3 25% of my allowance is $5, how much is my
total allowance?"). Share it with a partner and Example: To find 10% of 70, divide 70 by 10. So, 10% of
have them solve it. 70 is 7.
Interactive Game: Use an online math game
Halving: Used to find 5%, 50%, and 25% (since 25%
focused on calculating percentages. Track your
4 is half of 50%).
scores and share the strategies you used to
improve your performance.
174
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Create a Video Tutorial: Make a short video Example: To find 5% of 80, first find 10% (8). Then,
divide 8 by 2. So, 5% of 80 is 4.
explaining how to calculate a specific
5
percentage (like 25% of a number) using a
Addition of percentages: Used to find percentages like
real-life example. Share it with the class.
15% by adding 10% and 5%.
Example: To find 15% of 60, find 10% (6) and 5% (3).
Add 6 and 3. So, 15% of 60 is 9.
175
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: O3.1. Proportional Reasoning – Representing and Working with Rates and Ratios - Use ratio and rate reasoning to
solve real-world and mathematical problems, e.g., by reasoning about tables of equivalent ratios, tape diagrams, double number line diagrams, or
equations.
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Solve unit rate problems including those involving unit pricing and constant speed.
• Solve problems involving ratios, including percentages and rates, using appropriate tools and strategies
• Find a percent of a quantity as a rate per 100 (e.g., 30% of a quantity means 30/100 times the quantity)
• Solve problems involving finding the whole, given a part and the percent using a standard algorithm.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Hands-On Learning Activities
Product
Skills Open-Ended Problems Unit Rate Shopping: Bring in grocery store ads
1. Calculate the unit rate by dividing the total Multiple Solutions: Give learners open-ended and ask learners to calculate the unit price of
quantity by the number of units. problems where they can arrive at the solution using items (e.g., $3 for 5 apples, what is the price per
different methods (e.g., ratio tables, division, or apple?). This real-world context is relatable and
2. Solve real-world problems involving unit graphs). Assess their reasoning and problem-solving engaging.
pricing by finding the cost per item. process, not just the final answer.
Example Speed Comparison: Have learners compare
3. Solve problems involving constant speed by Unit Pricing Problem speeds in a simulated race where each "car"
calculating how far something travels per Problem: You are shopping for oranges, and two (learners in small groups) travels different
unit of time (e.g., per hour). stores have different offers: distances in different times. They will calculate
• Store A sells 6 oranges for $4.50. the unit rate (miles per hour) and compare their
4. Set up and solve problems using ratios to • Store B sells 8 oranges for $6.40. Which store has the results. Example: Learners will calculate that if a car
compare quantities in real-life contexts. better deal? travels 150 miles in 3 hours, it is traveling at 50 miles
Open-Ended Nature: per hour.
Knowledge • Learners can solve the problem using division to
calculate the price per orange for each store. Differentiated Instruction:
5. Explain that a ratio can be written as a • Alternatively, they could create a ratio table for each Strategy: Provide multiple approaches to
fraction. store to find the unit price. learning the concept of simplifying ratios (e.g.,
manipulatives, diagrams, or number lines).
176
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6. Solve problems by converting ratios to • Some learners may choose to graph the price vs. Example:
fractions when appropriate. quantity for both stores and compare the slopes (unit Diagram with Groups of Marbles
rates). (Manipulative Approach)
7. Apply the concept of sharing quantities in a Learners can visualize the marbles by grouping
given ratio by solving problems. Product them into sets that represent the ratio:
Real-Life Context Assessments Step 1: Original Ratio (15 Red Marbles, 20
8. Solve problems involving finding the whole, Practical Scenarios: Assess learners’ ability to solve Blue Marbles)
given a part and the percent using a standard unit rate problems using real-world examples such Red Marbles:
algorithm. as: Calculating the speed of a car traveling a ⚪⚪⚪⚪⚪⚪⚪⚪⚪⚪⚪⚪⚪⚪⚪ (15)
certain distance over time. Blue Marbles:
Value Task-Based Learning: Create assessment tasks that
🔵🔵🔵🔵🔵🔵🔵🔵🔵🔵🔵🔵🔵🔵🔵🔵🔵🔵🔵🔵
9. Create real life problems involving ratios involve learners solving a scenario, like determining
(20)
speed for different vehicles. Have learners justify their
reasoning in writing.
Step 2: Group the Marbles into Smaller Sets
by Dividing by 5
Product/ Conversation
Each group should contain the same ratio (3 red
marbles to 4 blue marbles):
Flexible Assessment Methods:
Group 1: ⚪⚪⚪ 🔵🔵🔵🔵
Strategy: Invite learners to demonstrate their Group 2: ⚪⚪⚪ 🔵🔵🔵🔵
understanding of ratios in different ways (e.g., drawing, Group 3: ⚪⚪⚪ 🔵🔵🔵🔵
explaining orally, or using manipulatives). Simplified Ratio: 3:4
Example: Some learners may simplify the ratio 15:20 This diagram shows that after grouping, we have
by drawing groups of marbles, while others might three sets of 3 red marbles and 4 blue marbles,
explain their reasoning verbally or write the steps representing the simplified ratio 3:4.
Product Collaborative Learning (Group Problem
Solving)
Solve Problems by Converting Ratios to
Performance-Based Assessments:
Fractions:
Converting ratios to fractions helps solve real-
Real-Life Projects: Assign a project where learners
world problems by enabling you to work with
create a recipe or a budget that requires them to use
the numbers more easily.
177
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
ratios and express them as fractions. They can present Examples: Recipe Problem:
their work to the class. Problem: A recipe calls for 2 cups of sugar for
every 3 cups of flour. If you want to make half
Create a Ratio Story: Have learners write a story that of the recipe, how much sugar do you need?
involves ratios and include questions that require their Solution: The ratio of sugar to flour is 2:3 As a
peers to convert those ratios into fractions fraction, this is 2/3. To find half the sugar,
multiply the fraction by ½.
Product
Hands-On Activities:
Real-World Projects:
Example: Provide learners with physical
Performance Tasks: Assign learners a project where
manipulatives (like counters or blocks) to
they apply ratio concepts to real-life situations, such as:
represent the 21 chocolates. Invite them to
physically group the manipulatives into parts
Example: "Plan a party for 10 people with a budget of
that correspond to the ratio 4:3, which helps
$100, splitting costs for food, drinks, and decorations
kinesthetic learners engage with the content.
in the ratio 3:2:1."
Learners create a plan, explaining how they divided the
money according to the ratio. This assesses their ability
to apply math to practical situations.
Product
Visual Representation and Manipulatives
Use visual aids like pie charts or grids to represent the
percentage. For example, divide a circle into four equal
parts to show that 25% is one-fourth of the class.
Learners can use counters or manipulatives to
physically represent the problem. This helps https://passyworldofmathematics.com/sharing-
kinesthetic learners and those who benefit from using-ratios/
hands-on activities.
Guided Practice with Step-by-Step Scaffolding: Modelling the Problem
If 25% of a class is 10 learners, learners will solve for • Example Problem: Present a problem
the total number of learners in the class using the such as, what is 30% of 50
formula: • Creating the Diagram:
178
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Whole=10/25×100=40 = Thus, the whole class has 40 Discussion: Have learners discuss what they see
learners. in the diagram and how it relates to the problem.
https://www.onlinemathlearning.com/equivalent- https://www.onlinemathlearning.com/percenta
ratios-tape-diagrams.html ges-tape-diagram-illustrative-math.html
179
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Manipulatives (counters) Number Line, Maths Worksheets, Maths Story Books, Educational Games (card games, board games, Math War, Online Math Games.
Graph papers, Diagrams. Using Technology: Online Games.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Ratios compares quantities and shows the relationship between them.
There are three ways of writing ratios using a colon e.g. 4: 3 As a fraction 2/5 or 3 to 4.
When it comes to writing, ratio order is very important.
Ratio should always be written in its simplest. E.g. the ratio 4: 6 can be simplified to 2: 3.
Equivalent Ratios: have different numbers but show the same comparison or relationship. They are very similar to equivalent fractions. We can used
multiplication and or division to find equivalent ratios. Whenever we multiply or divide the terms by the same number we have created equivalent ratios.
Simplifying Ratios means reducing ratios to a form where the only divisible common factor is one.
There are 6 mangoes to 8 apples in a box. What is the ratio of apples to mangoes?
Share $30 between Tom and Peter in the ratio 2:3. How much money does each boy get?
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts:
● Reading word problems that involve math operations.
● Writing word problems to reinforce understanding.
● Practicing mathematical vocabulary.
● Mathematics Storybook Form
Science:
● Measuring and recording data, then performing basic calculations.
● Studying patterns and sequences in nature that involve math concepts.
● Using math in science experiments and data analysis
Social Studies:
● Cooperative learning among learners in completing group projects.
● Promoting social interaction among learners as they learn.
● Sharing of ideas, strategies when solving real life problems
180
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: 3.2. Proportional Reasoning - Use a variety of representations and models of percentages to solve real-world
mathematical problems.
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Find a percent of a quantity as a rate per 100 (e.g., 30% of a quantity means 30/100 times the quantity)
• Solve problems involving finding the whole, given a part and the percent using a standard algorithm.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Product Visual Aids: Use pie charts, bar graphs, and
Choice Boards: Provide learners with a choice of percentage grids to visually represent percentages.
Knowledge activities to demonstrate their understanding of Visual aids help learners who learn best through
percentages. For example, learners could choose to seeing information.
1. Define a percentage as a part of 100. create a pie chart, write a word problem involving
percentages, or develop a digital presentation.
2. Express a number as a percentage of
another number.
Skills
3. Calculate a percentage of a given quantity.
4. Use different methods to convert
percentages to decimals and fractions,
https://www.ablebits.com/office-addins-
and vice versa.
blog/make-pie-chart-excel/
5. Create and interpret visual models of
percentages, such as pie charts, bar
Use of Visual Aids (e.g., Percentage Bars or
graphs, and 100 grids. This list of percentages add up to 100%, so our pie chart
Pie Charts):
is an accurate representation of the percentages. If they
Example: Provide learners with visual models like
6. Explain reasoning and approach to didn’t add up to 100%, then the wedges of the pie chart
bar diagrams or pie charts to represent
solving percentage problems, both in would be different from the percentages listed.
percentages. For example, show 180 out of 300
writing and orally. https://content.byui.edu/file/b8b83119-9acc-4a7b-
shaded portions on a bar to illustrate that 180 is
bc84-efacf9043998/1/Excel-1-3-3.html
60% of 300. This helps visual learners see how
Values
parts relate to the whole.
7. Create real-life problems involving
percentages of quantities.
181
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product Activity: Learners can use manipulatives or colour
Varied Assessment Formats: segments on paper to represent the percentage
Example: Invite learners to demonstrate their visually (e.g., colouring 40% of a grid representing
understanding in different ways, such as through written a number).
responses, diagrams, or oral explanations. For instance,
some learners might write the steps to express 40 out of
200 as a percentage, while others may explain their
process verbally.
Activity: Assess learners by having them solve a
percentage problem in writing or drawing a visual model
to show the relationship between two numbers.
Product
Real-Life Problem Assessments:
Example: Use practical assessments where learners
calculate percentages in real-world contexts, such as https://thirdspacelearning.com/gcse-
finding a discount on an item or the percentage of time maths/number/one-number-as-a-percentage-of-
spent on homework compared to other activities. another/
Activity: Ask learners to bring in advertisements
showing sale prices and have them calculate the
percentage discount and the final price of an item.
SCO4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QMyi6dj8zg
E
182
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Have learners write a percentage as a fraction out of 100.
E.g. 20% is written as 20/100. Reduce to 2/10. As a Real-World Contexts:
decimal=0.2 Example: Introduce real-life scenarios such as
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Xt4UDk7Kzw discounts, taxes, or tips. For instance, "If an item
costs $100 and it’s on sale for 15% off, how much
Product do you save?" This makes the concept of
Real-World Problem Assessment: calculating percentages more tangible.
Example: Give learners real-world data, such as the Activity: Ask learners to calculate a 15% tip on a
results of a classroom survey or sports statistics, and ask restaurant bill, a 20% discount at a store, or the
them to create a pie chart or bar graph to represent the amount of tax added to a purchase.
percentages.
Activity: Have learners analyse data from a classroom Activity: Pupils use different types of
vote (e.g., favourite subject) and create a bar graph manipulatives to calculate percentages of a given
showing the percentage of learners who chose each quantity. For Example: Find 25% of 200 marbles.
option. They should interpret what their graph tells them Pupils will group manipulatives and solve the
about the most and least popular subjects. problem.
25% means 25 out of every 100
25 for the first 100 marbles
25 for the second 100 marble
25……………… 100
25………………100
Total: 50 marbles
So 25% of 200 marbles=50 marbles
SCO4
Pupils will use Visual aid and charts to explain the
relationship among fractions, decimals and
percentages.
https://vimeo.com/414894706
What percentage of the diagram is
(a) Shaded
(b) Unshaded
183
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Conversation
Interviews and Conferences: Conduct one-on-one or
small group interviews to discuss learners’ understanding
and strategies for solving percentage problems. This can
be particularly useful for learners who struggle with
written assessments
Math Journals: Encourage learners to keep journals
where they reflect on their learning, solve problems, and
explain their reasoning. This can provide insights into
their thought processes and understanding. https://thirdspacelearning.com/gcse-
maths/number/comparing-fractions-decimals-
and-percentages/
https://www.alamy.com/stockphoto/percentagei
nfographic.html?sortBy=relevant
184
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.onlinemathlearning.com/percentage
s-tape-diagram-illustrative-math.html
Collaborative Projects: Have learners work
together on projects that require them to teach
each other different aspects of percentages and
their applications.
Learner Choice: Invite learners to choose how
they demonstrate their understanding of
percentages, such as through written explanations,
drawings, or digital presentations.
185
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Manipulatives (counters) Number Line, Maths Worksheets, Maths Story Books, Educational Games (card games, board games, Math War, Online Math Games.
Graph papers, Diagrams. Using Technology: Online Games. Percentage chart.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Percent means for every hundred. The symbol % is read as percent and it shows you are dealing with a percentage.
A Percentage is a fraction with a denominator of 100. For example 60/100 = 60%.
100% is the whole. 100/100 =1
5/100 can be written as 0.05 or 5% As a fraction = 5/100. As a decimal= 0.05 As a percentage = 5%
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Mathematics and Economics:
Calculate percentages for budgeting and interest rates.
Mathematics and Science:
Analyse species growth and habitat loss using percentages; interpret nutrition labels.
Mathematics and Social Studies:
Apply percentages to election results and historical population changes.
Mathematics and Technology:
Use spreadsheets for calculating and organizing percentages.
Mathematics and Art:
Scale artwork using percentages and analyse patterns.
Mathematics and Health/Physical Education:
Calculate heart rate percentages and analyse BMI.
Mathematics and Business:
Understand profit margins and market share through percentages.
Mathematics and Environmental Studies:
Calculate percentages of water conservation and energy efficiency.
186
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Pattern and Relationship
Introduction to the Strand: Teaching patterns and relationships in grade 6 helps learners develop critical thinking and problem-solving skills as they learn to
recognize and analyse mathematical structures. Understanding patterns lays the foundation for algebraic concepts, enabling learners to express mathematical ideas
using variables and equations. Additionally, exploring patterns fosters a deeper appreciation for the interconnectedness of mathematics, which is essential for real-
world applications in various fields, such as science and engineering.
Essential Learning Outcome: P1.1. Recognizing, describing and extending patterns – Repeating Patterns
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
Identify and describe patterns in tables of values and graphs involving problems in perimeter, area and volume calculations; Translate a pattern from one
representation to another and describe a pattern rule using symbols and one or more operations.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Think Pair Share Race Real world Decimal patterns
See the Pattern in the Table
Knowledge: In groups, using the real world pictures, have the groups
work collaboratively to find the pattern for the scenario
1. Interpret the basic geometric concepts
Present learners with the problem below.
cards Below.
(perimeter, area, volume).
The perimeter of a square is 8 cm. What would
the perimeter of 5 squares be?
2. Interpret tables of values and simple
graphs.
Hint
3. Identify and describe patterns in tables of Do you see a pattern?
values and graphs involving problems in Retrieved from: What is the pattern rule?
perimeter, area and volume calculations https://x.com/KiciaRashid/status/999678500721262592 Can I use a table of values to solve?
4. Interpret and describe application of
Model how to represent the data on the tables of
patterns in problem solving.
values.
187
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Skills:
Number of squares perimeter
The price of the meat in the store changed to
5. Create or analyse a pattern with decimals.
$1.78 lb on Monday, $1.98 lb on Tuesday and
6. Recognize patterns in tables of values, $2.08 lb on Wednesday. What would be the
graphs, perimeter, area, and volume price of the meat on Thursday? (Hint: What is
calculations the Pattern rule?)
7. Apply knowledge of pattern to calculate
Learners will use a table of value to solve.
the perimeter, area and volume of a
shape.
Show learners the video below for further
consolidation.
8. Identify and describe complex patterns in
input output
tables and graphs, including relationships
Word Problem Strategy, Tables & Patterns
between perimeter, area, and volume
Video
9. Translate patterns into mathematical
expressions and equations. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nCtRpelFZl
A
Values:
Guided Questions:
Decimal Detectives
10. Apply the pattern rules they have learned
to solve real-world problems. 1. How can understanding decimal patterns help us
Learners will solve the problem using a table of value. in everyday life?
11. Create real-life problem that will utilize 2. What strategies can we use to predict future
pattern rules to solve the problem. Learners will watch the video below guiding them on how to values in a decimal pattern?
represent the data on the table of values on a line graph. 3. Can you explain the connection between creating
and analysing decimal patterns?
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nros-CYgssQ
Decimal Detectives
Present a Real-World Scenario: Provide learners
Using grid paper, Learners will represent the data on a line graph. with a real-world problem that involves a
Learners will identify whether the graph shows an increasing or numerical pattern with decimals. For example:
decreasing pattern and identify the pattern rule.
188
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
A savings account starts with $10.00. Each week,
$0.25 is added. How much money will be in the
account after 5 weeks? 10 weeks?
Identify the Pattern: Guide learners to recognize
the pattern in the decimal values. In the example,
learners would see that $0.25 is added each week.
Make Predictions: Ask learners to predict the
amount of money in the account for future weeks
based on the identified pattern.
Extend the Pattern: Challenge learners to continue
the pattern beyond the given data points. For
example, how much money would be in the
account after 20 weeks?
Justify Reasoning: Encourage learners to explain
their predictions and the reasoning behind their
Retrieved from: thinking.
https://print-graph-paper.com/details/1-4-inch
Have a review session of basic concepts of perimeter, area,
and volume calculations. For example, let learners view a
video followed by a class discussion.
Patterns in calculating Area, Perimeter and Volume.
Review Video
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&
Have learners use a Venn diagram to compare and
v=sBE82nTWUZs
contrast the patterns in calculating the area, perimeter
and volume.
1. Introduce a table showing different
shapes and their corresponding
perimeters, areas.
189
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Area And Perimeter comparison Game
https://wordwall.net/resource/7035111/math/area-vs-
perimeter
1. Pattern Hunt: Learners work in teams to identify
Retrieved from:
patterns in real-world scenarios and present their
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/61073039947619
findings.
0217/
The picture below shows 5 gardens. Learners will use a
table of value to identify the pattern rule.
190
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Using the picture:
Imagine you are designing a garden with different
shapes for the flower beds. How would you use
pattern rules to optimize the use of space while
considering perimeter and area calculations?
Create a table of value to determine the pattern rule for
the perimeter of the gardens. (hint use the dots on outer
“rim” of the gardens)
Create a table of value to identify the pattern rule for the
gardens. (Hint: Use the square on the inside of the
gardens)
2. Pattern Rule Puzzles: Groups solve puzzles
where they have to articulate pattern rules using
symbols and operations.
3. Design Challenge: Teams create a project
incorporating patterns in tables and graphs for a
given scenario.
Additional Resources and Materials
Dot paper
Graph paper and grid worksheets
Rulers, calculators
Shape models (rectangles, triangles, cubes, etc.)
Whiteboard and markers
191
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Worksheets with pre-designed tables of values for perimeter, area, and volume
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Retrieved from: https://www.slideshare.net/slideshow/perimeter-area-volume/21061547#2
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Science: Use decimals for measuring volume, mass, and density in experiments.
Technology: Create graphs and tables with spreadsheets; program robots using decimal-based distances.
Engineering: Apply decimals in design and 3D modelling for accurate measurements.
Art: Scale drawings and patterns with decimals to explore symmetry and proportions.
Social Studies: Calculate map distances and population density using area and volume.
Physical Education: Track performance metrics, distances, and averages with decimal values.
192
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: P1.2. Recognizing, describing and extending patterns – Increasing and Decreasing Patterns
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Demonstrate an understanding of the role of patterns in multiplication/division situations involving multiplication by 0.1, 0.01, 0.001; division by 0.1,
0.01, 0.001.
• Determine pattern rules and use them to extend patterns, make and justify predictions, and identify missing elements in repeating, growing, and
shrinking patterns, and use algebraic representations of the pattern rules to solve for unknown values in linear growing patterns
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Observation Provide learners with opportunities to identify
patterns using concrete materials, pictorial
Knowledge Use a large paper/ cardboard to make a multiplication representations or diagrams.
grid. Example: For example:
- Identify patterns in multiplication and
division situations ● Array Exploration:
1 2 3 4
- Determine the pattern rules ○ Provide learners with counters or
blocks.
1 1 2 3 4
Skills ○ Ask them to create different
- Apply patterns rules when solving arrays (rectangular arrangements)
2 2 4 6 8
problems involving multiplication/ and count the total number of
division situations; multiplication 3 3 6 9 12 objects.
/division by 0.1, 0.01, and 0.001. ○ Discuss the relationship between
the number of rows, columns,
Place learners in groups of 4 or 5. Ask each group to
Skills and the total number of objects.
choose a pattern and explain it.
- Extend patterns using pattern rules, make ○ Introduce multiplication as a
Checklist:
and justify predictions shortcut for counting arrays.
- Can learners identify a multiplication pattern?
● Division with Sharing:
- Can learners explain the pattern?
- Identify missing elements in repeating, ○ Use manipulatives like counters
growing and shrinking patterns or small objects.
Product
○ Give learners a specific number
- Use algebraic representations of patterns of objects to share equally among
Provide learners with materials such as base 10 blocks
to solve for unknown values in linear a given number of people.
and ask them to show a pattern involving multiplication
growing patterns ○ Discuss how many objects each
or division by 0.1, 0.01, and 0. 001
person receives and any leftovers.
193
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
For example 3 X 0.1, 3 X 0.01 ○ Introduce division as the process
Do learners recognize each step is 10 times greater or of sharing equally.
Values smaller?
- Justify the relevance of patterns/rules in Visual Activities
real-life situations.
● Number Line Patterns:
○ Create number lines and mark
multiples of a specific number.
Google image:
○ Ask learners to identify the
https://www.google.com/search?q=base+ten+blocks
patterns in the numbers.
○ Discuss the relationship between
Product: Game
multiplication and division on the
number line.
Use cards with various patterns in different forms such
● Multiplication Chart Exploration:
as pictorial, concrete and numerical and have learners
○ Provide learners with a
work in groups to determine the pattern rules.
multiplication chart.
○ Ask them to identify patterns in
Observation
the rows, columns, and diagonals.
○ Discuss the relationship between
Invite learners to use both concrete materials and work
multiplication and division facts.
cards with varied patterns (repeating, growing and
shrinking). Observe learners as they complete patterns by
Abstract Activities
extending or inserting the missing elements. Listen as
they discuss rules and justify answers for missing
● Pattern Puzzles:
elements.
○ Create puzzles with missing
numbers in multiplication or
Checklist
division equations.
Behaviour Comments
○ Invite learners to identify the
yes/ no
pattern and fill in the missing
Can the learner identify the pattern rule?
numbers.
Was the learner able to extend the pattern correctly?
● Number Sentence Patterns:
194
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Are the missing elements accurate? ○ Provide learners with a series of
related multiplication or division
equations.
Think- Pair- Share ○ Ask them to identify the patterns
and write the next few equations
Invite learners to work in pairs or small groups to solve in the sequence.
for unknowns using algebraic representations of ● Real-World Problem Solving:
patterns. Listen as learners ○ Present real-world problems
involving multiplication and
division.
○ Encourage learners to identify
patterns in the data and use them
to solve the problems.
Game-Based Activities
● Multiplication Bingo:
○ Create bingo cards with
multiplication problems and
answers.
○ Call out multiplication problems
and learners cover the correct
answer on their cards.
● Division War:
○ Distribute cards with division
problems. Learners solve their
problems and the player with the
highest quotient wins.
● Pattern Finding Games:
○ Let learners interact with games
where they must identify patterns
195
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
in a series of numbers and use
those patterns to solve problems.
Give learners opportunities to divide and multiply
by 0.1, 0.01, 0.001 using concrete materials such
as base 10 blocks and counters
Example:
3 × 0.1
3 × 0.01
0.3 ÷ 0.1
0.3 ÷ 0.01
Provide learners with opportunities to explore and
extend patterns and determine the rules. Invite
learners to make and justify predictions.
For example:
Google image:
https://www.google.com/search?q=triangular+n
umbers
2, 7, 12,19
Google image:
196
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.google.com/search?q=square+num
bers+array
For example:
1. Concrete exploration:
○ Provide learners with pattern
blocks or counters.
○ Ask them to create their own
patterns, focusing on growing or
shrinking patterns.
○ Encourage learners to share their
patterns and explain the rule
governing the pattern.
1. Table of values:
○ Introduce the concept of a table
of values to represent patterns.
○ Create a table with columns for
the pattern number and the
number of elements in each
pattern.
○ Guide learners to complete the
table for their created patterns.
2. Rule discovery:
○ Ask learners to identify the
pattern rule in their tables of
values.
○ Encourage them to express the
rule using words and symbols
(e.g., "add 2 to the previous
number").
○ Introduce the concept of
variables (e.g., using "n" to
represent the pattern number).
3. Prediction and justification:
197
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
○ Ask learners to predict the
number of elements in the next
few terms of their pattern.
○ Challenge them to justify their
predictions using the pattern rule.
○ Introduce the concept of
extending the pattern beyond the
given data points.
4. Visual representation:
○ Use graph paper to plot the
points from the table of values.
○ Discuss the shape of the graph
and how it relates to the pattern
rule.
Example:
● A growing pattern starts with 3 blocks,
then 6 blocks, then 9 blocks.
● Learners create a table: | Pattern number
| Number of blocks | |---|---| | 1 | 3 |
| 2 | 6 | | 3 | 9 |
● They identify the pattern rule: add 3 to
the previous number.
● They predict the next number of blocks:
12.
● They justify their prediction by explaining
that they added 3 to 9
SCO: 5
198
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Invite learners to extend patterns and identify
missing elements in repeating, growing and
shrinking patterns using varied forms.
For example:
Google image:
https://www.google.com/search?q=patterns+in+
multipication
Google image:
https://www.google.com/search?q=increasing+p
atterns+in+tessalations
199
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Google image:
https://www.google.com/search?q=number+patt
erns+and+rules+worksheets
1. Matching Activity:
● Provide learner with a set of cards with
patterns containing missing elements.
● Invite learner the opportunity to engage
in match the missing elements with cards
containing answer choices.
● This activity can be done individually or
in pairs.
Pattern Missing Element
[1, 2, 3, _, 5] 4
200
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
[5, 8, _, 14, 17] 11
[10, _, 4, 1, -2] 7
[1, 4, 2, _, 3] 5
2. Fill-in-the-Blank Worksheets:
● Provide learners with worksheets that
contain patterns with missing elements.
● Learners can fill in the missing elements
by identifying the pattern and continuing
the sequence.
● Provided learners with worksheets that
include answer keys for self-checking.
3. Pattern Drawing:
● Provide learners with a starting part of a
pattern (repeating, growing, or shrinking).
● Ask them to continue the pattern by
drawing the missing elements.
● This activity can be done with concrete
materials (counters, blocks) or on paper.
4. Interactive Games:
● Use online or offline interactive games
that involve identifying missing elements
in patterns.
201
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● These games can provide immediate
feedback and make learning more
engaging.
5. Real-World Applications:
● Present learners with real-world scenarios
that involve patterns, such as calendar
patterns (months of the year), musical
scales, or geometric sequences.
● Ask learners to identify missing elements
or predict what comes next in the
Pattern Puzzles
○ Provide learners with patterns
represented by tables of values or graphs.
○ Some values in the table or points on the
graph will be missing.
○ Invite learners to identify the pattern,
write an algebraic equation, and use it to
find the missing values.
Graphing Linear Patterns
○ Provide learners with algebraic
equations representing linear
patterns.
○ Create a table of values based on
the equation.
○ Plot the points on the graph and
connect them to form a line.
202
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
○ Discuss the relationship between
the equation, table of values, and
graph.
○ Use the graph to find unknown
values.
Error Analysis
○ Provide learners with solved
problems involving algebraic
representations of patterns.
○ Introduce intentional errors in
the solutions.
○ Learners must identify the errors,
explain the correct process, and
find the correct answer.
Additional Resources and Materials
Pattern blocks or counters
Graph paper
Whiteboards or large paper
Markers
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
To effectively teach learners about patterns in multiplication and division, teachers should understand key concepts related to these operations. They need to
emphasize multiplication patterns through multiplication tables, repeated addition, and skip counting while highlighting properties such as commutative,
associative, and distributive properties. For division, it's essential to present it as the inverse of multiplication, using repeated subtraction and fact families to
illustrate relationships.
203
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Teachers should also be familiar with identifying patterns in products and quotients, discussing multiples, and teaching divisibility rules. Examples of number,
shape, and growing patterns can help learners practice recognizing and predicting outcomes based on established rules. Finally, understanding linear growing
patterns and algebraic representations will enable teachers to guide learners in solving for unknown values effectively.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Measurement and Units:
○ Use multiplication and division by decimals to convert between units, such as centimetres to meters (multiplying by 0.01) or grams to kilograms (dividing by 1000).
Social Studies:
● Scale and Distance:
○ Use map scales to calculate real-world distances. For example, if 1 cm on a map equals 0.01 km in real life, learners can multiply or divide to find actual distances.
● Population Density:
○ Calculate population density by dividing population numbers by area sizes, often requiring division by decimal values.
Health and Family Life Education:
● Dosage Calculations:
○ Calculate medication dosages based on weight, often requiring multiplication or division by decimals to get accurate amounts.
● Nutritional Information:
○ Use division to convert serving sizes and nutritional values (e.g., dividing total calories by number of servings).
204
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: P 2.1. Variables and Relationships – Representing Unknowns
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Writes and solves problems with expressions and equations using unknowns in all four operations with whole numbers.
Specific Curriculum Outcome Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Think - Pair - Share Exploration of Representing unknowns in
situations
Knowledge Distribute cards with situations and have learners work
in small groups to read and record each situation using a Provide learners with experiences to determine the
- Identify and construct expressions/ variable with pictures, numbers and words. expressions or equations with unknowns using at
equations with unknowns from given Invite learners to share their equations with a partner. least one variable. Give learners situations in
situations For example: context and invite them to identify the expression
or equation and recording using at least one
19 decreased by a number
Skills variable.
- Write and solve problems with Example: Tomas has 275 pencils. His friend gave
Lorni has 18 273 mangoes in a basket. 8 492 of the
expressions/equations with unknowns for him some more pencils. Write an expression to
mangoes are ripe and the rest are green.
addition, subtraction, multiplication, and show how many pencils Tomas has.
or division
1. 19 - x
2. 18 273 - x = 8 492
Values
- Identify and solve a real- life situation Product Problem Solving
with expression/equations using
unknowns for any of the four operations. Display work cards or situations and invite learners to Provide learners with opportunities to generate
write an expression or equation and solve with situations for unknowns and solve situations.
unknowns for addition, subtraction, multiplication and Let learners exercise their creativity.
division.
Have learners use the expressions or equations with Provide learners with expressions or equations
unknowns and generate situations for each. and let them create the situations to represent
them.
205
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcome Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
For example:
Product
240 ÷ x = 16
x =
Invite learners to work in small groups and research real
- life situations where solving for unknowns in any four
Use the following equation to write a
operations is applicable.
situation and solve.
Let learners share and justify their findings.
Questions learners about the relevance and accuracy of
their findings.
Research
Invite learners the opportunity to research and
share real - life situations using expressions and
equations using unknowns.
For example:
Baking: Mother used some flour to bake bread.
From her 25 kg bag, she has 16 kg left. How
much flour did Mother use?
Additional Resources and Materials:
cards
counters
internet (online support)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
A monomial with a degree of 1 has a variable with an exponent of one. For example, the exponent of m for the monomial 2m is 1. When the exponent is not shown, it is understood to be one.
Monomials with a degree of 1 with the same variables can be added together; for example, 2m and 3m can be combined as 5m.
To evaluate an algebraic expression, the variables are replaced with numerical values, and calculations are performed based on the order of operations.
Equations are mathematical statements such that the expressions on both sides of the equal sign are equivalent.
In equations, variables are used to represent unknown quantities.
206
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
There are many strategies to solve equations including guess-and-check, the balance model, and the reverse flow chart.
The strategy of using a reverse flow chart can be used to solve equations like
m/4 – 2 = 10. The first diagram shows the flow of operations performed on the variable m to produce the result 10. The second diagram shows the reverse flow chart, or flow of the reverse
operations, in order to identify the value of the variable m.
A flow chart with two rows. The top row goes from left to right. "m". Divide by 4. Subtract 2. Result is 10. The bottom row goes right to left. 10. Plus 2. Multiply by 4. Result is 48.
Formulas are equations in which any of the variables can be solved for. When solving for a variable in a formula, values for the variables are substituted in, and then further calculations may be
needed depending on which variable is being solved for. For example, for A = lw, if l = 10 and w = 3, then A = (10)(3) = 30. If A = 50 and l = 10, then 50 = 10w, and solving this will
require either using known multiplication facts or dividing both sides by 10 to solve for w.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
• Science: Use equations to predict experimental outcomes (e.g., mass, volume).
• Technology: Apply coding or formulas to solve unknowns.
• Social Studies: Analyse historical data with population growth equations.
• Physical Education: Calculate unknowns in fitness metrics like speed or distance.
Language Arts:
• Writing: Developing situations
• Comprehension: Inferences,
Art and Craft:
• Draw representations for situations
-
207
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome P2.2 : Variables and Relationships - Understanding and Representing Equivalence
Grade Level Expectation:
• Determine if and explain why two given quantities or measures are equal or unequal using measurement formulae, arithmetic expressions involving four
operations for whole numbers, addition and subtraction of decimals, equivalence and comparison of fractions and arithmetic expressions involving addition
and subtraction of fractions concretely
• Apply the properties to determine equality or inequality
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Product Interactive Number Sentences:
Provide learners with the opportunity for learners to create
Knowledge an interactive activity where they have to use cards with
1. Identify whether two expressions numbers and operation symbols to build expressions and
using addition, subtraction, physically compare them. This allows hands-on
multiplication, or division with exploration of whether the expressions are equal or
whole numbers are equal or unequal. For example,
unequal. Justify your conclusion by
Number cards: Cards with numbers (0–20) for simplicity.
applying operations properties,
Operation cards: Cards for each operation (+, –, ×, ÷).
including commutative, associative,
Equal/Unequal cards: Cards with "=" and "≠".
and distributive.
Property cards: Optional cards labelled "Commutative,"
2. Add and subtract decimals up to
"Associative," and "Distributive."
the thousandth place and compare
the results to determine if two Build an Expression: Each learner or pair of learners
decimal expressions are equal or selects number cards and operation cards to create two
unequal. expressions. For example:
Skills Expression 1: (3 + 4) × 2
3. Compare fractions by finding Expression 2: 3 + (4 × 2)
common denominators or using
Compare the Expressions:
visual fraction models to determine
Learners place the "=" or "≠" card between the two
if they are equal or unequal and
expressions after calculating the value of each. They
explain their reasoning.
208
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
compare to determine if the expressions are equal or
4. Use measurement formulae (such unequal.
as area and perimeter) to calculate In this example: (3 + 4) × 2 = 14, and 3 + (4 × 2) = 11, so
and compare the quantities of two they would use the "≠" card.
objects to determine if they are
Justification Using Properties:
equal or unequal.
Learners use the property cards (commutative, associative,
and distributive) to explain why the expressions are equal
5. Add and subtract fractions with
or unequal. In this case, the distributive property applies to
unlike denominators by finding
explain why the expressions are unequal: one expression
equivalent fractions and
adds first, while the other multiplies first.
determining if the results of two
Example: Compare 0.75 + 0.25 and 1 and explain why
expressions are equal or unequal.
they are equal using a visual model like a number line.
Hands-On Exploration: Provide learners with individual
or group number lines, where they can physically move a
Product marker or counter from 0 to 0.75 and then add 0.25,
landing on 1. This tactile experience supports visual and
Multiple Representations: kinesthetic learners.
In addition to the number line, you can use fraction
strips or pie charts (where 0.75 and 0.25 make up one Multiple Representations:
full part) to show visually why the sum is 1. Invite
learners to choose the representation that helps them Model to learners how to compare fractions using both
understand best. methods: finding common denominators and using visual
Similar can be done for subtraction of decimals models. This helps cater to different learning styles. Let
learners choose their preferred method when solving
Conversation problems to increase engagement.
Error Analysis: Present learners with pre-worked
examples that contain errors in comparing fractions.
Have them identify and explain the mistake. For
example, if a problem shows that 2/5>3/4, learners
must explain why this comparison is incorrect using
either common denominators or a visual model.
209
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Conversation
Real-World Connections
Connect the task to real-life situations by allowing for
practical applications of area, such as measuring floors
for carpeting. Ask learners which room (the rectangular
or square one) would require more material based on
the area calculation.
Conversation
Justification Writing:
https://www.splashlearn.com/s/math-games/compare-
Have learners write a justification for their conclusion.
fractions-using-fraction-strips
After comparing the sums, they should explain
whether the sums are equal or unequal and why. For
example: “The sum 1/2+1/4=3/4 which is less than 1,
while 2/3+1/3=1. Therefore, the sums are unequal.”
210
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/comparing-fractions/
https://www.mashupmath.com/fraction-strips-printable-
and-virtual
Example: Calculate the area of a rectangle with
dimensions 9 m x 4 m and compare it to the area of a
square with dimensions 6 m. Determine if the areas are
equal and justify the answer.
Grid Paper/Tile Models: Give learners grid paper or
manipulatives like square tiles to represent the dimensions
of both the rectangle and the square. Learners can arrange
the tiles to visualize the area of the 9 m x 4 m rectangle (9
rows of 4 tiles) and the 6 m x 6 m square (6 rows of 6
tiles). They can then count and compare the total number
of tiles.
211
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-662-62689-
4_11
Digital Tools: Use interactive digital tools like virtual
geoboards or area models, where learners can draw and
compare the areas by adjusting dimensions and seeing the
impact on the area.
Fraction Circles: Use fraction circles where each part
represents a fraction of the whole. For example, divide one
circle into two halves and another into quarters to
represent 1/2+1/4. Another circle can be divided into
thirds to show 2/3+1/3.The learners will observe that
both sums fill an entire circle, indicating equality.
212
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cmLiNDgdChE
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome
1. Using Measurement Formulae
Learners use common measurement formulae (e.g., area and perimeter of rectangles, squares, triangles) to determine if two measurements are equal or unequal.
• Example: Compare the area of a rectangle (length = 8 m, width = 5 m) with a square (side = 6 m).
o Rectangle Area: A=l×w=8×5=40 m2
o Square Area: A=s2=62=36 m2
o Since 40 m2≠36 m2.
2. Arithmetic Expressions with Whole Numbers
Learners use the four operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division) to compare whole number quantities.
Example: Determine whether 8×5 is equal to 10×4.
o 8×5=40
o 10×4=40
o The quantities are equal because both expressions result in 40.
3. Addition and Subtraction of Decimals
Learners learn to add and subtract decimals to determine equality or inequality.
Example: Compare 5.6−2.3 and 3.1
5.6−2.3=3.3, and since 3.3≠3.1, the quantities are unequal.
213
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
4. Equivalence and Comparison of Fractions
Learners compare fractions by finding common denominators or using visual fraction models.
• Example: Compare 3/4and 5/6by finding a common denominator.
o Common denominator: 12
o 3/4=9/12, 5/6=10/12
o Since 912≠10/12, the fractions are unequal.
5. Arithmetic Expressions Involving Addition and Subtraction of Fractions
Learners apply arithmetic to add and subtract fractions to determine equality.
• Example: Compare 1/2+1/4 and 3/4.
o 1/2+1/4= 2/4+1/4=3/4
o Since both expressions equal 3/4, the quantities are equal.
6. Applying Properties of Operations
Learners apply properties of operations (commutative, associative, and distributive) to determine equality or inequality.
Example: Use the distributive property to determine if 3× (4+2) is equal to 3×4+3×2.
o 3×(4+2)=3×6=18
o 3×4+3×2=12+6=18
o Since both sides equal 18, the expressions are equal.
Strategies for Explaining Equality or Inequality
• Use models and diagrams: Visual models, like fraction bars or number lines, help learners concretely compare quantities.
• Verbal explanations: Encourage learners to explain their thinking step by step, focusing on how they used operations or properties to determine equality.
• Use technology: Tools like calculators or math apps can assist in checking equality when working with complex calculations.
Additional Resources and Materials
Whiteboard, markers, manipulatives (such as counters or blocks), worksheet with sample expressions
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Science: Measurement and Data
Activity: Calculate area and perimeter of models in science to understand dimensions and capacity.
Art: Geometry and Patterns
Activity: Create geometric designs or tessellations, calculating areas and perimeters to fit shapes into a mural.
Social Studies: Data Representation
Activity: Analyse and compare demographic data using fractions and decimals, creating graphs for income distribution.
214
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Language Arts: Mathematical Storytelling
Activity: Write stories or word problems involving measurements, integrating narrative with math concepts.
Physical Education: Measuring Distances
Activity: Measure distances for tracks or sports fields, calculating total distances run using fractions and decimals.
Technology: Data Collection and Analysis
Activity: Use spreadsheets to organize and analyse measurement data, creating graphs for visual comparison.
215
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: P 2.3. Variables and Relationships - Writing Expressions and Equations
Grade Level Expectation:
• Create story problems involving open sentences in all four operations and whole numbers with explanation of what a variable is and how it is used in a given
expression or equation.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Product
Manipulatives and Hands-On Activities
● Equation Balance Scales:
Knowledge Learner Journals
Provide learners with a physical balance scales to
● Ask learners to maintain a math journal where they
demonstrate the concept of variables and balancing
1. Explain what a variable is and its usage explain in their own words what a variable is and
equations.
in a given expression or equation. how it is used in an expression or equation.
Learners can place weights representing numbers and
● Periodically review these journals to assess
variables on each side of the scale to visualize how to
Skills understanding and provide feedback.
solve for the unknown variable.
Explain to learners that in an equation, both sides must
2. Create story problems involving open
balance, just like a scale. When one side changes, the
sentences (equations with variables) in
other side must also change to keep the balance.
all four operations (addition,
Setting Up the Equation:
subtraction, multiplication, and
Write a simple equation on the board, such as: x+3=7
division) using whole numbers.
Step-by-Step Problem Design:
3. Solve for the unknown variable in the
Break down the process of creating a story problem into clear steps.
open sentences derived from story
Use a template or guide such as:
problems using appropriate strategies
1. Identify a real-life scenario.
2. Decide on the quantities involved.
3. Choose the appropriate operation
Product
(addition, subtraction, multiplication,
Self-Assessment and Reflection:
division).
● Encourage learners to assess their own story
4. Formulate an open sentence (equation)
problems and reflect on their problem-solving
to represent the problem.
process.
5. Write a clear and complete story
● Provide a self-assessment checklist for learners to
problem.
review their own work.
216
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Ask learners to reflect on what worked well and Example: Sarah has some stickers in her collection. After
what could be improved in their problem creation. she buys 15 more stickers, she now has a total of 42
Example Self-Assessment Checklist: stickers. How many stickers did Sarah originally have?
Checklist Items:
a. Did I clearly describe the scenario? Open Sentence: x+15=42
b. Did I choose the correct operation for the
problem?
Where x represents the number of stickers Sarah
c. Is the equation I created correct and
originally had.
solvable?
d. Did I use the variable effectively?
Guided Practice with Scaffolding
● Provide guided practice with step-by-step
instructions to help learners learn how to solve
Product
for variables.
Summative Assessments
● Offer scaffolded worksheets with step-by-step
Performance Tasks: Create real-life scenarios where
problems.
learners need to solve for an unknown variable. For example,
● Provide a clear strategy for isolating the variable
calculating the missing side length of a rectangle given the perimeter or
(e.g., inverse operations).
area.
Example of Worksheet Step-by-Step:
Quizzes and Tests: Include a mix of multiple-choice, short
Problem: x−4=10
answer, and extended response questions that require
● Steps:
learners to solve for unknowns in different contexts.
1. Identify the operation being performed
Project-Based Assessments: Have learners work on a
(subtraction).
project where they need to apply their knowledge of solving
2. Use the inverse operation (addition) to
for unknowns. For example, designing a budget for a school event
isolate the variable.
with unknown costs for certain items.
Solve: x=10+4
Additional Resources and Materials
Resources
Worksheets:
Education.com: Story problem worksheets with open sentences for all operations.
Game-based story problems for equation formulation.
217
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Mathway: Input word problems to see equations.
Books:
Math Story Problems by William L. Smith: Varied story problems for creating open sentences.
Word Problems Made Easy by Terry Stickels: Strategies for solving story problems.
Materials
Prompts: Create real-world scenario prompts for equation formulation.
Graphic Organizers:
Equation Framework: Template for breaking down word problems.
Variable Concept Map: Definitions and examples of variables.
Manipulatives: Use counters or blocks for visualizing story problems.
Real-World Scenarios: Gather scenarios relating variables to learners' experiences.
Assessment Tools
Quizzes: Include story problems requiring open sentences.
Rubrics: Assess understanding of variables in expressions.
Classroom Activities
Story Problem Creation: Learners create and exchange story problems.
Classroom Discussion: Identify variables in various contexts to represent unknown quantities.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Math & Language Arts:
Variable Explanation: Have learners narrate what a variable is through stories or poems.
Story Problems: Create narrative-based math problems to blend storytelling with mathematical reasoning.
Math & Science:
Real-World Applications: Use variables in science experiments (e.g., temperature changes) to illustrate quantities.
Data Analysis: Collect data and create equations to describe scientific findings.
Math & Social Studies:
Economic Concepts: Develop story problems on budgeting or expenses involving variables.
Historical Events: Model historical data (e.g., population) with equations to analyse trends.
218
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Math & Art:
Graphing and Visualization: Illustrate equations with graphs or geometric designs.
Pattern Recognition: Identify patterns in art that can be expressed with variables.
Math & Physical Education:
Sports Statistics: Use sports data to create variable-based story problems (e.g., points scored).
Game Strategies: Discuss scoring strategies in games, employing variables to represent unknown scores.
These integrations help deepen learners’ understanding of variables while enhancing skills across disciplines.
219
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: P 3.1. Modelling Quantitative Relationships and Analysing Change – Modelling Patterns and Relationships with Equations and
Functions
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Write and evaluate numeric expressions involving whole-number exponents; Apply the properties of operations to generate equivalent expressions
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Conversation/ Product Differentiated Instruction
Visual Learners: Use visual aids such as charts or diagrams to
Knowledge Writing Expressions with Exponents show what "squared" and "cubed" mean.
1. Write numeric expressions involving Description: Provide learners with verbal descriptions Example: Show a chart with 52 and 43 along with the expanded
whole-number exponents. and ask them to write corresponding expressions with form (5×5 and 4×4×4).
2. Evaluate numeric expressions exponents.
involving whole-number exponents. Example Prompt: Write an expression for "5 squared
plus 4 cubed."
Skills Expected Expression: 52+43
3. Apply properties of operations
(commutative, associative, and Product
distributive) to generate equivalent
expressions. Performance Tasks: Create tasks where learners must
apply their knowledge Expressions with Exponents in
real-world contexts.
https://planbee.com/blogs/news/square-numbers
Task: Collecting Stamps
Scenario: You start with 5 stamps and collect twice as
many stamps each month. Write and evaluate the
expression to find the number of stamps you have after 4
months.
• Expression: 5×24
• Solution:
o Calculate 24=16
o Multiply by 5: 5×16=80
Instructions for Completing Tasks:
Read the Scenario: Carefully read each real-world
context scenario.
220
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Use manipulative to represent and solve the scenario.
Write the Expression: Write the appropriate
mathematical expression using exponents to model the
scenario.
Evaluate the Expression: Calculate the value of the
expression step-by-step. Compare answer with concrete
representation
Check Your Work: Ensure that each step is correct and
the final answer makes sense in the context of the
problem.
Assessment Criteria:
Correct Expression: Did the learner write the correct
mathematical expression to model the scenario?
Accurate Calculation: Did the learner accurately https://thirdspacelearning.com/us/blog/what-are-cube-
calculate the value of the expression? numbers/
Logical Reasoning: Did the learner demonstrate logical
reasoning and understanding of the problem context? Auditory Learners: Explain the concepts out loud, emphasizing
Clear Explanation: Did the learner clearly explain each the terminology and steps.
step of their solution process? Example: "Five squared means five multiplied by itself, and
four cubed means four multiplied by itself three times."
Product
Choice Boards
Description: Provide a choice board with different
activities related to the properties of operations. Learners
can choose the activities they feel most comfortable with.
Example:
Choice Board Options:
Option 1: Create a poster explaining the commutative
property. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iTUxCiBpOZc
Option 2: Solve a series of problems using the associative
property. Kinesthetic Learners: Use manipulatives like blocks or
Option 3: Write a story problem that can be solved using counters to represent the exponents physically.
the distributive property.
221
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Example: Give learners 5 blocks and have them create a square,
then give them 4 blocks to create a cube.
Think-Pair-Share (Example):
Scenario: Imagine a colony of bacteria doubles in size every
hour. If there are initially 10 bacteria, write an expression to
show the number of bacteria after 4 hours.
Think: Learners consider the scenario and start formulating an
expression.
Pair: Learners collaborate, discussing their ideas and building on
each other's understanding.
Share: Pairs share their expressions and reasoning with the class.
Teacher facilitates discussion, highlighting different approaches
(e.g., starting with 10 and multiplying by 2 four times, using 10 x
24).
Apply properties of operations (commutative, associative, and
distributive) to generate equivalent expressions.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_3Eio-hjrGs
Scaffolded Instruction
Description: Break down learning into manageable chunks and
provide support at each step.
Example:
Start with basic examples of each property, such as 2+3=3+2
(commutative), then gradually increase the complexity, moving
towards expressions like 3(2+4) =3×2+3×4 =3×2+3×4
( distributive).
222
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Materials
1. Manipulatives
o Base 10 Blocks: Use these to visualize multiplication and exponents (e.g., showing 10210^2102 as a 10x10 square).
o Expression Cards: Create cards with different expressions for learners to sort and compare to find equivalent expressions.
2. Graphic Organizers
o Exponent Charts: Provide learners with charts that display bases and their exponents to help visualize powers of numbers.
o Properties of Operations Posters: Create posters that outline the commutative, associative, and distributive properties for reference during activities.
3. Real-World Application Materials
o Data Sets: Provide data on population growth, financial investments, or physical phenomena that require learners to use exponents and operations to analyse.
o Formulas and Equations: Handouts with various real-world formulas (e.g., area, volume, interest) that learners can use to practice writing and evaluating
expressions.
4. Assessment Tools
o Quizzes and Tests: Create assessments focusing on writing and evaluating expressions with exponents and applying properties of operations.
o Rubrics: Develop rubrics to evaluate learners' understanding and ability to create equivalent expressions and solve problems.
5. Books and Literature
o Math Textbooks: Utilize Grade 6 math textbooks that cover exponents and properties of operations.
o Math Puzzles and Brain Teasers: Include puzzles that involve exponent rules and equivalent expressions for critical thinking practice.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Properties of Operations:
1. Identity Property:
o a+0=a
o a−0=a
o a×1=a
o a÷1=a
2. Commutative Property:
o a+b=b+a
o a×b=b×a
3. Associative Property:
o (a+b)+c=a+(b+c)
o (a×b)×c=a×(b×c)
4. Distributive Property:
223
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
o a×(b+c)=(a×b)+(a×c)
Order of Operations:
• Perform calculations in brackets first, then multiplication and division (left to right), followed by addition and subtraction (left to right).
Problem-Solving Strategies:
• Multi-step problems may include whole numbers, decimals, fractions, ratios, rates, and percentages. There can be multiple solutions.
• Identify actions, quantities, knowns, and unknowns in a problem.
• Represent actions with diagrams and choose operations to write equations.
• Solve using diagrams or equations.
• Multi-step problems often have an ultimate question (final result) and a hidden question (intermediate step).
Operations and Situations:
• Actions in a situation guide the operation:
o Changing: Use addition/subtraction.
o Equal Groups/Comparisons: Use multiplication/division.
Using equations to represent situations clarifies the structure based on known and unknown values, reinforcing problem-solving skills across various mathematical concepts.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
• Science: Energy and Exponents
Concept: Explore different forms of energy (e.g., potential and kinetic energy).
• Social Studies: Population Growth Models
Concept: Understand how populations grow using exponential models.
• Environmental Science: Carbon Footprint
Concept: Understand the impact of different activities on carbon emissions.
• Economics: Interest Rates
Concept: Explore how interest compounds over time.
• History: Ancient Civilizations and Architecture
Concept: Study the architecture of ancient civilizations and their use of geometric shapes.
224
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
E ssential Learning Outcome 3.2: Modelling Quantitative Relationships and Analysing Change – Representing Functions and Relationships
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Create and use tables and graphs to determine a number pattern;
• Evaluate expressions at specific values of their variables.
• Include expressions that arise from formulae used in real-world problems.
• Perform arithmetic operations, including those involving whole-number exponents, in the conventional order when there are no parentheses to specify a
particular order (Order of Operations)
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Product Real-World Connections
Project-Based Assessments Description: Make learning relevant by connecting it to real life.
Skills Description: Use projects to integrate skills and assess Example:
1. Collect and organize data into understanding Have learners track their own screen time for a week, create a table.
tables to identify number Bar Graph
patterns The bar graph visually represents the screen time for each
day of the week, with each bar's height corresponding to
2. Create graphs (bar graphs, line the number of minutes spent on screen.
graphs) to identify and interpret Line Graph
number patterns. The line graph shows the trend in screen time over the
week, with points connected by lines to indicate changes
3. Analyse patterns in tables and from day to day.
graphs to make predictions
about future values.
4. Apply the order of operations
in complex expressions
involving multiple operations
https://x.com/superkidsck/status/990975208222789632
and exponents.
Day Screen Time (minutes)
Monday 120
Tuesday 90
Wednesday 110
225
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Knowledge Thursday 130
5. Substitute specific values for Friday 95
variables in algebraic Saturday 140
expressions and evaluate the Sunday 150
resulting expressions.
Pattern Identification Through Visuals: Use color-coding or
6. Interpret and evaluate shapes to highlight trends in data sets (e.g., increasing, decreasing,
expressions that arise from real- or steady patterns).
world problems, such as those For visual learners: Present data using manipulatives (blocks,
involving distance, time, and counters) to represent values before transitioning to graphs.
rate.
Product
Project-Based Assessment: Have learners collect data
Value
from a real-life context (e.g., tracking the growth of a
plant) and create a graph. They analyse the pattern, make
7. Create real life situations that
predictions, and explain their reasoning.
can be written as expressions.
Support diverse needs: Invite learners to choose topics
of personal interest and present their work in various
formats (written, oral, digital).
4 - 1 - Needs
3 - 2 -
Criteria Excelle Improve
Good Satisfactory
nt ment https://mathisvisual.com/growing-geometric-patterns/
Mostly
Accurate Incomplete Inaccurate Real-World Connections:
Data accurate
and or or Relate algebraic expressions to real-life scenarios (e.g., calculating
Collectio with
consiste inconsistent incomplet total costs based on the number of items bought). This helps
n minor learners see the relevance of math in everyday life, which can
nt data. data. e data.
issues. increase engagement.
Scenario:
Clear,
Good Graph Imagine you are organizing a party, and you need to buy pizzas.
accurate, Graph is
Graph graph, unclear or Each pizza costs $12. You don’t know how many pizzas you need
well- inaccurate
yet, but you know you will figure it out based on the number of
Creation but missing key
labelled or unclear. guests.
some info.
graph.
226
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
labels Let the number of pizzas be represented by p. The total cost of
the pizzas can be represented by the algebraic expression:
missing.
Total Cost=12p
Identifie Pattern Example Problem:
Pattern s pattern and Limited or If you need 5 pizzas, how much will the total cost be?
No clear
& and predicti unclear Substitute p=5p into the expression: 12(5)=60
pattern or
Predictio logical on pattern/predi
prediction. Concrete Examples and Real-Life Scenarios:
n predictio mostly ction.
Use relatable scenarios, such as planning a family trip or
n. correct.
participating in a school event, to make the concepts of distance,
Strong, Reasona time, and rate relevant. This can help engage learners and build
Explanation No clear
context.
Reasoni clear ble but
is unclear or explanatio
ng explanati lacks
brief. n. Scenario:
on. detail.
Imagine you are planning a trip to visit a friend who lives 150
Engagin miles away. You need to figure out how long it will take you to
Organiz
g and Somewhat Disorganiz get there, depending on your speed.
Presenta ed, with
well- incomplete or ed or hard
tion minor Variables:
organize unclear. to follow.
gaps. • Let d represent the distance (in miles).
d.
• Let r represent the rate or speed (in miles per hour).
• Let t represent the time (in hours).
Conversation
Relationship:
Open-Ended Questions:
The formula to find the time based on distance and rate is:
Include questions that allow for multiple ways of solving
t=d/r
the problem, enabling learners to use strategies that suit
their individual strengths. For example, “How would you solve
Example Problem:
this expression using substitution? Explain your steps.”
If you drive at a speed of 50 miles per hour, how long will it
take to reach your friend's house?
Product
Substitute d=150 miles and r=50 miles/hour into the formula:
Real-World Problem Solving:
t=150/50
Create assessments that require learners to solve real-life
Evaluate:
problems involving distance, time, and rate. For example,
t=3
227
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
“How long will it take to travel 200 miles at a speed of 60 miles Collaborative Learning:
per hour?” Encourage group work where learners can discuss and solve
problems together. This promotes peer teaching and allows
Product learners to learn from one another.
Reflection and Self-Assessment:
Encourage learners to reflect on their learning process.
Have them write about what strategies helped them
understand the order of operations or areas where they
still need improvement.
https://www.math.net/pemdas
https://study.com/skill/learn/using-the-order-of-operations-
without-parentheses-explanation.html
Additional Resources and Materials
Graph paper
Rulers
Markers or coloured pencils
Data collection sheets
A variety of data sources (e.g., surveys, environmental data, sports statistics)
228
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Patterns can be extended because they are repetitive by nature.
Pattern rules are generalizations about a pattern, and they can be described in words.
Patterns can be extended in multiple directions, showing what comes next and what came before.
To make a near prediction about a pattern is to state or show what a pattern will look like just beyond the given representation of that pattern. The prediction can be
verified by extending that pattern.
To make a far prediction about a pattern is to state or show what a pattern will look like well beyond the given representation of that pattern. Often calculations are
needed to make an informed prediction that can be justified.
Identifying the missing elements in a pattern represented using a table of values may require determining the term number (x) or the term value (y).
Identifying the missing elements in a pattern represented on a graph may require determining the point (x, y) within the given representation or beyond it, in which case
the pattern will need to be extended.
The algebraic expression that represents a linear growing pattern is also referred to as the general term or the nth term. It can be used to solve for the term value or the
term number.
Note
Determining a point within the graphical representation of a pattern is called interpolating.
Determining a point beyond the graphical representation of a pattern is called extrapolating.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
1. Mathematics and Science:
o Data Collection: Collect environmental data (e.g., temperature) to create graphs, analysing trends in weather or plant growth.
o Graphing Experiments: Use scientific experiments to create line or bar graphs, illustrating mathematical modelling in science.
2. Mathematics and Art:
o Artistic Graphs: Design visually appealing graphs using colours and shapes to represent data accurately.
o Patterns in Art: Explore mathematical patterns (fractals, symmetry) in art, encouraging learners to create projects that illustrate these concepts.
3. Mathematics and Social Studies:
o Census Data Analysis: Analyse demographic data, creating graphs to visualize and predict trends.
o Economic Trends: Model economic scenarios with algebraic expressions based on real-world data (e.g., inflation, stock market).
4. Mathematics and Physical Education:
o Fitness Tracking: Track physical activities and graph results, helping set fitness goals through data analysis.
o Sports Statistics: Analyse and represent sports statistics in tables and graphs, informing strategies based on mathematical insights.
5. Mathematics and Language Arts:
o Story Problems: Write and solve story problems based on real-life scenarios, enhancing comprehension and critical thinking.
o Mathematical Journals: Maintain journals to describe mathematical concepts, reflecting on their relevance to everyday life.
These integrations help learners connect math with various contexts, enhancing understanding and engagement.
229
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
E ssential Learning Outcome: P3.3. Modelling Quantitative Relationships and Analysing Change – Solving Problems with Functions and Relationships
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Use variables to represent two quantities in a real-world problem that change in relationship to one another; write an equation to express one quantity, thought of as
the dependent variable, in terms of the other quantity, thought of as the independent variable.
• Analyse the relationship between the dependent and independent variables using graphs and tables and relate these to the equation.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Conversation
Peer Assessment with Feedback
Knowledge Strategy: Incorporate peer assessment where learners evaluate
each other's identification of independent and dependent
1. Identify and define independent and variables in provided scenarios, using a structured rubric.
dependent variables in real-world E.g. Hours Worked and Earnings
problems. Scenario: A learner explains that the independent variable is
the number of hours worked and the dependent variable is the
2. Use variables to represent two amount of money earned.
quantities that change in relation to Peer Assessment: Learners swap their explanations and use a
one another rubric with space for comments. The rubric assesses if the
relationship between the variables is clearly explained.
3. Observe patterns in tables that Rubric Criteria:
show how changes in the • Does the learner identify hours worked as the https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dsKWcwUgalI
independent variable affect the independent variable? Role Play
dependent variable. • Is the amount of money earned identified as the Strategy: Engage learners in role-playing activities where
dependent variable? they act out real-world scenarios, identifying and explaining
Skills • Does the explanation make it clear how one variable the independent and dependent variables
affects the other?
E.g., Ticket Sales (Price and Number of Tickets Sold)
4. Plot the values from the table on a Guided Feedback: Description: Learners set up a role-playing activity where
coordinate grid to create a graph Sentence Frame: “You did a great job identifying the hours one learner plays the seller, and others are buyers. The
that shows the relationship between worked as the independent variable. To improve, you could add seller determines the total revenue based on the number of
the independent and dependent a sentence explaining how more hours lead to more money tickets sold and the price of each ticket.
variables. earned.” Independent Variable: Number of tickets sold.
230
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Constructive Feedback: “I like how you explained the hours Dependent Variable: Total revenue (price × number of
5. Analyse graphs to determine the and money. Maybe you can explain how the money changes tickets).
nature of the relationship (e.g. when the hours change, like by giving an example.” Sample Activity:
increasing or decreasing). • The "seller" sets a price for tickets (e.g., $5 per
ticket).
Values Product • The "buyers" come to purchase different numbers
Multiple Representation of Answers of tickets (e.g., 2 tickets, 4 tickets, 10 tickets).
6. Create stories to explain the Invite learners to show their understanding in different ways. • After each transaction, the seller calculates the total
patterns in different graphs. They could write an algebraic equation, draw a graph, or explain revenue (e.g., $5 × 4 tickets = $20).
the relationship in words. This helps accommodate learners • Learners complete a table and graph the number
who may struggle with formal notation but still grasp the of tickets sold versus the total revenue generated.
concepts. Real-World Context
Use relatable, real-life examples. For instance:
Product "As you ride your bike, the distance you travel increases
Real-World Problem-Solving with time. If x represents the time in minutes, and y
• Provide learners with word problems based on the represents the distance in kilometres, how can you
table. For example: "If you bike for 5 minutes, how represent this relationship using variables?"
far will you have travelled? How about for 7 minutes?" Example: If a bike travels at a constant speed, the
They can use the table as a reference to solve these relationship between the time and distance can be
problems. expressed as:
• Encourage learners to create their own word problems y=kx
and swap with a partner to solve, supporting creativity Where:
and comprehension. • Y represents the distance travelled in kilometres.
• X represents the time in minutes.
• K represents the constant speed of the bike in
kilometres per minute (rate).
For example, if the bike is traveling at 0.5 kilometres per
minute, the equation would be:
y=0.5x
231
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Invite learners to work in pairs or groups to discuss various
scenarios (e.g., savings over time, steps taken over time).
Hands-On Activities
Movement-Based Learning: Create a physical model by
having learners physically move to represent time and
distance. For example, set up stations or marks on the
floor where each step forward represents 1 minute of time
and half a kilometre of distance. As learners walk through
the "time", they can observe how the distance increases.
Here's the information in table form showing the key
points on the graph for y=0.5x:
232
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Distance (y) in
Time (x) in minutes
kilometres
0 0
2 1
4 2
6 3
8 4
10 5
This table shows that for every 2 minutes, the distance
i ncreases by 1 kilometre, following the equation y=0.5x
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Using Variables to Represent Relationships in Grenadian Cuisine
Scenario: A Grenadian street vendor is selling freshly squeezed tamarind juice. The cost of the juice depends on the number of glasses sold.
Problem: How can we represent the relationship between the number of glasses sold and the total cost of the juice?
Solution:
Variables:
x: The number of glasses of juice sold
y: The total cost of the juice
Equation:
Assuming the vendor charges a fixed price per glass, we can represent the relationship using a linear equation:
y = mx + b
where:
m is the price per glass (slope)
b is the fixed cost (y-intercept)
Example:
If the vendor charges $2 per glass and has a fixed cost of $50 for supplies, the equation would be:
y = 2x + 50
Analysis:
Graph: Plotting the equation on a graph would show a straight line with a slope of 2 (price per glass) and a y-intercept of 50 (fixed cost).
Table: A table can be used to represent the relationship between x and y for different numbers of glasses sold.
233
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Number of Glasses (x) Total Cost (y)
0 50
10 70
20 90
30 110
Conclusion:
The equation y = 2x + 50 represents the relationship between the number of glasses sold and the total cost of the juice.
The graph and table provide visual and numerical representations of this relationship.
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Exploring Relationships Between Quantities
Subject Integration: Math, Science, and Art
1. Real-World Problem
Scenario: Learners can explore the relationship between the amount of water a plant receives and its growth.
• Independent Variable: Amount of water (in litres) given to the plant.
• Dependent Variable: Height of the plant (in centimetres).
2. Write an Equation
Learners will gather data by watering a plant with different amounts of water (e.g., 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2 litres) and measuring the height of the plant after a week.
Example Data:
Water (litres) Height (cm)
0 10
0.5 15
1 20
1.5 25
2 30
Equation: Learners can express the relationship as a linear equation. For instance, if the relationship appears to be linear, they can write:
H=5W+10
Where:
• H is the height of the plant (dependent variable).
• W is the amount of water (independent variable).
• The slope (5) represents the growth in height per litre of water.
3. Analyse the Relationship
234
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
a. Graphing the Relationship
• Learners can create a graph with water on the x-axis and plant height on the y-axis.
• Each point represents a pair of values from their table.
• Encourage learners to draw the line of best fit, which represents the equation.
b. Using Tables
• Learners can extend their table by predicting heights for additional water amounts based on the equation (e.g., 2.5 litres).
Water (litres) Height (cm)
0 10
0.5 15
1 20
1.5 25
2 30
2.5 35
4. Relating to the Equation
• Discuss how the slope of the line indicates how much the height increases with each additional litre of water.
• Have learners analyse what the y-intercept (10) represents in the context of the problem (the height of the plant when no water is given).
5. Cross-Disciplinary Connections
• Science: Explore the biology of plant growth and the role of water in photosynthesis. Discuss factors that might affect growth other than water, such as sunlight and
soil quality.
• Art: Learners can create a visual representation of their findings through drawings or digital graphics showing the plant’s growth stages with varying water amounts.
235
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Geometric Thinking
Introduction to Strand: Geometric thinking describes a learner’s understanding of the properties of geometric shapes and spatial relationships.
Geometric thinking is essential to how learners make sense of shapes and spatial relationships (where an object is in relation to another). This kind of
reasoning requires learners to analyse geometric concepts and formulate arguments based on their observations. Learners engage in deductive reasoning,
problem solving and critical thinking while enhancing their ability to conceptualise and utilise geometric shapes and relationships in different ways.
Geometric thinking is foundational to advancement in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM), in school and also in STEM careers.
Essential Learning Outcome: G1.1. Explore and Analyse Geometric Shapes and Relationships - Developing Spatial Sense
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Use language and gestures that describe shape, objects, and space orally and in writing
• Describe a picture or object in real world contexts or an object undergoing a transformation;
• Draw a picture or build a model from a description and vice versa (orthographic drawing of 3D objects); from a picture or description and vice
versa (3D objects from orthographic drawing);
• Make predictions based on spatial reasoning (orthographic drawings of 3D objects, 3D objects from orthographic drawings and result of
combining transformations).
• Create lists of the geometric properties of various types of quadrilaterals, including the properties of the diagonals, rotational symmetry, and line
symmetry.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Entrance Slip/Conversation: To evaluate To help learners grasp the distinguishing properties of various
learners' conceptualisation of geometric quadrilaterals, have them sort and analyse a diverse collection
Knowledge properties.(Outcomes 1,2) of quadrilaterals, including squares, rectangles, parallelograms,
rhombuses, kites, darts, and both concave and convex regular
1. Identify and categorize various Invite learners to match the quadrilateral to and irregular quadrilaterals. As they categorize these shapes,
types of quadrilaterals (e.g., the properties that best describe it. Discuss guide them in recognizing attributes that differentiate one class
squares, rectangles, rhombuses, results after completion. of shapes from another, such as angles, side lengths, diagonal
parallelograms, trapezoids, and properties, line symmetry, and rotational symmetry. They
236
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
quadrilaterals) based on their should document and articulate various defining features, for
characteristics. example, stating, “All of these shapes are squares because they
possess four equal sides, four right angles, and four lines of
2. Compile comprehensive lists of symmetry.”
geometric properties for each type To deepen their understanding and create property lists that
of quadrilateral, including the define categories, provide groups of learners with pre-sorted
number of sides and angles, Lengths of sets of quadrilaterals—squares, rectangles, parallelograms,
opposite sides, Measures of interior rhombuses, kites, darts, and trapezoids. Assign a label to each
angles, and Relationships between sides group (e.g., “These are all parallelograms”), and have them
and angles) compile detailed property lists that describe the characteristics
of each class (e.g., “What defines a parallelogram?”).
3. Examine the properties of
diagonals in different To enhance their recognition of relationships among different
quadrilaterals, detailing:(The number quadrilateral categories, have learners compare their property
of diagonals, Lengths and relationships lists for various shapes and pinpoint common characteristics:
of diagonals, The intersection properties
of diagonals (e.g., whether they bisect For squares and rectangles
each other) For squares, rectangles, and parallelograms
For squares, rhombuses, parallelograms, and kites
4. Investigate the concepts of Learners should utilize these shared properties to articulate
rotational symmetry and line why all squares qualify as rectangles, and all rectangles are
symmetry in quadrilaterals, noting: parallelograms. They should also differentiate the properties
Retrieved from:
The order of rotational symmetry (if that set squares apart from rectangles, and rectangles apart
https://th.bing.com/th/id/OIP.6vNHlm8DL
applicable) from parallelograms (e.g., while all squares are rectangles, not
dsQgY6DxZDFUQAAAA?rs=1&pid=ImgD
all rectangles are squares; similarly, all rectangles are
etMain
5. State the axes of symmetry for parallelograms, but not all parallelograms are rectangles).
each type of quadrilateral
Instruct learners to construct a structure using interlocking
Checklist
6. Compare and contrast the cubes, guided by its top, front, and side views. Once they have
Learners are able to match quadrilaterals to
geometric properties of various built their models, have them compare their structures with
their properties accurately
quadrilaterals, highlighting those of their peers who received the same instructions and
yes / no
similarities and differences in their engage in discussions about any discrepancies. As they examine
properties, particularly in terms of the different constructions and compare them to the provided
diagonals and symmetry. drawings, assist them in identifying and resolving potential
237
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
7. Create visual representations (e.g., Observation: To evaluate how learners mistakes. Encourage them to assess whether all, some, or none
drawings, diagrams, or models) of visualize shapes from different of the structures meet the given criteria and articulate their
quadrilaterals to illustrate different perspectives. reasoning.
properties and geometric
relationships. Give learners an orthographic shape and
various perspectives. Have them draw top,
8. Interpret the top, front, and side front and side view of the shape.
views of three-dimensional
objects.
9. Visualize and explain how a three-
dimensional shape corresponds to
its two-dimensional views.
10. Compare 3D constructed models
to identify similarities and
differences in interpretation.
Retrieved by
Skills https://cdn.britannica.com/73/131973-050- To promote multiple valid solutions and enhance the
troubleshooting and reasoning process, give learners only the
748BD531/drawing-projections-isometric-
projection.jpg top and front views of a structure. Alternatively, present them
11. Construct three-dimensional with one view at a time, allowing each new perspective to help
models using materials such as them progressively refine their construction.
Checklist
interlocking cubes or other Learners are able to accurately represent the
manipulatives based on provided side, top and front view of the shape.
views.
12. Analyse discrepancies between yes / no
their models and the provided
views to troubleshoot and explain
any errors in construction.
Self-Assessment /Product-to assess
learners; ability to draw 3d objects
238
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Values Teacher provides learners with 3D objects e.g.
cube) and ask them to draw the front, top, and
13. Communicate the properties of side views.
quadrilaterals in creative ways.
14. Articulate the process of
constructing the three-dimensional
objects, using appropriate
geometric vocabulary.
Retrieved from
https://cdn4.vectorstock.com/i/1000x1000/7
6/58/cubes-with-shadows-in-perspective-
vector-10937658.jpg
Checklist
I can draw a simple 3d object
yes/no
I can draw the 3D object form at least 2
perspectives
yes/no
239
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Group Work /Product - to design a unique
orthographic drawing or create a 3D
model from an orthographic drawing
(outcomes 6,8,9)
In small groups learners will design/draw or
create a 3D model from interlocking cubes
and isometric dot paper. Activity will be done
over a week period.
If drawn, represent shape from 3 perspectives
(front, side, top)
Retrieved from
https://i.pinimg.com/originals/7c/cf/33/7cc
f332c9ba8fedc34a0f1e064cca277.jpg
Checklist
Learners can design/create shape
incorporating 3D principles
240
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
yes/no
Learner represents model from at least 3
perspectives
yes/no
Additional Resources and Materials
Seeing All Sides: Orthographic Drawing :https://www.teachengineering.org/activities/view/cub_spatviz_lesson01_activity2
Making Connections Between Orthographic Drawings and 3-D Shapes
https://makinginmath.wordpress.com/2019/06/17/making-connections-between-orthographic-drawings-3d-shapes/
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
241
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
242
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Shapes and Objects
Polygon: A flat shape with straight sides. Examples include triangles, quadrilaterals, pentagons, hexagons, etc.
Regular Polygon: A polygon with all sides and angles equal.
Irregular Polygon: A polygon with sides and/or angles of different lengths and sizes.
Vertex (Vertices): The point where two or more edges meet.
Edge: The line segment between two vertices.
Face: A flat surface on a 3D shape.
Prism: A solid object with two identical ends and flat sides.
Pyramid: A solid object with a polygonal base and triangular faces that meet at a point (apex).
243
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
• Mathematics and Art: Use symmetry to create designs like mandalas, exploring cultural patterns and spatial awareness.
• Mathematics and History: Study the role of geometry in ancient architecture and art, appreciating its historical applications.
• Mathematics Engineering: Build models using quadrilateral shapes to learn about structural stability in real-world construction.
• Mathematics and Language Arts: Develop a geometry glossary, practicing technical vocabulary and presentation skills.
• Mathematics and technology: Use 3D modelling tools to visualize and manipulate quadrilaterals, enhancing spatial reasoning.
• Mathematics and Science: Research symmetry in nature (e.g., butterfly wings, honeycombs) to connect geometry with biology.
• Mathematics and Physical Education: Form shapes with body movement to understand symmetry and rotation kinaesthetically.
• Mathematics and Geography: Apply quadrilateral concepts in map reading and grid-based mapping for spatial skills.
Each approach reinforces geometric concepts through hands-on, interdisciplinary learning.
244
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: 1.2. Explore and Analyse Geometric Shapes and Relationships - Sorting, patterning, and building with 2D & 3D Shapes
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Represent, construct and deconstruct 3D shapes and objects
• Represent and construct right, acute, obtuse, and reflex angles using a straightedge and protractor
• Sort and pattern with Angles.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to: Entrance Slip /Observation: to determine whether Discovery/independent learning
learners can sort objects based on the 3D shapes they (Outcome1)
Knowledge look like as well as name the shape they look like. Provide opportunity for learners to recognize 3D
(Outcome 1) shapes based on their attributes
1. Identify3d shapes and objects with 1. Sort objects according to 3D shapes.
further accuracy 2. Name the shapes Invites learners to identify and correctly match
3D shapes to their attributes
Skills
2. Construct 3D shapes with further
accuracy
3. Deconstruct 3D shapes with further
accuracy
4. Draw angles using straight edges and
protractors
5. Classify angles according to their size
Retrieved from https://encrypted-
tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcRkVaNuQro5Y
6. create patterns using angles MltIdM0HtfBnguYwoGG_8G9dfOXZXEyKYOidF4BP
EDkQoDsugl_kZ32xJk&usqp=CAU
Checklist
1. Learners are correctly able to sort objects Retrieved from
https://d1uvxqwmcz8fl1.cloudfront.net/tes/
● Yes resources/11445922/ce2f07cb-840b-4da8-
245
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Values ● Somewhat 9723-
● No cc8f199f3316/image?width=500&height=500
7. Create unique 3D shapes to depict real &version=1520432278179
life examples. 2. Learners can correctly name the 3D shapes that a group
of objects are examples of (note that some property may match more than
8. Design creative pieces (anchor charts, shape and some properties may not be listed)
booklets) to show different angles in ● Yes
objects. ● Somewhat
● No Guided discovery through critical thinking (
Outcomes 2 and 4 )
Peer Assessment/Product: To determine whether Provide opportunity for exploring the 2D shapes
learners can create 3D shapes which form the faces of 3D shapes.
Learners will be given a cut-out paper to represent faces
(triangles, rectangles, circles, squares etc), tape/ glue and Invite learners to determine the 3D shapes that
be asked to create 3D shapes. can be created using a given set of 2D shapes
Learners will then present their creations to their peers then complete the given table
who will identify the shapes.
Checklist
Retrieved from
https://d1uvxqwmcz8fl1.cloudfront.net/tes/resources/1
1666249/bbf1abd1-1024-4e9d-8402-
4a9b118f8ddd/image?width=500&height=500&version=
Retrieved from Google Images
1586379585350
Conversation: To determine whether learners are able
to deconstruct objects and discuss different
Guided Discovery / Deconstructing
arrangements for their faces. (outcomes 3 and 4)
Objects.(outcomes 3 and 4)
246
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be provided with a collection of 3D objects Provides learners with an opportunity to
(e.g. shoe boxes, pizza boxes, smarties candy box). deconstruct shapes in different ways.
Learners will be invited to choose one object. They will Invite learners to fill in information on ways
then trace around each of the faces then cut them out. given objects can be deconstructed
Learners will then lay out the shape so they can remake ( learners may be given manipulatives if
the object if it was folded. They will then compare the necessary)
nets of the shape.
Learners will discuss and answer the following questions
1. Can you open up your object in a different way and still
be able to put it back together to make the same object? Is
there another way? Is it the same?
2. If not, how is it different? Does it matter that it is
different?
3. Is there a number of different ways of putting the faces
together so that they could be re-folded to make the box?
Checklist
Retrieved from
Learners can correctly deconstruct 3D shapes and discuss
https://study.com/cimages/multimages/16/3ds
various arrangements
hapechart.png
● Yes
● Somewhat
Provide opportunities to identify and name
● No
different types of angles
Independent Learning(outcomes 5 and 6)
Have learners view the following video
Provide opportunities to identify angles in 2D shapes
Types of Angles (Acute, Obtuse, Right, Straight,
Reflex) | Math with Mr. J
Identify and name the types of angles that can be found in
given shapes
Present learners with various items that can be
found in the school/ classroom environment
and be asked to identify angles they can see
247
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from Google Images
Checklist
Learners are correctly able to identify and name angles
correctly Retrieved from Google Images
● Yes Discovery
● Somewhat Provide opportunities for gamifying the
● No recognition of angles
Invite learners in groups to play this game where
Product/Conversation: To determine whether they are to attempt to draw angles accurately.
learners can use a ruler and protractor to draw given Alien Angles | Math Playground
angles.
Have learners view the following video Learning by doing ( outcome 8)
Drawing Angles Using a Protractor
Provide opportunities to Sort angles.
Learners will be given a bag from which they will dip the
name of a type of angle Give cutout paper with angles and be asked to
sort and stick them on matching spaces in the
Learners will be given paper, a ruler and protractor and classroom based on the type of angle
asked to draw the angle they dipped.
248
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will later present their drawn angle to their peers
and have them discuss the angle and say what type of
angle they think was drawn.
Checklist
Learners are correctly able to draw and name angles
correctly
● Yes Retrieved from Angle sorting worksheet
● Somewhat activity | Teaching Resources
● No
Think, Pair, Share: To check whether learners are
able to sort types of angles based on given
measurements.
(outcome 8)
Learners will be given measurements of angles and be
asked with a peer to classify each measurement based on
the type of angle it would be.
Retrieved from Google Images
Video Assisted Learning and Project
( outcome 9)
Provides learners with an opportunity to create a
pattern using different angles
249
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Present the video below.
Angles and Protractor Art Project
(Teacher will use discretion and pause at
intervals to complete each step)
Give learners a cardstock paper, a ruler, a
protractor and crayons. Learners will then be
invited to create their project involving drawing
angles and creating a pattern by colouring the
Retrieved from Google Images angles based on their type.
Checklist
Learners are correctly able to sort angles by measurement
● Yes
● Somewhat
● No
Group Work)/Observation :To create patterns using
angles
( outcome 9)
In small groups learners will create a unique pattern using https://cdn.teachstarter.com/fileserver/2021/0
angles on Geogebra. 5/angles-in-letters-activity-1200x628.jpg
250
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from
https://www.desmos.com/calc_thumbs/production/ch2
9jvpwgg.png
Checklist
1.Learners are able to create patterns using angles
● Yes
● Somewhat
● No
2. Learners were able to identify the types of angles in
presented pattern
● Yes
● Somewhat
● No
Additional Resources and Materials
https://www.orchidsinternationalschool.com/maths-concepts/nets-3d-shape
https://wmznlejcfq.s3-ap-southeast-1.amazonaws.com/media/worksheets/classifying-angles-worksheet-1.pdf
https://corbettmaths.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/Types-of-Angle-pdf.pdf
http://www.drysdaleps.vic.edu.au/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/Drawing-Angles-Using-a-180-Degree-Protractor-Worksheet-Adobe-Reader-_352305-1.pdf
https://www.greatschools.org/gk/worksheets/drawing-angles/
https://wordwall.net/resource/14385681/angles
251
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
https://image.slidesharecdn.com/differenttypesandpartsofanangle-140814043617-phpapp02/85/Different-types-and-parts-of-an-angle-2-320.jpg
https://mathmonks.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/Types-of-Angles.jpg
252
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
https://i.pinimg.com/474x/48/30/be/4830bef3640ecc18259054b801219193.jpg
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Identifying and drawing angles is important in geometry as these concepts can be effectively used in the description and construction of different shapes such as
polyhedrons, and polygons.
Angles can be used in mathematical problems to explain and explore the behaviour of different lines. It is also useful in trigonometry.
253
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: G2:1. Recognizing, Naming and Describing Shapes - Analysing and Describing Shapes
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Recognize and describe angle relationships (complimentary, supplementary, vertical opposite angles, angles created by parallel lines and transversals
(through measuring)
• The sum of angles in various polygons
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to: Product: To give learners practice on measuring Discovery Learning (Outcome 1)
angles on diagrams drawn to scale as well as Give learners an opportunity to measure angles
Knowledge using the measurements to prove the using a protractor. This allows them to prove the
relationships between pairs of angles. (Outcomes relationships between various pairs of angles.
1. Recognize angle relationships 1, 2 and 3)
(complementary, supplementary, vertically For example: Have learners’ measure angles on
opposite angles and angles created by GeoGebra and invite them to compare the
parallel lines and transversals). measures of pairs of angles to prove the
relationships that exist between them.
2. Describe angle relationships Retrieved from
(complementary, supplementary, vertically https://www.geogebra.org/m/zngydp5x
opposite angles and angles created by
parallel lines and transversal. Video-assisted learning (Outcomes 2,3). Engage
learners' visual and auditory senses to help them
3. Illustrate various types of angle gain a deeper understanding of the concept. For
relationships. example: Show videos that illustrate the
. relationships between different types of angles and
4. Recognize the sum of angles in various how a transversal creates certain angles when it
polygons. intersects parallel lines.
Skills Complementary Angles & Supplementary Angles |
Math with Mr. J
5. Determine the sum of the interior angles
of a polygon by calculating the number of Retrieved from https://brainly.ph/question/31997112
non-overlapping triangles it contains. Parallel Lines Cut by a Transversal - Finding Angle
Measures
254
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Values: Checklist: Learners correctly measure and determine Relevant information in this video ends at 2:35
the size of the angles.
6. Create real life situations to compare Provide learners with information sheets (like the
complementary and supplementary angles ● All ones below). Study and review the different types of
● Some angles and their relationships with learners, and
● None discuss as a class.
Conversation: To determine whether learners
know the different terms describing the
relationships between pairs of angles. (Outcomes
2, 3)
Draw a diagram similar to this one on the board. Point
out various pairs of angles and ask learners to describe
the relationship between them, e.g., angles 2 and 4 are
vertically opposite; angles P and Q are consecutive
interior angles and therefore are supplementary.
Retrieved from
https://amandapaffrath.weebly.com/2-
parallel-lines-and-transversals.html
Retrieved from https://byjus.com/maths/parallel-
lines-transversals-angle/
Checklist: Learners are able to correctly recognize and
describe the relationships between various pairs of
angles from the diagram.
● All
● Some
● None
255
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product: To enable learners to use the fact that the Retrieved from
angles in a triangle add up to 180° to find the sum https://www.onlinemathlearning.com/comple
of angles in different polygons. (Outcomes 4,5,6) mentary-angle.html
Provide learners with a sheet of various polygons and
ask them to identify triangles within each polygon. By Vocabulary Game (Outcomes 2,3)
counting the triangles, they can determine the sum of Provide opportunities for learners to familiarize
the polygon's interior angles by multiplying the themselves with vocabulary that might be new to
number of triangles by 180°. Have learners fill out a them. For example: Invite learners to work in pairs.
table, like the one below, with their answers. Spread answer cards face up on top of their desks.
The teacher reads a definition for the group of
words listed below. The learner who grabs the right
answer first gets the point.
Congruent Parallel lines
Transversal Complementary
Supplementary Vertically opposite angles
Alternate angles Interior angles
Exterior angles Corresponding angles
Consecutive angles
Answers on the cards can be in the form of words
or images.
Retrieved from
https://www.softschools.com/math/geometry/topics
/the_sum_of_the_interior_angles_in_a_polygon/
Checklist: Learners are able to correctly determine the
sum of angles within each polygon.
● All
● More than half
● Less than half
256
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from
https://bluemountainmath.com/angle-
relationships/
Discovery Learning (Outcomes 4, 5)
Provide learners with the opportunity to break up
various polygons into triangles that do not overlap
each other.
For example: The sum of their interior angles can
then be found by multiplying the number of
triangles by 180° or by adding.
Angles in a triangle add up to 180°. Learners can
use this rule to determine the sum of the interior
angles in a polygon.
Retrieved from
https://www.earthslab.com/mathematics/polygon
/
If the polygon contains two triangles, then the sum
of the interior angles is 2 x 180° = 360°, or 180° +
180° = 360°
257
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
● Cardstock
● Markers
● Rulers
● Protractors
● Internet access and devices for GeoGebra
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
A trick to help learners remember that complementary angles add up to 90° and supplementary angles add up to 180°: The c in complementary can start
to form the 9 in 90°, while the s in supplementary can start to form the 8 in 180°.
Angle sum of any polygon - Maths Tutorials
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
● Mathematics and Art: Create tessellation designs to explore and measure angle relationships.
● Mathematics and Technology: Make digital presentations to compare complementary and supplementary angles.
● Mathematics and Physical Education: Using body movements to form and identify angles enhances kinesthetic learning.
● Mathematics and Science: Observe angles in nature or physics, such as light refraction, to connect angle concepts to real-world phenomena.
● Mathematics and Engineering: Construct polygons and calculate interior angles by dividing shapes into triangles and reinforcing angle sums.
● Mathematics and Language Arts: Write explanations or brochures about angle relationships with real-life examples for clear communication.
● Mathematics and History: Study angles in historical architecture to link geometry to structural design.
Each activity strengthens angle concepts and connects math to other disciplines.
258
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: G2.2. Recognising, Naming and Describing Shapes - Naming 2D & 3D shapes
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
● Recognize, name and classify angles
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Observation: To assess how much information Interactive Learning - Making a Math Angle
learners remember about types of angles (Outcomes Clock (Outcomes 1, 2 and 3)
Knowledge 1, 2, and 3) Give learners a hands-on opportunity to
Invite learners to play this quick game to review types of demonstrate different types of angles.
1. Recognize angles (acute, obtuse, right, angles. Press on the blue dot in the middle of the clock(s)
reflex, and straight). representing the angle named. For example: Have learners make a math angle
clock as shown in the video. Learners use this
2. Name angles (acute, obtuse, right, reflex, https://www.purposegames.com/game/603afcb93d clock to show acute, obtuse, right, reflex and
and straight). straight angles.
Skills How to Make Maths Angle Project/ Angle
Clock Model/ Types of Angle Model
3. Classify angles according to the type
(acute, obtuse, right, reflex, and straight).
4. Create different types of angles through
hands-on practice.
Values
5. Design different creative pieces (a posters,
Retrieved from
poems, stories songs) outlining types of angles
https://www.purposegames.com/game/603afcb93d
in the environment. Retrieved from
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop
Checklist: Game scores
&v=qdyffTvt3X8
● Scored 83-100%
● Scored 50-67%
259
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Scored 0-33% Group work (Outcomes 1 , 2, 3,4)
Observation- To identify types of angles in your Provide learners with the opportunity to work
environment (Outcomes 1, 2, and 3) together to reinforce their ability to identify
Walk around the classroom and the school and have types of angles.
learners identify and classify different angles in their
environment, e.g. corners of surfaces, angle at which the For Example: Place learners in small groups and
door is ajar, etc. have them create a poster on the different types
of angles with drawings and descriptions
Retrieved from
Retrieved from https://tools4schoolsathome.com/how-
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop
to-teach-angles-a-fun-way/
&v=u51-eqEfMAc
Checklist: Learners are able to correctly identify different
at least 3 types of angles in their environment.
Game - Angle Hunt (Outcomes 1,3)
Incorporate fun activities to help learners classify
● Yes
different types of angles. For example: Hide cut-
● Somewhat
outs of the various types of angles around the
● No
class. Place learners in 5 groups based on the
names of the angles- acute, obtuse, right,
Product- Exit slip -To determine whether learners
reflex and straight. Groups are timed and hunt
are able to Name and classify various angles
around the classroom only for the angles after
(Outcomes 1, 2 and 3)
which their group is named. The group that
260
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
accurately finds the most angles within the
allotted time wins.
Retrieved from
https://www.liveworksheets.com/sites/default/files/styl
es/worksheet/public/def_files/2022/7/19/2071906120
93933937/207190612093933937002.jpg?itok=vGzXy9Yl
Checklist: Learners are correctly able to classify angles as
acute, obtuse, right, reflex and straight.
● All
● More than half
● Less than half
261
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
● Manila sheet
● Construction paper
● Ruler and protractor
● Markers
● Tooth picks
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
There are many things in real life that create angles, such as clothes hangers, scissors, crossroads, arrowheads, partially opened doors, to pyramids, Different letters
in various alphabets also form examples of angles. What is the angle of the letter V? An acute angle. While practicing yoga and exercising, we make different angles
in different postures. Angles are all around us.
Retrieved from https://www.mathnasium.com/math-centers/sherwood/news/angles-real-life-
s#:~:text=Real%2Dlife%20Application%20of%20Angles,enhance%20their%20performance%20in%20sports.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
● Measurement
● Trigonometry
262
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: G2.3. Recognizing, Naming and Describing Shapes – Comparing and Adding the Angles of 2D & 3D Shapes
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
● Recognize, describe and compare angles based on angle relationships
● Generalize the sum of interior angles in various polygons
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Observation: To determine whether learners can Tactile Learning
identify the relationship between the angles shown. Give learners the opportunity to gain a deeper
Knowledge The teacher places this chart on the board and points at understanding of the different relationships
different pairs of angles. Learners state the relationship between angles created by transversals.
1. Use the properties of supplementary between them, giving reasons for their answers.
angles, complementary angles, opposite For example: Draw a large diagram with a
angles, and interior and exterior angles to transversal on the floor. Have children stand in
solve for unknown angle measures positions representing the angles and have the
2. Explain how the number of sides in a class identify the relationships. They could also
polygon affects the size of its interior place objects on the drawings to denote the
angles. angles and show the relationships.
Skills
3. find the sum of interior angles in various
polygons
4. Calculate the measure of an interior angle
based on the polygon’s sides
5. Determine the corresponding exterior Retrieved from
angles after calculating the sum of the https://amandapaffrath.weebly.com/2-parallel-lines-
interior angles. and-transversals.html
Values Checklist: Learners are correctly able to state and
describe the relationship between the angles shown.
6. Design a colour-coded chart highlighting ● All Retrieved from
the angles formed with parallel lines and a ● Some https://www.cuemath.com/geometry/transvers
transversal ● None al/
263
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product - Group Work: To give learners an Conceptual understanding (Outcome 1)
opportunity to work together to determine the Give learners an opportunity to practice
measure of various angles based on the relationship distinguishing between complementary and
between them. supplementary angles.
For example: Write various pairs of angles on
the board and ask learners to identify which
pairs are supplementary (add up to 180°) and
which pairs are complementary (add up to 90°).
Retrieved from https://www.tes.com/en-
us/teaching-resource/complementary-and-
supplementary-angles-12522919
Have learners apply the additivity principle and
angle properties to measure angles in pattern
blocks and create benchmark angles (30°, 45°,
60°, 90°, 120°, 135°, 180°, 270°, and 360°). For
instance, they can identify the orange square as
Retrieved from https://mathmonks.com/wp-
90°, deduce that 1 square + 3 tan rhombuses =
content/uploads/2023/12/Angle-Pairs-Formed-by-a-
180° implies each rhombus has a 30° angle, and
Transversal-Worksheet.webp
calculate that 3 blue parallelograms forming 360°
Checklist: Learners are correctly able to determine the
means each obtuse angle is 120°. They can also
relationship between pairs of angles and find/calculate the
demonstrate that combining the obtuse angles
measure of angles.
(120° + 120°) with the acute angle (30°) results
● All
in a reflex angle of 270°, and verify this by
● Some
subtracting the square's angle from 360°.
● None
264
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Conversation: To determine whether learners are able Learners draw a straight line with a point and
to identify the general formula for finding the sum of create another line at an angle, estimating and
interior angles in a polygon (Outcome 2) then confirming the angle measures with a
protractor. In groups, they compare their
Use this activity from E.L.O. 2.1 and ask learners to diagrams and determine the sum of the two non-
compare the math work for each polygon with the straight angles, identifying them as
number of sides in order to identify the relationship or supplementary angles.
general formula for finding the sum of interior angles in a
polygon. Learners draw a right angle and create two angles
from the vertex, estimating and confirming their
measures with a protractor, then checking if the
angles sum to 90°, identifying them as
complementary angles.
Learners draw intersecting lines, estimate the
measures of the four resulting angles, and
confirm with a protractor. In groups, they
discuss angle relationships, noting that opposite
angles are equal, adjacent angles form a straight
angle (180°), and the total of all angles is 360°.
Introduce the formula for the sum of interior
angles: (𝑛−2) ×180° where 𝑛 is the number of
Retrieved from sides.
https://www.softschools.com/math/geometry/topics/th Work through examples on the board, starting
e_sum_of_the_interior_angles_in_a_polygon/ with a triangle (𝑛=3) and quadrilateral (𝑛=4
). Explain that in a regular polygon, all interior
To find the interior angle sum of a polygon, we can use a
angles are equal. Show how to find the measure
formula: interior angle sum = (n - 2) x 180°, where n is
of one interior angle by dividing the sum of
the number of sides. For example, a pentagon has 5
interior angles by the number of sides:
sides, so its interior angle sum is
(5 - 2) x 180° = 3 x 180° = 540°.
265
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Checklist: Learners are able to determine the general Learners draw a polygon, calculate the sum of
formula for finding the sum of interior angles in a the interior angles, and extend lines from each
polygon. vertex to determine the corresponding exterior
angles. They compare their findings in groups to
● Most learners observe similarities and differences.
● Some learners
● No learner Provide learners with scaled angle diagrams and
a set of measures so they can calculate unknown
angles using angle properties, verifying their
solutions with a protractor.
Have learners create "angle puzzles" where an
angle is missing from a straight line, a full circle,
or a right angle, and then exchange their puzzles
with a partner. Support learners who may
struggle with identifying the angle or
Retrieved from
understanding the relationship to addition and
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/math/88287
subtraction.
8
266
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
● ruler
● protractor
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
A trick to help learners remember that complementary angles add up to 90° and supplementary angles add up to 180°: The c in complementary can start
to form the 9 in 90°, while the s in supplementary can start to form the 8 in 180°.
Angle sum of any polygon - Maths Tutorials
Angles can be measured indirectly (calculated) by applying angle properties. Measuring angles indirectly is often quicker than measuring them directly and is the
only choice if the location of an angle is impossible or impractical to measure.
Smaller angles may be added together to determine a larger angle. This is the additivity principle of measurement.
Angle properties can be used to determine unknown angles.
A straight angle measures 180°: this property is used to determine the measurement of a supplementary angle and is applied when determining the exterior angles
of a polygon.
A right angle measures 90°: this property is used to determine the measurement of a complementary angle.
Interior angles of quadrilaterals sum to 360°; this property is used to find an unknown angle in a quadrilateral.
Interior angles of triangles sum to 180°; this property is used to find an unknown angle in a triangle.
Angle properties can also be used to determine other unknown measures (e.g., the exterior angle measures of a polygon) or to explain why opposite angles are
equal.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
● Mathematics and Art: Create geometric artwork using polygons and angles, such as mosaics or mandalas.
● Mathematics and Science: Explore natural examples of polygons and angles, such as honeycomb structures, through research and presentations.
● Mathematics and History: Investigate historical architecture that uses geometric shapes, such as the Parthenon, and present findings.
● Mathematics and Physical Education: Form angles with body movements in activities like yoga or dance to reinforce concepts kinesthetically.
● Mathematics and Technology: Use software like GeoGebra for digital creation and manipulation of polygons to enhance understanding.
267
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
● Mathematics and Language Arts: Write reports or presentations explaining interior and exterior angles, fostering communication skills.
● Mathematics and Social Studies: Create maps with polygons, calculating angles for layout and direction.
● Mathematics and Music: Develop a dance involving turns at specific angles, connecting math to rhythm and movement.
268
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: G3.1: Composing, Decomposing and Transforming Shapes - Combining Shapes
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: learners should be able to :
• Calculate missing angle using angle relationship (complementary, supplementary, vertical opposite angles)
• Draw angles using a straightedge and a protractor.
• Plot and read coordinates in all four quadrants of a Cartesian plane
• Describe the translations that move a point from one coordinate to another.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Provide a worksheet that requires learners to measure Conceptual Understanding
given angles and identify whether they are measured
Knowledge clockwise or counter clockwise. Playing Games – Bingo Provide learners
Include questions about the relationships between with the opportunity to calculate angles to
1. Identify and describe the four quadrants angles, asking learners to explain their reasoning. create complementary, supplementary or
of the Cartesian plane. vertical angles.
2. State the relationship between angles that Evaluate learners' worksheets to check for
are measured clockwise and those that are understanding of measuring and constructing angles. Let learners select various angle sizes to fill in
measured counter clockwise Assess participation during guided practice and the their bingo sheets and apply their mental math
accuracy of angle constructions. skills to solve the problems as they are
Skills announced. The first learner to completely fill in
1. Pairs of angles can be ____, _____ or _____. the angles on their bingo sheet wins.
3. Use a protractor to measure and
construct angles up to 360°. 2. Two angles that sum 90 are called ________. When
4. Plot given coordinates on a Cartesian put together these angles form_________
plane in all four quadrants, demonstrating
an understanding of the x-axis and y-axis 3. Two angles that sum 180 are called __________.
When put together, these angles form a ________.
5. Read and interpret the coordinates of
plotted points, explaining their positions 4. Two angles that share a _________ and are opposite
relative to the axes and quadrants. of one another are called _________. These angles are
__________.
269
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6. Describe the translation of a point from
one coordinate to another using
directional language (e.g., "move right," Think Pair Share/Self-Assessment : to determine
"move left," "move up," "move down") whether learners can calculate missing angles
and quantify the movements in terms of using angle relationships
units
Have learners view the following videos to help
7. Perform translations on given points, learners further understand how to find the missing
calculating the new coordinates after angle
moving a point a specified number of
units in the x or y direction, and represent Complementary Angles & Supplementary Angles |
these translations visually on a Cartesian Math with Mr. J
plane What are Vertical Angles? | Math with Mr. J
Retrieved from
8. Evaluate the results of translations by Invite learners to work in small groups/ pairs to solve https://ecdn.teacherspayteachers.com/thumbit
comparing the original and new problems related to finding the value of missing angles. em/Complementary-and-Supplementary-
coordinates, confirming that the changes Learners will share their answers and explain how they Angles-Bingo-Small-Group-9115954-
made are consistent with their were able to determine the answers 1676281882/original-9115954-1.jpg
descriptions of the movements.
Values Present learners with both a semi-circle and a
full-circle protractor, and encourage them to
8. Use coordinates in creating artistic designs and compare their similarities and differences. Help
incorporate angles in making artistic designs learners understand the relationship between the
term “360” for a full circle and the concept that
angles can extend to 360°. Have them explore
reading the protractor in both clockwise and
counter clockwise directions. Ask them to
identify the angle measures for straight and right
angles, as well as the range of measures for
acute and obtuse angles. Additionally, have
them use both types of protractors to measure
angles greater than 180° (reflex angles) found in
everyday life.
270
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Drawing Angles Using a Protractor
Have learners measure the angles of convex
quadrilaterals, such as a dart shape, and calculate
the sum of their interior angles. As they measure
different quadrilaterals, guide them to observe
that the total always equals 360°. This can be
further demonstrated by removing the vertices
of a quadrilateral and rearranging them into a
circle to illustrate the concept visually.
Retrieved from
https://www.liveworksheets.com/sites/default/files/st
yles/worksheet/public/def_files/2021/4/5/104051456
131607534/104051456131607534001.jpg?itok=wutC4k
IG
Checklist
Learners will carry out self-assessment as to how well
they understood the concept and how well they were
able to calculate missing angles based on angle
relationships .
271
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Instruct learners to measure the exterior angles
of different quadrilaterals and assist them in
Retrieved from
recognizing that the sum of an interior angle
https://i.pinimg.com/originals/ab/38/8a/ab388ae989
and its corresponding exterior angle always
1c76d2d9897458e7203280.jpg
equals 180°.
Have learners measure the angles in a rotation,
Product (Naming angles) : to determine learners
both clockwise and counter clockwise (see
ability to identify angles and their measurements
E1.4). As they rotate an object 270° and 90°,
either by hand or using technology, discuss why
Learners will be given a worksheet to complete on
the images end up at the same coordinates.
identifying the types of angles
Have learners measure the interior angles of
various polygons, including those found in
everyday life, and determine the sum of their
angles. Discuss any similarities and differences.
Have learners create a design featuring a variety
of angles, including at least one right angle, one
acute angle, one obtuse angle, and one reflex
angle. They should measure each angle and
record the measurements on a separate sheet of
paper before exchanging their designs with a
partner. Assist learners in measuring the angles
in each other's designs and verifying any
measurements that differ. If discrepancies are
within a few degrees, emphasize that
measurements are often approximate and can be
affected by the tools used. For larger
272
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
discrepancies, encourage learners to review the
scale they applied or the accuracy of their
calculations for determining the reflex angle.
1. Have learners draw the four quadrants of a
coordinate plane on a grid or graph paper. Have
them use a scale of 1 and place the positive
integers to the right of the origin on the x-axis
and above the origin on the y-axis and the
negative integers to the left of the origin on the
x-axis and below the origin on the y-axis. Have
them plot various points as a horizontal
movement to the right or left of the origin and
then a vertical movement up or down. For
example, to plot the point (−3, 4), move 3 to
the left from the origin and then up 4. Next,
have them draw an image on the grid using the
point that they have just plotted. Then, have
Retrieved from them write down the coordinates for their image
https://img.yumpu.com/38210969/1/500x640/3g- and exchange them with a partner to re-draw
hwork-ch-02pdf-mathsrevisioncom.jpg the image.
2. Have learners play strategic guessing games
with a partner. Behind a screen, each should
Checklist: Learners are correctly able to identify the plot secret objects, such as a treasure chest,
various types of angles. along points in all four quadrants of a
coordinate plane. They will take turns guessing
● All the location of their partner’s hidden objects,
● Some using positive and negative coordinates to
● None identify locations. Each partner will need a
blank coordinate plane to keep track of their
guesses. The game ends when one person has
Guess my Angle Game/Observation - learners will found all the objects hidden by their partner.
be made to review the video below then teacher
273
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
will demonstrate how to draw angles using a 3. Provide learners with the four quadrants of a
straightedge and protractor coordinate plane with points plotted on it. Ask
them to describe the movement to get from one
Learners will be given paper, ruler and protractor. A list point to the next. Guide learners to use
of angle measurements will be presented to the entire appropriate signs to indicate the movements;
class (projected or written). Learners will select one of for example, 3→ or right 3 and ­3↑ or up 3.
the measures and use the steps to draw their chosen
angle (angle size must not be written).
Discussion (outcome 4)
Learners will then show their drawing to peers who will Provide opportunity for learners to discuss the
then try to guess which angle was constructed. Peers types of angles and the characteristics of each
who drew an angle with the same measurement will be type of angle
asked to also present their drawing. If there appears to
be any difference in the appearance of the angles they
will be asked to measure each one using their protractor
and discussions will be held to determine what the error
was.
Checklist
Retrieved from
https://d1uvxqwmcz8fl1.cloudfront.net/tes/resources
/11666249/bbf1abd1-1024-4e9d-8402-
4a9b118f8ddd/image?width=500&height=500&versio
Retrieved from
n=1586379585350
https://teachmint.storage.googleapis.com/publi
c/755496959/StudyMaterial/7cbf7bee-12f4-
43fb-a737-018172dbbd32.png
274
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Observation and Product: to determine whether Guided Learning with technology
learners can identify points and plot given points
on four quadrants of a Cartesian plane. Provide opportunities for learners to digitally
create different angles.
Plotting Points on a Coordinate Plane | All 4
Quadrants Allows learners to practice drawing different
Coordinate Plane Song | The 6th Grade Graphing types of angles:
Video That Spits Actual Fire 1. Using protractors
2. Using the software
Have learners recall what axis are and how points are https://www.geogebra.org/m/crgt
written based on x and y axis. vj5s
Observe learners as they complete a given worksheet
on plotting points on a coordinate plane
Video Assisted Learning ( outcome 13 ,14)
Provides learners with the opportunity to review
the concept of translating points and to take
necessary and relevant notes in their book.
Translating points on a coordinate plane
Ask learners to explain what translation means
in their own words.
Use a whiteboard or digital tool to demonstrate
how to translate a point. For example, show
how the point.
(2, 3) translates to (4, 5) by moving it right two
units and up two units.
Guided Practice: Provide a few examples for
learners to practice with you, encouraging them
Retrieved from https://worksheets.clipart- to visualize the movement on the coordinate
library.com/images/grade-4-geometry-plotting-points- plane
coordinate-grid-4q.gif
275
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Checklist Learners will be given a worksheet and be asked
to select the correct position that would be
learners are able to plot points on a coordinate plane created based on a given translation.
● All
● Some
● None
Discussion : to determine whether learners can
plot points on a plane and read the coordinates
(outcomes 9, 10)
A coordinate grid will be presented to learners (printed
copies/ projected).
Retrieved from
https://www.mathworksheets4kids.com/transf
ormation/translation/mcq-point1.pdf
Retrieved from
https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/math/grade-
5-geometry-reading-points-coordinate-grid-4q.gif
276
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
learners will be called on randomly and asked to
identify a named or numbered point and to then read
out the coordinates for the point
Checklist
Learners were able to accurately identify and read
points on a Cartesian plane. yes/ no
Product -Group Work/ Project - to allow learners
to perform translations
( outcome 13 and 14)
Translating Points
Each group will be given a sheet of graph paper on
which they will draw a Cartesian plane and plot four
points on (1 in each quadrant).
Learners will name each of their points and state their
coordinates They will then create a translation of each
point which they will name appropriately. They should
be able to provide their coordinates and explain their
translation.
Learners will be invited to present their plane and
explain their plotting and translations with their peers.
Checklist:
1.Learners are correctly able to correctly plot and
name points on Cartesian plane
277
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● All
● Some
● None
2. Learners were able to accurately calculate
translations
● yes
● somewhat
● no
3. Learners were able to correctly plot and label
transformed points
● All
● Some
● None
Additional Resources and Materials
https://wmznlejcfq.s3-ap-southeast-1.amazonaws.com/media/worksheets/pairs-of-angles-worksheet-1.pdf
https://www.ufacademy.org/wp-content/uploads/Complementary-and-Supplementary-Angles.pdf
https://www.sac.edu/learnerservices/EOPS/Documents/Math%20Study%20Guide%204%20-%20Geometry.pdf
https://www.mathantics.com/files/pdfs/Worksheets_GraphingOnTheCoordinatePlane.pdf
https://www.fusd.net/site/handlers/filedownload.ashx?moduleinstanceid=12431&dataid=15409&FileName=Graphing%20Points%20and%20Identifying%20
Shapes.pdf
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
278
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Retrieved from https://msroymaths7.weebly.com/uploads/6/0/1/2/60121593/1084793_orig.jpg
● Complementary angles are formed when the total of two angles equals 90 degrees. These angles don't have to be close to each other, but their sum
should equal 90 degrees.
● A linear pair must be supplementary, but a supplementary angle does not have to be. In either case, the sum of the angles should always be 180°.
● If we have an x° angle, we can subtract it from 90° to obtain a complementary angle.
● If we have an x° angle, we can subtract it from 180° to find a supplementary angle.
279
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
https://ecdn.teacherspayteachers.com/thumbitem/Coordinate-Plane-Poster-5910582-1597408107/original-5910582-1.jpg
Translation is the movement of a horizontal, vertical or both movement of a point or shape of a graph or figure. A figure can be translated left, right, up or
down. It is a slide and does not change the size or orientation of a shape.
Any translation in the coordinate plane affects the coordinates of any point in the same way. In particular, it will add or subtract constant values from the 𝑥- and
𝑦-coordinates; these can be thought of as the horizontal and vertical displacement of the translation respectively.
In general, if a translation in the coordinate plane has a horizontal displacement of 𝑎 units and a vertical displacement of 𝑏 units, then (𝑥,𝑦) will be mapped to
(𝑥+𝑎,𝑦+𝑏).We write this as (𝑥,𝑦)→(𝑥+𝑎,𝑦+𝑏).The signs of 𝑎 and 𝑏 tell us the direction of the displacement.
Example: If we want to translate D (−3; 2) four units right. We move 4 from −3 and stop at (1; 2). The new position is the image of D. We write D’(1; 2) and
we say “D prime”.
• Note: The 𝑥-coordinate changed because we translated D horizontally (i.e. left or right).
280
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
• If we translate a point up or down (vertically) the 𝑦-coordinate will change but the 𝑥-coordinate will not
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
The calculation of complementary, supplementary and vertical angles is helpful for working with Algebra as well as Trigonometry.
Working with a coordinate system and Cartesian plane can be used to determine the position of any item from its starting point (origin) to its current location.
Plotting points on a graph is a valuable skill in coordinate geometry, serving as a gateway to understanding more complex concepts like distance, slope, and
equations of lines.
281
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: G3.2. Composing, Decomposing and Transforming Shapes - Deconstructing Shapes
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Learners will be able to deconstruct shapes to identify and describe angles.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Entrance Slip - to determine whether learners can Visual learning
represent angles using concrete materials
Knowledge Provide opportunities for learners to identify
In pairs learners will use given material e.g. Match sticks angles with further accuracy.
1. Identify individual angles from complex and playdough to construct shapes using different types
shapes of angles 1. Have learners view videos on shapes
E.g. : Reflex, Obtuse , Acute, Right and angles. Review what angles are
2. Describe the types and properties of angles https://youtu.be/FehnQ_2SgsM?feat
they identify within shapes. Learners are able to represent angles accurately ure=shared
Skills Yes / With Guidance/No 2. Guide learners into reviewing the
different types of angles using video-
3. Interpret the structure of shapes by Product- to determine the ability of learners to Types of Angles
deconstructing them into their angle identify angles within shapes. https://youtu.be/UsE1hu-
components. q0Cs?feature=shared
3. Invite learners to colour code like
angles within a shapes
282
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from
https://ofamilyblog.files.wordpress.com/2
018/05/colouring-in-different-types-of-
angles-different-colours.jpg?w=768
Invite learners to identify angles based on given
properties
Give learners a stack of old magazines or
Retrieved from
printed images.
https://i.pinimg.com/originals/56/4a/63/564a63a6407d
b1a0c91292de1bb0b8a7.png
Ask them to cut out shapes (both regular and
irregular) and glue them onto a large board or
flat surface.
283
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Next, have learners identify the angles within
each shape by drawing lines to connect the
vertices.
Then, have learners deconstruct the shapes
built and label the angles
Additional Resources and Materials
Classifying Angles: https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/math/grade-3-geometry-classifying-angles-b.pdf
Angles Worksheet 1: https://www.letsplaymaths.com/Class-6-Angle-Worksheet-1.html
Angles worksheet: https://www.letsplaymaths.com/Class-6-Angle-Worksheet-1.html
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Composing And Decomposing : https://www.tutoringhour.com/worksheets/2d-shapes/composing-decomposing/
Types of Angles: https://www.cemc.uwaterloo.ca/events/mathcircles/2018-19/Winter/Junior6_Feb12.pdf
Angles an Introduction - https://byjus.com/maths/angles/
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Geometry - Tessellations
Patterns and Relations
Time - Angles formed from hand on clock
284
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: G3.3. Composing, Decomposing and Transforming Shapes - Transforming Shapes
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Recognize, name and create tessellations
• Recognize, name, perform and draw transformations (reflections, rotations, translations and dilations).
• Predict, describe, compare and verify the image of a shape under a given transformation.
• Compare the image to the pre-image for a transformation.
• Justify why an image is (or is not) the result of a particular transformation.
• Determine the composition of two or more transformations.
• Determine the inverse of a given transformation.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Observation: Discovery/Manipulation.
Provide opportunities for learners to manipulate
Knowledge Observe group discussions and participation during shapes in forming tessellations.
activities
1. Recognize shapes that can tessellate Evaluate learners’ tessellation patterns based on 1. Show learners images of tessellating patterns found
creativity, understanding of tessellation, and the use in nature (honeycombs, turtle shells) and art (M.C.
2. Describe the characteristics of of identified shapes. Escher). Ask learners what they notice about these
translations, reflections, and rotations, patterns. Lead them into a discussion about the
Product/Self-Assessment: to determine characteristics of shapes that tessellate. Explain
3. Translate shapes on a grid, moving them learners' ability to create a tessellation tessellation and the concept of repeating shapes
a specified distance in a given direction that cover a plane without gaps or overlaps.
while maintaining their orientation. 1. Learners are shown the following video to Regular polygons: triangles, squares, and hexagons
help them to create unique patterns. tessellate.
4. Execute reflections across a specified line Some irregular shapes can tessellate if they fit
(e.g., x-axis, y-axis, or a line of symmetry) Tessellation art. together without gaps.. Use the projector to display
and describe the changes in orientation 2. Learners are also presented with tessellation different shapes and demonstrate whether they
and position of the reflected shape. patterns and are led to create one tessellate or not. Distribute cut-out shapes
(triangles, squares, hexagons, and various irregular
shapes). In small groups, have learners experiment
285
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5. Carry out rotations of shapes around a with different shapes to see if they can create
fixed point on a grid by given angles (90°, tessellations on their paper. Learners should trace
180°, 270°, or 360°) and identify how the
rotation affects the shape's position around the shapes to create a pattern and identify
which shapes tessellate.
Skills
Invite each learner to choose one or two shapes
6. Demonstrate the ability to create they identified as tessellating.
tessellating patterns using identified Using grid paper, learners will create a tessellating
shapes pattern using their chosen shapes. They can colour
in the shapes to enhance their designs.
7. Apply combinations of at least two Encourage creativity while ensuring they maintain
transformations (translations, reflections, the tessellation rules. Invite learners to display their
and rotations) on shapes and record the tessellating patterns and explain their choices of
Retrieved from
final position and orientation of the shapes.
http://mathandmultimedia.com/tag/tessellation-
transformed shapes on a grid.
patterns/
8. Compare the results of different
Checklist
combinations of transformations on the
same shape to analyse how the order of
transformations affects the final outcome.
9. Predict a shape's resulting position and
orientation after performing a specified
combination of transformations and Retrieved from
justify their predictions using geometric https://mammothmemory.net/maths/geometry/
reasoning. tessellation/what-regular-shapes-can-be-
tessellated-and-how-can-you-tell.html
10. Test predictions by performing the
transformations on a grid and evaluate
Retrieved from
the accuracy of the predictions, discussing
https://i.pinimg.com/originals/ab/38/8a/ab388ae
any discrepancies.
9891c76d2d9897458e7203280.jpg
286
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Values Observation: to determine leaner’s ability to
11. Use transform to create different identify the type of transformation of any shape
tessellation design
Learners will be presented with the video to grasp
the concept of the 4 different types of
transformations )
then complete the exercises.
.
The Four Transformations In Maths
Retrieved from
https://www.mashupmath.com/geometric-shapes
Class Discussion /Practice(Outcome
Provide learners with the opportunity to draw
Retrieved from https://www.cuema
transformations a shown below
th.com/geometry/transformations/
1. Discuss and describe using the terms
flip, slide, turn enlarge and reduce
(dilations) in discussion.
Retrieved form https://s-media-cache-
ak0.pinimg.com/736x/52/a0/18/52a0181df9
6a4fcb97f1c2c1f35e181d.jpg
287
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.
Retrieved from https://s3-us-west-
2.amazonaws.com/quizizz-destination-
bkt/80fcc9dd-dcb0-4aa4-ad0d-
c393bf6fad2c.jpg?w=90&h=90
2. Present the worksheet below.
Retrieved from https://www.2nd-grade-math-
salamanders.com/image-files/geometry-
worksheets-printable-spot-the-transformation-1.gif
2. Complete the worksheet below.(Page 1 Only)
https://www.mayfieldschools.org/Downloads/tran
slation_reflection_rotation_-_homework.pdf
288
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from https://worksheets.clipart-
library.com/worksheet/geometry-transformations-
worksheet-answers-31.html
Instruct learners to create a triangle on grid paper,
labelling the vertices as A, B, and C. Using tracing
paper, they should explore various combinations of
translations and reflections (e.g., moving right by 10
units and then reflecting horizontally) to produce new
triangles. They will label these new triangles with prime
notation (A’, B’, C’), double prime (A”, B”, C”), triple
prime (A”’, B”’, C”’), etc., to differentiate them from
the original triangle.
289
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners should confirm that the original and the
translated triangles are congruent and investigate
whether changing the order of transformations affects
the outcome. This process can be repeated with
different polygons.
Have learners sketch a triangle on grid paper and label
its vertices D, E, and F. They will rotate the triangle
around one of its vertices by angles of 90°, 180°, 270°,
and 360°, both clockwise and counter clockwise, using
tracing paper. Learners should label the rotated
triangles with prime notation (D’, E’, F’), double prime
(D”, E”, F”), triple prime (D”’, E”’, F”’), and so on, to
identify the variations. They will compare the triangles
and discuss the similarities and differences among
them.
Ask learners to draw a triangle on grid paper and label
the vertices J, K, and L. They will perform rotations of
90°, 180°, 270°, and 360° around a point located
outside the triangle, using tracing paper as a guide.
They should label these rotated triangles with prime
notation (J’, K’, L’), double prime (J”, K”, L”), triple
prime (J”’, K”’, L”’), and so forth. Learners will
compare the triangles and discuss what remains the
same and what changes.
Have learners create a triangle on grid paper, labelling
its vertices P, Q, and R. They will rotate the triangle
about a point inside the triangle by 90°, 180°, 270°, and
360°, both clockwise and counter clockwise, using
tracing paper. They should label the resulting triangles
with prime notation (P’, Q’, R’), double prime (P”, Q”,
R”), triple prime (P”’, Q”’, R”’), etc.
290
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will compare the triangles and describe their
similarities and differences.
Encourage learners to use a dynamic geometry
software to construct a polygon, rotate it by 270°, and
measure the angles and distances involved. They can
move a vertex or the rotation point and observe the
effects of these changes (i.e., what varies and what
remains constant). Learners should compare the effects
of clockwise and counter clockwise rotations (positive
vs. negative angles) and discuss why a 270° clockwise
rotation is equivalent to a 90° counter clockwise
rotation. They will carry out successive transformations
and have classmates identify the transformations that
occurred.
Ask learners to perform a series of transformations
that include a translation, reflection, and rotation (up to
360°) on a grid, making a mental note of each
transformation. They will share their original shape and
transformed image with a partner, who will identify
and explain the transformation process. This procedure
can be repeated with two successive transformations,
allowing another partner to analyse and explain what
occurred.
Challenge learners to predict the outcome of two
combined transformations that result in a single
transformation, and have them test their predictions
using dynamic geometry software.
291
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ihh3GRI4gAY
https://www.2nd-grade-math-salamanders.com/transformation-geometry.html
https://mathbitsnotebook.com/Geometry/Transformations/TRCompositeTransformations.html
https://study.com/learn/lesson/transformation-math-types-examples.html
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
https://study.com/learn/lesson/reflections-math-geometry.html
https://mathsux.org/2020/08/12/reflections/
Transformations on a shape result in changes to its position or its size. As a shape transforms, its vertices (points on a grid) move. The transformation describes
the results of the movement. This explains how transformations involve location and movement. Transformations can be combined or composed. Sometimes a
single transformation can be created by combining multiple transformations. A translation involves distance and direction. Every point on the original shape
“slides” the same distance and direction to create a translated image. This combination of distance and direction is called the translation vector. For example, on a
grid, a vector could describe that each point moving “5 units right and 2 units up”. It is a mathematical convention that the horizontal distance (x) be given first,
followed by the vertical distance (y). A reflection involves a line of reflection that acts like a mirror. Every point on the original shape is “flipped” across the line of
reflection to create a reflected image. Every point on the original image is the same distance from the line of reflection as the corresponding point on the reflected
image. Reflections are symmetrical. A rotation involves a centre of rotation and an angle of rotation. Every point on the original shape turns around the centre of
rotation by the same specified angle. Any point on the original is the same distance to the centre of rotation as the corresponding point on the reflected image.
Because a rotation is a turn, and 360° produces a full turn, a counter clockwise rotation of 270° produces the same result as a clockwise rotation of 90°. Convention
has it that a positive angle describes a counter clockwise turn and a negative angle describes a clockwise turn, based on the numbering system of the Cartesian plane
(see E1.3).
Note
292
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
At this grade level, learners can express the translation vector using arrows; for example, ().Dynamic geometry applications are recommended to support learners to
understand how transformations behave, either as a single transformation, or a combination of transformations.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
● Lines of Symmetry
● Tessellations
● Patterns
● Statistics - Pictographs
293
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Measurement
Introduction to Strand: Measurement is basically quantifying something. Measurement can be used to determine the height, weight, capacity, temperature, distance,
conversion or the amount of a certain thing, especially in comparison to something else (also known as a standard). In measurement, the numerical value is called a
unit and various instruments are used to “measure” any type of quantity. Measurement is extremely essential in everyday transactions and interactions such as:
● In the construction of buildings (dimensions)
● In commerce, buying and selling goods
● Preparing food, we measure the ingredients in specific quantities
● Conducting scientific experiments
● Completing tasks, we need to know time
● Getting to places, we need to calculate distance
● For formulating medicines and treating patients
Essential Learning Outcome M1.1 : Understanding What and How We Measure - Developing an Understanding of Measurable Attributes
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Develop and apply language relating to measurement terms (surface area, money, time and angles).
• Recognize angles as geometric shapes that are formed wherever two rays share a common endpoint.
• Recognize measurement as the number that indicates a comparison between the attribute of the object being measured and the same attribute of a given
unit of measure.
• Use the concept of measuring to fill, cover, or match the attribute being measured with a unit of measure for that attribute.
• Measure length, area, mass, and capacity using the appropriate metric units.
• Solve problems that require converting smaller units to larger ones and vice versa.
294
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Conversation - To determine whether learners are Conceptual Understanding
able to develop and define terminology relating to Provide opportunities for learners to develop
Knowledge measurement and appropriately apply them to the language skills and enhance understanding of
respective measurement unit. measurement terms for example:
1. Use and apply language relating to - Explain how to find the area of a square
measurement terms (surface area, money, time - Explain what the numbers represent on a these Invite learners to create a word web for each
and angles). analogue clock concept below, with associated words or phrases.
- Describe these angles
2. Explain how an angle is formed e.g. surface area (squared, multiply, length, width,
centimetre, meter, kilometre)
Skills
money (cost/ price, change. profit. loss, hire
3. Use a protractor to measure and construct purchase)
angles up to 360°.
4. State the relationship between angles that are time (duration, minutes, seconds, hour, time
measured clockwise and those that are measured elapse, o’clock, am, pm)
counter clockwise
5. Find a comparison between the attributes of the angles ( degree, acute, obtuse, right, straight,
object being measured. reflex, rays,
6. Use appropriate metric units to Measure length,
area, mass, and capacity. Conceptual Understanding
7. Solve problems that require converting
the length, area, mass, and capacity of smaller Demonstrate using how an angle is formed using
units to larger ones and vice versa.
Values
8. Create a simple word problem which
incorporates the conversion of two units studied
Retrieved from
https://www.dadsworksheets.com/worksheets/protractor
/protractor-measuring-angles-hands-of-a-clock-v1.html
a diagram
295
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Checklist Retrieved from https://www.mathematics-
Learners are able to describe at least 1 application of monster.com/glossary/angle.html
measurement yes/no
Guided Discovery Learning
Learners can name at least 4/6 angles correctly
yes/no Provide learners with the opportunity to
demonstrate their ability to identify angles (as
geometric shapes) in their environment (e.g.,
Observation: To determine whether learners are able classroom, outdoors, at home) from different
to name and define a specific angle by looking at a perspectives. For example:
picture
Name each angle and state reason for name.
Retrieved form https://www.splashlearn.com/math- Retrieved from
vocabulary/geometry/angle https://www.pinterest.com/pin/1206120962618
82165/
Checklist
Learners can name at least 4/6 angles correctly 1. Present the video:
yes/no
Learners can state at least 1 valid reason for 4/6 angles Retrieved from https://youtu.be/9RTM418qfdI
correctly named
296
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
yes/no 2. Generate a discussion of other places in
the classroom and school environment
Product: To determine learners’ ability to use a protractor they can locate other angles as well as
to measure angles. name the angles identified.
3. Invite learners to work in groups to
draw pictures and mark off locations of
angles. (promote angles from both left
and right vertices)
Video Assisted learning
Provide opportunities to develop learners' skills
in comparing attributes of objects being
measured
For example:
Present the videos as shared below that allow
learners to use suitable terms to describe and
compare everyday objects based on attributes,
given a scenario.
Retrieved from https://youtu.be/rhBrte0NV0U
Retrieved form https://youtu.be/kC_xVobgfw4
Measurable attributes refer to characteristics
of objects that can be measured, which may
include length, weight, mass, volume,
Retrieved from capacity, or area.
https://www.dadsworksheets.com/worksheets/protractor
/protractor-drawing-angles-right-obtuse-acute-v1.html
Checklist
297
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners can name at least ⅝ angles accurately (+/- 2) in
each worksheet When comparing two objects with a measurable
yes/no attribute in common, we can determine which
Observation/Group work: To determine whether object has "more of" or "less of" the attribute.
learners can compare attributes of objects being
measured.
Invite learners to work in groups to compare various
objects and assign attributes to them
Learners will be provided with pairs of objects, as well as
worksheets. They will use their knowledge of the different
measurement attributes to compare them.
Tactile Learning
Provide opportunities to develop learners' skills
in measuring length mass or capacity
For example:
Demonstrate use of measurement tools in
measuring different things (objects, liquids, etc.)
and learners will follow suit using tools provided
for them.
298
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from
https://kidskonnect.com/math/describing-and-
comparing-measurable-attributes/
Checklist
Learners can state at least one (1) comparison between
each pair
yes/somewhat/no
Self - Assessment: To determine whether learners can
apply units of length, mass, and capacity
Retrieved from
https://ecdn.teacherspayteachers.com/thumbite
m/Measurement-A-Z-Clip-Art-11116466-
1708381098/original-11116466-1.jpg
Present demonstration video:
Retrieved from https://youtu.be/jNFevCpkRoY
Measuring length | Mass | Capacity | Units of
measure | Maths with Nile (youtube.com)
Learners are placed in groups and given
measurement tools.
299
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners complete three (3) worksheets such as those
below by selecting the most appropriate unit.
Retrieved from
https://www.kidsacademy.mobi/printables/mea
suring-tools-mixup/
Learners use appropriate units on the tools to
measure objects. e.g. meter rule and foot rule to
measure lengths of yarn or measuring cylinder to
measure capacity of various bottles of liquids.
Retrieved from
Learners will be expected to use appropriate
https://ecdn.teacherspayteachers.com/thumbitem/Metric
units to measure, be it ml or l as it pertains to the
-Measurement-Centimeter-Meter-Kilometer-Worksheets-
liquid.
2510284-1500876148/original-2510284-4.jpg
300
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Demonstration /Group work
Demonstrate converting units in length, mass,
time and capacity using videos provided.
Retrieved from
https://www.youtube.com/shorts/dFIFPv7SiFs
?feature=share
Retrieved from Weight – Units and their
conversion | Mathematics Grade 4 | Periwinkle
Retrieved from Converting Units of Time
(Hours to Minutes)
Retrieved from https://th.bing.com/th/id/OIP.PSnMvr-
Retrieved from Converting Lengths (Meters and
c6IWjQpqm6lXwUgAAAA?rs=1&pid=ImgDetMain
Kilometres)
Retrieved from Capacity Units And Their
Conversion | Maths For Kids | Periwinkle
Place learners in groups to observe their peers
convert units of measurement before attempting
to do conversions independently.
Learners then move from group to group to
teach the conversion and learn from the experts
of the other conversions from members of the
other group. This is done until all members of
each group have visited each other’s group and
grasp the understanding of all the conversions.
301
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from https://files.pango.education/resource-
thumbnails/medium/dfe51994-3841-4758-b920-
5e5ffacb4668.
Checklist
I can determine at least 4/6 appropriate units in EACH
worksheet
yes/no
Peer Assessment: To determine whether learners can
correctly convert the different units of measurement
(e.g., mm to cm to m to km) (Outcomes 6, 7).
Learners will complete conversion worksheets and one
word problem involving conversion. Invite learners to
correct the work of their peers.
e.g.
Note: 1 kilometre (km) = 1,000 meter (m)
1 m = 100 centimetres (cm) = 1,000 millimetres (mm)
Convert to the units shown:
1. 73 m =___ mm 2. 45 m = ____mm
3. 20 m = ____cm 4. 49 m = ____cm
5. 67 m = _____cm 6. 89 m = ___cm
7. 13 m = mm 8. 17 cm = mm
302
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
9. 22 m = cm 10. 31 m = cm
Retrieved from https://www.k5learning.com/free-math-
worksheets/fifth-grade-5/measurement/metric-units-
length-km-m-cm-mm
Sara bought 500 ml of mustard oil, 250 ml of coconut oil
and 2 l of refined oil. What is the total quantity of the 3
oils together in ml?
Checklist
Learner can accurately convert at least 6/10 units
yes/no
Learner can solve word problem
yes/no
Additional Resources and Materials
● Protractor
● Computer
● Projector
● https://www.dadsworksheets.com/worksheets/protractor.html
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
https://www.splashlearn.com/math-vocabulary/geometry/angle-measure
https://thirdspacelearning.com/us/math-resources/topic-guides/measurement-and-data/units-of-measurement/
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Calculating Area and Perimeter
Converting time hrs to minutes and vice versa
Geometry - Types of angles
Number Concepts - Rounding off, fractions, decimals
303
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: M1.2. Understanding What and How We Measure - Comparing and Ordering Based on Measurable Attributes
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
1. Recognize angle measure as additive.
2. Understand the role of estimation including personal referents and benchmarks
3. Choose objects that model the attribute being measured, and the sequence of self, non-standard and standard units in comparing and ordering
measurements.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Product: to determine learners’ ability to calculate an Discovery Learning (Outcome 1)
unknown part of an angle, given the total degree of Provide opportunity to determine missing angles
Skills the angle. (Outcome 1) by deduction (using rules) from examples not
1. Solve addition and subtraction drawn to scale.
problems to find unknown angles Kyle is adding angles to create other angles.
on a diagram in real world and The teacher draws angles and divides them into
Fill in the circles to select the angles Kyle can use to create
mathematical problems, e.g., by two or more parts, not drawn to scale with sizes of
a 128º angle.
using an equation with a symbol each part included. The learners are then asked to
for the unknown angle measure. Fill in the circles to select the angles that Kyle can use to calculate the total size of the angle.
create a 55º angle.
2. Identifying non-standard
measuring unit when measuring
angles
3. Identify a referent for a given
common non-standard
measurement unit
304
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4. Estimate measures with different
attributes using non-standard units
and personal referents
Values
5. Use personal referents to compare
and order measurements of objects
in the environment
Retrieved by
Retrieved from
https://learnbright.org/lessons/math/angles-and-
https://th.bing.com/th/id/OIP.G86LR3VTOzEydnBRA
equations/
HESQgAAAA?rs=1&pid=ImgDetMain
Checklist
Learners can determine at latest 5 /9 missing angles
yes/no
305
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Self-Assessment: Learners will explore the concept of Video Assisted Learning (VAL)/ guided
measurements using non-standard units.(Outcome 2) discovery/Independent Learning
Provide learners with the opportunity to use real-
life situations, and discussions to apply the usage of
non-standard measuring units
1. Present video and engage learners in a
discussion on non-standard measuring
Retrieved from https://www.math-only- units.
math.com/measurement-of-length.html For example, can you think of any other
object not mentioned in the video that can
Using either hand span or ‘feet’. Each learner will measure be used as a non-standard unit of
a suitable object of your choice for example their desk. measurement? What can it be used to
measure?
Non Standard Units of Measuring
Checklist
I can measure using non-standard measuring units. 2. Invite learners to complete the activity on
● Yes the site from questions 3 - 12 after there is
● No a review of the content presented on the
● Somewhat page as a whole class discussion.
Retrieved from https://www.math-only-
Observation : learners will determine what can be math.com/measurement-of-length.html
measured using these items
1. Learners are given a variety of items, such as
paper clips, coins, beans etc. 3. Provide items to measure and they state
the best non-standard unit to use and also
provide valid reasoning why.
Example. What is the distance around the school
building?
Retrieved from https://brainly.in/question/48547864
306
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Checklist Invite learners to demonstrate as in the case of
Learners can identify at least ¾ non-standard measuring strides, hand spans etc. Lead learners to deduce
units that strides for example will take a shorter time to
● Yes measure, as it is a bit more practical than using
● No hand spans or foot spans.
Guided Discovery using critical thinking
Provide learners with the opportunity to use
various items as non-standard units of
measurements.
1. Invite learners to collect items shown
below, then identify what each item can be
used to measure.
Retrieved from https://physicsgoeasy.com/non-
standard-units-of-measurement/
2. Invite learners to complete the worksheet
below.
307
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product: to determine learners' ability to estimate
using non-standard units
Retrieved from
https://walshysclassroom.wordpress.com/wp-
content/uploads/2017/04/nonstandard.png?w=44
7&h=373
Guided Discovery using critical
Retrieved from Provide learners with the opportunity to estimate
https://www.havefunteaching.com/resource/subject/mat using non-standard units. For example:
h/measurement/estimating-and-measuring-with-tools-
worksheet/ Invite learners to work in groups of two or three.
Learners will construct a scale using a hanger, two
(Adapt worksheet to allow learners to use centimetres and paper cups, and a string.
metres only) learners will use simple objects as referents to
measure the weight of common items found in the
classroom
308
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Conversation- determine learners' ability to discuss
relevant content in ordering the measurement of
objects
Learners are invited to work through the site provided and
observe.
Retrieved from https://scienceres-edcp-
educ.sites.olt.ubc.ca/files/2015/01/elem_math_shape_vol
ume.pdf
Learners will be engaged in discussions with teachers
on measurement accuracy when using referents.
■ Are “hands” or “feet” a good unit of measure?
Why or why not?
■ There is a box of cookies that is three hands wide Retrieved from
and another box of cookies that is five hands https://jdaniel4smom.com/2018/05/make-
wide. The boxes are exactly the same size. How homemade-balance-scale-to-weigh-chickens-
can this be? activity.html
■ Why do you think “inches” and “feet” (the kind
of feet you find on a yardstick or tape measure)
are better units of measure than “hands” and Use reflective observation and guided
“feet”? discovery
Provide opportunity for learners to model
Learners can use appropriate non-standard measuring attributes being measured for example:
units to model the attribute being measured
● Yes
● No Use your hands and feet to measure the classroom
● Somewhat furniture.
309
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
■ First, have learners measure all the
classroom objects (the height of a desk,
the width of a door frame)
■ Next, take your turn (teacher), measuring
all the same objects using your hands or
feet.
■ Together, find the difference of each
measurement set by subtracting the
number of “hands” or “feet” that the
learners measured from the number of
“hands” or “feet” that the teacher
measured. Since children and adults don’t
have the same size hands, the
measurements will be very different!
Discovery using Guided/Independent
Learning)
1. Invite learners to use the manipulatives to
find the distance around the desk as well
as the area. The lesson should not be time
constraint but to develop mastery.
Learners use cubes to measure the perimeter of the
desk surface in front of them.
310
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from Google Images
Invite learners to bring items from home, such as a
large and small coke bottle, as well as small and
large bottles of water. Learners will determine how
much of the small bottle fills the large one and vice
versa.
Retrieved from Google Images
311
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from Google Images
Additional Resources and Materials
https://www.varsitytutors.com/common_core_4th_grade_math-help/recognize-angle-measure-as-additive-ccss-math-content-4-md-c-7
https://us.sofatutor.com/math/videos/additive-angles-2
https://www.commoncoresheets.com/angles-worksheets?filter_by_grade=7
Text, worksheets, www.splashlearn.com
Protractor
https://mathsframe.co.uk/en/resources/category/234/year-6-block-d-estimate-angles-and-use-a-protractor-to-measure-and-draw-them-on-
their-own-and-in-shapes-calculate-angles-in-a-triangle-or-around-a-point
https://quizizz.com/en/measurement-and-weight-worksheets-class-1
312
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Math Antics - Angle Basics
https://www.splashlearn.com/math-vocabulary/geometry/angle-measure
Additive angles - Part 1
Referents: A referent is an object that can be used to help estimate a measurement. Referents are used to estimate the length of an object in centimetres,
meters, and millimetres
Nonstandard units of measurement are units of measurement that are not typically used, such as a pencil, an arm, a toothpick, or a shoe. We can use just
about anything as a nonstandard unit of measurement
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Statistics - Pictographs
Patterns and Relations
Geometry - Types of angles
Number Concepts - Rounding off, fractions, decimals
313
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: M1.3. Understanding What and How We Measure - Developing and Applying Non-standard Units of Measure
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• select and use appropriate non-standard measuring units including personal referents and benchmarks that model the attribute being measured
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Entrance Slip - to determine learners’ level in Discovery using Guided/video assisted
competency using non-standard unit of measurement learning/Independent Learning
Skills Each learner will measure and record only the objects
listed below using either hand span or ‘feet’. Teacher will
1. Use non-standard to estimate the measure measure and learner will record difference. Provide opportunities to identify classroom
of objects objects best suited to be measured in non-
standard units for example:
Knowledge
1. Invite learners to identify two items in
2. Identify a referent for a given common the class that can be measured using
non-standard measurement unit each of these body parts.
3. Estimate a non-standard measuring unit
using personal referents
Retrieved from Google Image
Values
Checklist
4. Use personal referents to model attributes Learner records a difference within 1 or 2 units for all
being measured objects
● Yes
5. Use appropriate non-standard units to ● No
Retrieved from Google Images
measure the attribute being modelled
2. Present learners with the video and
engage in a discussion with the teacher
on non-standard measuring units.
Non-standard Units of Measuring
314
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Conversation / Observation : to determine learners’
ability to referents to estimate measurement Use reflective observation and guided
Learners will be given a variety of items, such as paper discovery
clips, coins, beans etc. Learners will determine what can
be measured using these items. Provide opportunity for learners to use a
referent guide to measure objects
1.1B Referents
For example if crayons are stacked on each
other, how many crayons is the length of your
pencil. If each crayon is 1cm in diameter, then
how long is your pencil in cm,
Retrieved from Google Images
Learners can identify referent for a non-standard unit
● Yes
● No
● Somewhat
Retrieved from
https://boingboing.net/2017/07/25/this-pack-
of-hamilton-cray.html
315
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Observation : to determine learners’ ability to
compare non-standard units using other objects Use reflective observation and guided
discovery
1. In the flower shop, the owner does not have any
batteries remaining but he has croissants. Provide opportunity for interaction with
Using the information below, how many croissants is personal referents for example:
equal to two flower pots?
1. Give learners a chopstick of 5cm.
Find something in the classroom that is about:
Learners can identify a referent for a given common non-
standard measurement unit
● Yes
● No
2. How many shirts can be hung on this wire? 2. Using paper clips and/ or blocks,
measure the length of your pencil. Use
the pencil to measure the distance from
one end of the class to the next. The
information collected is then converted
into a number of blocks or paper clips
Retrieved from Google Images
equivalent to the measurement.
Learners can identify a referent for a given common non-
standard measurement unit
● Yes
● No
316
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3. How many cups can be placed in a line on this
table?
Retrieved from Google Images
Learners can identify a referent for a given common non-
Retrieved from Google Images
standard measurement unit
● Yes
● No
3. Use the small buckets from the class
kitchen to fill a jug. How many buckets
were needed?
Retrieved from Google Images
317
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product/Peer Assessment : to allow learners to use Practical Activity
referents in a real- life situation Provide opportunity for practical ways to model
use of referents for example:
Learners will work in pairs to dramatize the following for
a week. One learner will pretend to be the patient and the Pair learners to measure each other's height
other nurse. Learners will make records and discuss the using a hand span. Each learner will lean against
methods used to arrive at the given answer at the end of a wall or an object while the other learners mark
the week. (chocolate syrup could be used as the their height using chalk. Then, measure the
medication height using a hand span.
The doctor prescribed 5 ml every 8 hrs for 5 days. One
spoonful shown measures 5 ml. At the end of the 5 days
how many spoons would the child have consumed and
what is the remainder in terms of spoonful.
Retrieved from
Retrieved from Google Images
https://qualitymatters.usp.org/sites/default/files/blogs/c
ontent-images/Teaspoon-BlogArticle.jpg
Record your findings and share with the class.
318
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Text, worksheets, www.splashlearn.com (teachers can adapt worksheet accordingly)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Nonstandard units of measurement are units of measurement that are not typically used, such as a pencil, an arm, a toothpick, or a shoe. We can use just about
anything as a nonstandard unit of measurement
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Operations- operations can be used during conversion by apply division and multiplication primarily
319
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: M1.4. Understanding What and How We Measure - Developing and Applying Standard Units of Measure
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
● Measure angles in whole-number degrees using a protractor;
● Draw angles of specified measurement
● Convert among different-sized standard measurement units within a given measurement system (e.g., convert 5 cm to 0.05 m), and use these conversions
in solving multi-step, real-world problems.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Entrance Slip- to determine learners’ ability to Revision using Practical Games and
estimate and measure angles Technology )
Skills
1. Estimate the size of an angle Provide opportunity for competition in
2. Measure angles in whole-number degrees 1. Learners will work in groups of four to complete the reviewing measuring angles. The learner who
using a protractor form gets the most correct wins.
3. Draw angles of specified measure 1. Divide class into teams.
4. Convert among different-sized standard Teams of 3 will take turns using their hands to
measurement units within a given represent angles. The other teams will guess the
measurement system (e.g., convert 5 cm size of the angle. The team closest to the correct
to 0.05 m), answer gets the points. If they are both correct,
5. Use conversions of different-sized they both get the point.
standard measurement units within a
given measurement system to solve multi- 2. Log into the given site independently. Follow
step problems the instructions of this interactive game
Estimate Angles | Turtle Diary Quiz
Values
Retrieved from
https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/math/grade-5-
6. Describe a problem/experience/scenario
geometry-estimate-angles-a.pdf
encountered that involves the multiple Guided Discovery using critical thinking
conversion of units. Provide alternate methods for estimating angles
Learners are given a worksheet to complete.
for example:
Measure Angles by Folding Paper
320
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Cut a paper in circular shape using a bangle
or compass.
● Fold it once to get the shape of a
semicircle. The straight edge of the
semicircle formed shows the 180 degree
angle.
● Again fold it into equal half and mark
the folded line. Now, mark 90 degrees in
this fold.
● Fold the 90 degrees into equal half, then
we get an angle equal to 45 degrees.
Retrieved from https://encrypted-
Now if we open the sheet to have the
tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcTgoDLd6iCgZc
semi-circle shape, then the mark
I46LDspqO54wdyhLRttwCNsg&s
opposite to the 45 degrees, across 90
degrees, can be marked as 135 degrees
(45 + 90 = 135).
Self-Assessment/Product - to determine learners’
● Fold the 45 degrees mark, then we will
ability to mark of angles on a protractor
get the angle equal to 22 ½ degrees and
1. Draw a second ray to create the angles shown.
the angle on the left of 135 degrees will
Label each angle as acute, obtuse, right or straight.
be (135 + 22 ½ = 157 ½ degrees).
Retrieved from https://cdn1.byjus.com/wp-
content/uploads/2021/07/how-to-measure-
angles-by-folding-paper.png
Guided Discovery using video assisted
learning)
321
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Provide opportunity for video assisted
demonstration of using the protractor to draw
angles
Present video on how to use the protractor.
How to Use a Protractor | Math Videos for
Kids | Measuring Angles | Geometry for Kids |
Twinkl
Complete the worksheet by circling the correct
answer.
Use reflective observation and guided
discovery (
Provide opportunity for learners to manipulate
the protractor to draw angles. For example:
Retrieved from
1. Equip learners with small protractors to
https://media.studyx.ai/us/6bad6d39/3879cc3a81374c7f
manipulate. Teacher will then
9f4bfdc58c43b7b0.jpg
demonstrates the proper use of the
protractor (chalkboard appropriate)
through illustrations using both scales
Checklist
(left and right vertex)
1. I can mark off at least 4/6 angles correctly
yes/no
2. Using a protractor, draw and classify the
following angles.
2. Draw the following angles using the
provided ray as a starting point.
322
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
30° 145° 95°
1. Draw the following angles
a. 55°
b. 125°
c. 20°
d. 160°
Checklist
Guided discovery using real-life application
I can draw at least 3/5 angles correctly
yes/no
Provide opportunity for real-life application
involving the conversion of units.
Conversation/Product - to determine learners’ ability
solve simple problems involving conversion of
1. Using a scale, measuring cups and other
capacity
measuring units, learners will practice
converting measurement. For example,
pour 1500 ml of water into a 2-litre
1. The doctor insisted I drink 2 litres of water a day.
bottle. Record the amount of water in
How many bottles of this water should I drink
the bottle in litres.
daily?
323
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from
https://5.imimg.com/data5/NQ/OV/MY-
27015760/250-ml-packaged-water-bottle.jpg
2. John wants to order some clothes on Shein for
his children. The measurements on the Shein
clothing sites are in inches but John only knows
his children's measurements in cm. Fill out the
table using the conversion below so John can buy
the right sizes for his kids.
Retrieved from
https://www.learningfarm.com/web/practicePa
ssThrough.cfm?TopicID=648
Use reflective observation
Provide learners with the given scenario and
observe how they arrive at their respective
conclusions.
‘The local shop has run out of quarters in the
cash register. $20 is given to the messenger
Retrieved from Google Images
to go to the nearest bank to buy quarters.’
Checklist
With how many quarters should the messenger return?
Guided Discovery using critical thinking
Learner can convert units accurately
Provide learners with opportunity to use details
yes/somewhat/no
from charts, advertisements, travelling
tickets/schedules, work schedules etc. as a guide
for conversions in time.
324
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Conversation/ Observation- to provide opportunity to
discuss conversions with money
How many of each these do I need to obtain
a. $1
b. $10
c. $100
Retrieved from Units of Time Conversion Chart
How many ten cents will give you $1?
How many $1 will give you $10?
How many 10c will give you $10?
Peer Assessment- to provide opportunity to discuss
conversions with time. Peers will assess each other's
responses under teacher’s supervision.
325
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Leah loves to cook with fresh herbs. So, she decides to
plant 8 different herbs and keep the small pots on her
kitchen window sill. She starts with a 2-kilogram bag of
soil and puts the same amount of soil in each pot. If she
uses all of the soil, how many grams does she add to each
pot?
Retrieved from
Multi-step problems with metric unit conversions | 6th
grade math
Fill in the blanks:
(i) 1 day = …………….. hours
(ii) 1 week = …………….. hours
(iii) 1 fortnight = …………….. hours
(iv) Number of days in the month of March =
……………..
(v) Number of days in an ordinary year = ……………..
(vi) Number of weeks in a year = ……………..
(vii) Number of minutes in 2 days = ……………..
(viii) …………….. Months have 31 days.
Checklist
Learner can accurately convert at least ⅝ units
yes/no
326
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
● Money
● Measuring tape
● Meter ruler
● Measuring cup
● Related text book
● Printed worksheets
● https://www.geogebra.org/m/jvav67sm
● https://www.geogebra.org/m/jvav67sm
● Angle Unlimited
● Angle
● Learn Metric Units & Unit Conversions (Meters, Liters, Grams, & more) - [5-8-1]
●
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
In the metric system, all units are defined in terms of a basic unit.
The basic unit of mass in the metric system is the gram.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Operations- requires the ability to use all the basic operations
Geometry- drawing angles or shapes
Number theory- fractions, decimals
327
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: M2.1. Applying Techniques, Tools and Formulas for Measuring – Developing Personal Referents for Measuring
Attributes
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Develop and apply relationships within systems of measurement and relate to place value concepts
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Observation Video presentation
Present groups of learners with objects labelled with varying Provide learners with opportunities to connected place
Knowledge lengths/masses/ capacities. Have learners work on converting value to metric unit conversions. Invite learners to
the units to given units of measurement using the place value recognize that larger metric units, like litres, kilograms,
1. Recognize the relationship chart. Observe learners as they use the chart to convert between and kilometres, are 1,000 times their smaller
between the metric system of units. counterparts, such as millilitres, grams, and meters.
measurement and place value Question learners to discover similar patterns in place
2. Explain how to convert Oral Presentation value, where 1 thousand is 1,000 times 1 one, and 1
between various units of Have learners work in small groups. Each team will be given hundred thousand is 1,000 times 1 hundred. Have
measurement using a place work cards on which they will be required to solve real-life learners to further linked this to smaller relationships,
value chart problems involving the conversion between units of measurement such as 1 meter being 100 times 1 centimetre, just like 1
relating to length/mass/capacity. Have learners solve the hundred is 100 times 1 one. Both systems rely on powers
Skills problems then explain to the class how to perform the of ten, reinforcing learners’ understanding of scaling in
calculations using the place value chart. math.
3. Use a place value chart to
convert measurements from Product Present a video clip to learners to demonstrate the
one unit to another. Complete a worksheet involving the conversion of units relating procedure for converting between units. Discuss real-life
4. Solve real-life problems relating to length/mass/capacity. situations that require the conversion from one unit to
to unit conversion Source: chrome- another. Model the procedure for converting from a
extension://efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj/https://www. higher unit to a lower unit and vice versa. Metric
Values k5learning.com/worksheets/math/grade-5-metric-units-length- Conversion with a Place Value Chart
km-m-cm-mm-a.pdf
5. Create real-life problem that
involve conversions of units.
328
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6. Ask questions involving the Group work
connections between place Divide learners into groups of 4. Present each group with
value and metric conversions of two (3) worded problems involving the conversion from
units one unit to another. Provide place value charts for each
group and guide learners as they work on solving the first
problem. Give each group the opportunity to solve the
other two (2) problems then present their answers to the
rest of the class.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
When converting from one unit of measurement to another, it is necessary to make the connection to place value units. For example: (For linear
measurement) 10 millimetres = 1 centimetre 100 centimetres = 1 metre 1000 metres = 1 kilometre
The units are emphasized in multiples of 10.
Examples: Harry travelled a distance of 80 kilometres. Calculate the distance he travelled in metres
80km = ______m ( To convert km to m, you multiply 80 by 1000) 80 x 1000 = 80,000 m
A place value chart can also be used to convert between units.
329
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
The same principle applies to mass and capacity.
Additional Resources and Materials
Add meters and centimetres pattern Sheets
Personal white boards
Unlabelled hundred thousand place value chart (Template) and Unlabelled hundred thousands
place value chart
330
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Source: chrome-extension://efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj/https://orchardsjunior.school/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/Converting-Measures-guide.pdf
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Maths: Converting between units
Language Arts: Writing a poem/jingle about unit conversion
Social Studies: Calculating the
Health:
Science: Converting between units - e.g. Calculating the distance travelled by an object (6 kilometres to metres ) / Calculating the capacity of containers in
selected units etc.
Art: Creating a place chart to demonstrate how to convert between units
331
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: M2.2. Applying Techniques, Tools and Formulas for Measuring – Using Tools to Measure Attributes
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Measure, classify, compare, and create angles using standard units of degrees, using a protractor
• Estimate angles using benchmarks
• Understand and demonstrate the selection and use of appropriate measuring tools that model the attribute being measured.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Self-assessment Ask learners to brainstorm how angles are used in
Have learners work independently to measure the size of various the world around us. Create a list from the
Knowledge types of angles using a protractor. Present a self-assessment brainstorming session.
checklist for them to use to assess their ability to use a protractor Discuss the following questions:
1. Identity the different types of angles correctly. How do people in various professions use angles to
2. Write the measurement of angles in complete their work?
degrees How do all people use angles in their everyday
lives?
Skills How do you (as a child/learner) use angles?
3. Use a protractor to measure angles Review the concept of angles and how they are
4. Draw angles using a protractor formed.
5. Classify angles according to their Present learners with the following scenario:
measurement AJ and Kayla are working at the Bookshop. They
are setting up a new sales display that includes
several different math tools which includes rulers
and protractors. AJ and Kayla are not familiar with
a protractor.
Observation
AJ asked, “What is a protractor?"
Activity #1: Have learners work in pairs to use
protractors to determine the size of various angles.
Can you help AJ and Kayla solve some problems
Learners measure the angles and classify them
using a protractor?
according to their sizes/types.
Present a video to demonstrate how to use a
Activity # 2: Present various sizes of angles to the
protractor to measure angles. Present various types
learners. Have them use their protractors to draw angles
332
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
to match the given measurements. They will then of angles to learners and have them practise using
classify the angles by labelling the type of angle each. the protractor to measure the angles.
After completing this activity, have learners display their
work for their classmates to check for accuracy. Have learners create angles out of toothpicks.
Angles can be created out of simple toothpicks and
glued to construction paper creating a sheet of
angles. Learners can exchange angle sheets and
then measure each angle with a protractor, record
the measurement in degrees, and identify the angle.
Using the toothpick models, ask learners to identify
some objects that might resemble or contain each
of the angles created. For example, a rectangle end
table contains right angles at the corners, a recliner
set back might resemble an obtuse angle, and the
beak of bird may look acute.
Worksheet
Provide learners with crayons or coloured pencils
Have learners complete a worksheet on which they use a protractor
to turn the toothpick models into images and
to measure given angles and classify them by type.
drawings. Display the creative work of your
Source: https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/math/grade-
learners.
5-geometry-classify-measure-angles-a.pdf
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Angles are measured in degrees. To find the size of an angle, we use a geometric tool called the protractor. A protractor looks like a semicircle and has
measurements marled in degrees from zero (0) to one hundred and eight (180). There are 360 degrees in a full rotation.
The midpoint of the protractor is called the centre marker. The numbering on a protractor often runs clockwise and anticlockwise. It is very important to follow
the steps when using a protractor to draw or measure angles.
333
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Source: https://www.ixl.com/math/lessons/measuring-angles-with-a-protractor
How to use a protractor
To measure an angle using a protractor, follow the steps below.
1. Ensure that you align the vertex of the angle with the dot at the centre of the protractor.
1. Line up one side of the angle with 0 degrees on the protractor.
2. Read the scale on the protractor to identify where the other side of the angle crosses the number scale.
Most protractors have two number scales. It is important to use the same number scale for both sides of the angle.
Additional Resources and Materials
Construction Paper
Crayons or Coloured Pencils
Glue
Index Cards
Pencils
Protractor
Toothpicks
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Maths:
Language Arts: write a descriptive paragraph on how to use a protractor.
Social Studies: use a protractor to find out the distance of one country from another.
Health:
Science:
Art: use a ruler and protractor to create an art piece.
334
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: M2.3: Applying Techniques, Tools and Formulas for Measuring – Developing and Applying Formulae for Measuring
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Apply the area, perimeter, volume formulae for rectangles, triangles, parallelograms, composite shapes and prisms in real world and mathematical
problems.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Observation Give each learner a geo board and a pack of
Teacher observes learners as they use given formulae to rubber bands. Begin by inviting learners free
Knowledge calculate the area and perimeter of selected 2D shapes exploration for five minutes. Then ask them to
and composite shapes. create a shape and calculate the perimeter and
1. Identify appropriate formulae to find the Teacher observes learners actions in forming the shapes area. Have learners taking turns giving
perimeter of rectangles, triangles, parallelograms on the geoboard. measurements to the class of the shape they
and composite shapes. Conversation made, like, “Make a triangle with a perimeter of
2. Identify appropriate formulae to find the area Pupils work in pairs using given lengths of sides and 16,” or “Make a rectangle with an area of 8.”
of rectangles, triangles, parallelograms and perimeter and or area and generalise Formulas Each Everyone tries it on their geo boards and holds
composite shapes. pair will present to the entire class their method of them up to show their answers.
3. State how to use the formula to calculate the generating the formula. For example:
volume of prisms. Perimeter for square: Learners are given tools and instruments to
(4 x L.) (L + L + L + L.) (L +L × 2) etc. measure the sides of different shapes. They will
Skills find the perimeter of each shape by adding the
sides. Have learners find the perimeter and area
4. Calculate the area, perimeter, and volume of of polygons by counting the sides of a rectangle
rectangles, triangles, parallelograms, composite and find the area by counting the square units and
shapes and prisms. then by using the formula of length time’s width.
5. Solve real world problems involving the Learners find the perimeter and area by using the
calculation of area, perimeter, and volume of formula and adding the sides together.
Product
selected shapes.
Complete a worksheet by using the formula for calculating the
These shapes and their perimeter will be recorded
volume of prisms.
Values on the board. Learners will observe the shapes
Pupils use given perimeters and areas to create 2 D
and the perimeter and formulate formulas to find
shapes.
6. Discuss the importance of being able to find perimeter.
the area, perimeter and volume of selected 2D Learners then draw shapes with given perimeters
shapes, composite shapes and prisms. with and without grid paper. Have learners find
335
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
7. Appreciate the use of area, perimeter and the missing side of a rectangle when the perimeter
volume in real life situations. is given.
Teacher will also present the perimeter to learners
create a shape with that perimeter.
Additional Resources and Materials
Geoboard
Rubber bands
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Maths: calculate the perimeter of the classrooms and arrange the seats given a specific distance apart.
Language Arts: penned a poem on how to find perimeter.
Social Studies:
Health:
Science: Measure a plot of land to cultivate crops and the distance from each seedling calculate how many of the seedlings can be planted on the plot of land.
Art: Create models of different shapes using given perimeters.
336
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Data Handling and Probability
Introduction:
In our increasingly data-driven world, the ability to collect, organise, and interpret data is essential. Whether you're looking to understand patterns in learner
performance, make informed decisions in business, or simply make sense of the world around you, data plays a crucial role.
Understanding how to formulate questions and work with data equips you with powerful skills that apply in countless real-world scenarios. From assessing the
effectiveness of teaching strategies and improving learner outcomes to making strategic business decisions or contributing to scientific research, the ability to handle
data is invaluable.
Essential Learning Outcome: D1.1. Collecting, Organizing, and Displaying Data – Formulating Questions That Can be Answered with Data
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Recognize a statistical question as one that anticipates variability in the data related to the question and accounts for it in the answers
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Observation Provide opportunities for learners to identify and
Learners are given a list of questions and are told to pose questions that can be answered by data that
Knowledge identify which ones are statistical by considering varies. This task helps them distinguish between
variability. statistical and non-statistical questions. For
1. Identify and explain the role of variability example, a statistical question involves data
in formulating and interpreting statistical collection with expected variation, like "How
questions. many minutes do 6th graders spend on
2. Explain that different factors (e.g., time homework each week?" In contrast, a non-
period, location, population) can statistical question, such as "How much time did
influence variability in data and affect the Juana spend on homework last night?" has a
formulation of statistical questions. single, fixed answer without variation.
3. Interpret findings from statistical analyses
in a way that acknowledges and explains Teacher will discuss the definition of a statistical
variability. question and provide examples. Teacher will
337
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
provide hypothetical objects or scenarios to
Skills learners to illustrate the concept of statistical
question:
4. Recognize what constitutes a statistical For example:
question. Ask learners whether "How old is my pet dog?" is a
5. Differentiate between statistical and non- statistical question. Explain that it's not, since there's only
statistical questions. one subject, so no variability exists. Then, discuss how to
6. Apply the concept of variability in rewrite it into a statistical question, such as "How old are
answers to statistical questions the pets of the learners in our class?" This question
involves a population (learners' pets) and a measurement
Values (pets' ages), where variability in the ages is expected.
7. Create real life situation involving the Ask learners why "What is my favourite pizza topping?"
influence of variability in data. is not a statistical question. Then, have them rewrite it as
one, such as "What is the favourite pizza topping of
learners in this class?" The population is the learners, the
measurement is their favourite topping, and we would
expect varied responses like cheese, sausage, or pepperoni.
Survey Responses from Learners:
Object: Charts or graphs showing survey responses from
Source:https://cdn.education.com/worksheet- learners on different topics.
image/3535052/statistical-questions-card-sort-2023-01- Scenario: Teacher presents survey data on topics that
25.gif interest learners (like favourite sports, TV shows, or
hobbies). Teacher discusses with learners how questions
Learners will analyse a real-world data set and write about preferences can anticipate variability in responses.
their own statistical questions that anticipate variability. Example of a statistical question: "What is the
most popular sport among learners in our grade?"
Explanation: This question anticipates variability
because it recognizes that different learners may have
different favourite sports, and the answer (most popular
sport) takes this variability into account.
338
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Teacher will clarify the concept of variability in
Conversation data and how it impacts the answers to statistical
questions.
Provide scenarios where learners can generalized
that a well-written statistical question refers to a
population of interest, a measurement of
interest, and anticipates answers that vary.
Source:https://images.squarespace-
cdn.com/content/v1/6282ec55d5f3c229291fcb47/167
4437692155-M76N7FPBYPLS0T7J5SXQ/image-
asset.jpeg
Think Pair Share Activities
Pairs of learners will be given a list of questions and
they will have to identify which ones are statistical
questions based on the concept of variability. They
would present their explanations orally to the rest of the
class.
Learners will go on a scavenger hunt around their
school to find examples of statistical questions and
explain the variability they account for.
339
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product
Learners find examples of statistical questions in the
news or online and highlight the presence of variability
in the data.
Learners will write a short story that incorporates a
statistical question and describes how the answer
accounts for variability.
Additional Resources and Materials
Statistical Questions Worksheet Level A and Level B: For example, retrieved from https://www.statisticsteacher.org/files/2019/02/Section1.pdf
Link teaching about statistics: Conduct statistical investigations : Year 6: Planning tool (mathematicshub.edu.au)
Additional Resources and Materials
Statistical Questions Worksheet Level A and Level B: For example, retrieved from https://www.statisticsteacher.org/files/2019/02/Section1.pdf
340
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Link teaching about statistics: Conduct statistical investigations : Year 6: Planning tool (mathematicshub.edu.au)
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Maths: Learners answer questions based on graphs presented to them.
Language Arts: Learners know how to form questions to get answers they are looking for.
Social Studies: Learners use statistics to get the population of the school.
Health: Learners will track their daily physical activities and analyse the data to understand their activity levels.
Science: Learners identify weather patterns and can make judgement based on the weather patterns observed.
341
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: D1.2. Collecting, Organizing, and Displaying Data – Collecting, Organizing, Displaying and Communicating Data
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Collect qualitative data and discrete and continuous quantitative data to answer questions of interest about a population, and organize the sets of data as
appropriate, including using intervals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Observation Teacher and learners will distinguish between
Learners will create a survey to collect qualitative qualitative data (descriptions and characteristics) and
Knowledge and quantitative data from their classmates. Then, quantitative data (numerical measurements) and
organise the data in appropriate intervals and answer identify examples of discrete (countable) and
1. Explain the difference between questions based on the data collected. continuous (measurable) quantitative data.
qualitative and quantitative data. Peer Assessment For example:
Learners will exchange data sets with their classmate The teacher and learners will discuss examples of qualitative
Skills and provide feedback on how they organised and data (e.g., favourite colours, types of pets) and quantitative data
analysed the information (e.g., number of siblings, temperature). Sort examples into
2. Identify discrete and continuous discrete and continuous categories.
quantitative data. Conversation
3. Use tally charts and compute facility Give learners scenarios involving qualitative data, as
(spreadsheets, Microsoft excel) to well as discrete and continuous quantitative data. Ask
organize collected data. them to sort the scenarios into these three categories
4. Organise data sets using intervals. and explain their reasoning.
5. Use grid paper and computer software
(Excel program) to create tables, Continuously reinforce the differences between these
simple vertical and horizontal bar data types as learners identify which kind is needed to
graphs and simple line graphs. answer their questions of interest.
6. Analyse data to answer questions of
interest Teacher teaches learners how to construct frequency
tables, histograms (for continuous data), and bar
Values charts (for discrete and qualitative data). The teacher
emphasises the importance of choosing appropriate
7. Show how data collection and analysis intervals for grouping data (e.g., ages grouped in 5-
are used in various fields (e.g., health year intervals).
342
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
surveys, market research, Source:https://www.csionline.org/files/assets/imag
environmental studies). es/medium/1583527988_Learners.Presenting.Data.j
pg
Learners create a poster, slideshow, or video to
present their data collection and analysis to the class.
Learners compare and contrast qualitative and
quantitative data they collected. They explain how
the data provided different information about the
population.
Product
Learners will observe their surroundings and
identify examples of qualitative and quantitative
data. They record their observations in a journal and
categorise the data they collect.
Source:https://media.geeksforgeeks.org/wp-
content/uploads/20231004173705/Histogram.webp
Learners will create presentations or reports that
summarise their data collection process, findings, Use the data from learners’ heights in the class to
and conclusions. They will use graphs, charts, and make a histogram. After learners complete their
tables to support their explanations and histograms, have them compare with partners who
interpretations. used larger and smaller intervals. Help them see how
different interval sizes change the histogram’s
appearance, with smaller bins showing more detail
and larger bins showing less.
Provide learners with a bar graph or histogram that
presents information in a misleading way. For
example, the histogram below does not start at zero
on the vertical axis, nor does it have a consistent scale
for the age of guests. Have learners describe what
makes this graph misleading. Ask them to recreate the
graph so that it presents the information accurately
343
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Quantitative data is either discrete or continuous.
Discrete data includes variables that can be counted using whole numbers, such as the number of learners in a class, the number of pencils in a pencil case, or
the number of words in a sentence.
Continuous data can have an infinite number of possible values for a given range of a variable (e.g., height, length, distance, mass, time, perimeter, and area).
Continuous data can take on any numerical value, including decimals and fractions.
Understanding the features and purposes of different kinds of graphs is important when selecting appropriate displays for a set of data.
Pictographs, line plots, bar graphs, multiple-bar graphs, and stacked-bar graphs are used to display qualitative data and discrete quantitative data.
Histograms display continuous quantitative data using intervals. The bars on a histogram do not have gaps between them due to the continuous nature of the
data. This contrasts with bar graphs, which do have gaps between the bars to show the discrete categories.
Broken-line graphs are used to show change over time and are helpful for identifying trends. To create a broken-line graph, learners apply their understanding
of scales and estimation.
The source, titles, labels, and scales provide important information about data in a graph or table:
The source indicates where the data was collected.
The title introduces the data contained in the graph.
Labels provide additional information, such as the intervals that have been used in a histogram.
Scales identify the possible values of a variable along an axis of a graph.
Introduce learners to tools like spreadsheets (Excel, Google Sheets) for organising and analysing data. Teach them to use graphing tools or software (e.g.,
online graph makers, statistical software) to create charts and plots.
Additional Resources and Materials
Video on teaching about frequency: https://study.com/learn/lesson/frequency-distribution-table.html
Video on making a histogram: How To Make a Histogram Using a Frequency Distribution Table
Online Game on frequency tables: https://ca.ixl.com/math/grade-6/create-frequency-tables
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Maths: Learners see how data collection and analysis are used in market research.
Language Arts: Learners learn how to answer and form ‘w’ questions words correctly.
Social Studies: Learners see how data collection and analysis are used in environmental surveys.
Health: Learners see how data collection and analysis are used in health surveys.
Science: Learners look at the frequency of weather patterns. There is a frequency of weather patterns during certain seasons of the year.
Art: Draw weather patterns to display in the classroom.
344
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: D2.1. Using Statistical Methods to Analyse Data – Describing Data Sets
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Determine whether a given set of data can be represented by a line graph (continuous data) or a series of points (discrete data) and explain why
• Understand that a set of data collected to answer a statistical question has a distribution that can be described by its centre, spread, and overall shape.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Observation Present learners with a set of numerical data and
Learners complete a table highlighting the differences discuss if the data is continuous or discrete.
Knowledge between discrete and continuous data. Learners look at a video on continuous and
discrete data.
1. Identify a given set of data as continuous Video link: Discrete and Continuous Data
or discrete
2. Discuss whether a given data set is
continuous or discrete.
3. Explain the difference between
continuous and discrete data
Skills
4. Select the most suitable graph, such as
histograms or broken-line graphs, to
represent different data sets.
5. Display the data with accurate sources,
titles, labels, and scales, and justify the
Present different types of data sets on the board:
choice of graph.
Categorical data (e.g., favourite colours)
6. Decide between using a line graph and a
Continuous data over time (e.g., temperature
scatter plot (series of points) based on
changes over a week)
information given.
Data showing correlation (e.g., height vs. weight)
7. Describe a data set by its centre, spread,
Guide learners to decide the best graph type for
and shape.
each data set, highlighting:
Histogram: Useful for showing distributions and
frequency of data within ranges.
345
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Line Graph: Best for showing changes over time.
Values Scatter Plot: Ideal for showing relationships or
8. Create real life stories/situations to correlations between two variables.
depict the correct graph to represent
continuous and discrete data.
Explain the importance of accurate titles, labels,
scales, and sources:
Show a sample graph with errors (e.g., no title,
unclear scale, or missing labels) and have learners
identify and correct them.
Display two sample data sets:
Data showing changes over time (for line graph).
Data showing correlation without time sequence
(for scatter plot).
Ask learners to work in pairs to determine which
graph type to use for each data set. Discuss
answers as a class.
Have learners describe data sets:
Introduce the terms centre, spread, and shape:
Center: The middle value or typical value of a
data set (mean or median).
Spread: The range or how spread out the values
are (variance or standard deviation).
Shape: The overall pattern of the data distribution
(e.g., symmetrical, skewed, or bimodal).
Use an example data set to demonstrate these
concepts on a histogram or box plot. Prompt
learners to describe the centre, spread, and shape.
Provide learners with a data set and have them:
346
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Source:https://mathequalslove.net/wp- Choose an appropriate graph type to represent
content/uploads/2017/12/Discrete-vs-Continuous- the data.
Functions-Foldable-3.jpg Create a graph with accurate titles, labels, and
scales.
Learners generate scenarios to fall under the heading Write a short paragraph justifying their graph
continuous and discrete. choice.
Describe the data’s centre, spread, and shape.
Source:https://mathequalslove.net/wp-
content/uploads/2017/12/Discrete-vs-Continuous-
Functions-Foldable-1.jpg
Conversation Source:
Group work https://www.cuemath.com/data/discrete-data/
Learners analyse real-life data sets and decide on the
appropriate graph. Learners will discuss the centre, Provide examples of data sets and have learners
spread, and shape of these data sets and how they help decide which type of graph is appropriate. For
answer statistical questions. instance, plot the temperature over a week
(continuous data, line graph) versus the number
Product of learners arriving at different times (discrete
Learners complete a worksheet identifying discrete and data, scatter plot).
continuous data.
Use real data sets (like test scores or heights) and
guide learners through calculating and interpreting
the centre, spread, and shape. Visual aids like
347
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
histograms or box plots can help illustrate these
concepts.
Instruct groups to create a visual representation
of their data (histogram).
As a class, discuss how to interpret the graphs
and what the centre, spread, and shape indicate
about the data.
Class Discussion:
Explore how different data sets can have similar
centres but different spreads and shapes.
Discuss how the context of the data influences
interpretation.
Source: Continuous & Discrete Data | NMK | Live
Worksheets
Learners collect their own data (e.g., daily temperatures,
number of books read in a month) and create graphs
and descriptive statistics.
Exit Ticket:
Ask learners to answer one of the following questions:
Why would you choose a histogram over a scatter plot?
When is it best to use a line graph?
Define "spread" and provide an example.
348
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Source:https://medium.com/hackernoon/continuous-vs-discrete-variables-in-the-context-of-machine-learning-15d9005e2525
Source:https://mcdowellmatheog.weebly.com/uploads/2/6/7/6/26765014/7479784_orig.png
349
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Line Graphs: Use these for continuous data to show trends over time or a range. Emphasise that the line represents a continuous change.
Scatter Plots: Use these for discrete data to show individual data points. They are ideal for showing relationships between two variables that are not necessarily
continuous.
Understanding the features and purposes of different graphs is essential for selecting the appropriate display for a data set.
Pictographs, line plots, bar graphs, multiple-bar graphs, and stacked-bar graphs are used for qualitative data and discrete quantitative data.
Histograms display continuous quantitative data in intervals, with no gaps between bars, unlike bar graphs, which have gaps to indicate discrete categories.
Broken-line graphs illustrate changes over time and help identify trends, requiring an understanding of scales and estimation.
Key elements for effective graphs include:
Title: Clearly describe what the graph shows.
Labels: Identify what each axis represents.
Scale: Ensure consistent intervals and that the data fits well within the graph.
Source: Acknowledge where the data originated from.
Additional Resources and Materials
Link teaching discrete data: Discrete Data - Cuemath
Link on discrete and continuous data:4-4 Continuous vs. Discrete Data Notes
Whiteboard and markers
Projector/smartboard
Graph paper and rulers
Printed or digital copies of example data sets
Computers or tablets with access to graphing tools (e.g., Excel, Google Sheets, or graphing calculators)
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Social Studies: Learners list examples of discrete and continuous data collected in their country.
Science: Learners identify whether the data collected on the weather is continuous or discrete.
Art: Learners design a chart showing discrete and continuous data.
350
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome D2.2: Using Statistical Methods to Analyse Data – Developing and Applying Methods to Analyse Data Sets
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Recognize that a measure of centre for a numerical data set summarizes all of its values with a single number, while a measure of variation
describes how its values vary with a single number
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Conversation Have learners describe data using mean:
After discussing with their partner in pairs on a measure Define mean as the average of a data set. Please
Knowledge of centre or measure of variation to a statistical question explain how to calculate it (sum of values divided
1. Describe a given set of numerical data given, learners will present their responses to the class by the number of values).
using a measure of centre (mean) orally. This is done by deciding if a measure of centre or Work through a sample data set as a class (e.g.,
2. Describe a given set of numerical data measure of variation is preferred in answering the learner ages and weekly test scores).
using a measure of variation (range) question and why. Calculate the mean together, highlighting how the
3. Determine suitable centres and variation mean represents the centre.
for given data sets
4. Compare different data sets to Using manipulative to find the mean
understand how measures of centre and Learners are presented with counters or building
variation vary. blocks to help them calculate the mean of a given
5. Summarize a given data set in the context data set. First, learners make the height of the
of centre and or variation building block according to each data value then
they are asked to use the building blocks to help
Values the make each stock of building blocks the same
6. Share examples of data sets to model the height
difference between measures of centre For examples:
and measures of variation
351
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://1.bp.blogspot.com/-8tkRZ7-
NhxI/VqtdKFrFz9I/AAAAAAAAGc8/ZTo7K
yuApEM/s1600/Slide3.JPG
Ms Rashid: Find the mean of a data set
(kiciaabdurrashid.blogspot.com)
Understanding how the mean works
Learners are then questioned as to what it means
to have a mean of 5(from the example above).
This is to elicit the fact that if each data set value
were created equally each would be 5.
Learners are then asked to formulate a number
sentence that can be used to calculate the
obtained mean.
measure of variation
Have learners describe data using the range:
Define range as a measure of variation, calculated
as the difference between a data set's highest and
lowest values.
352
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Demonstrate this with the same data set used for
meaning, emphasizing that range shows how
spread out the data values are.
Discuss why some data sets might have a larger or
smaller range and how this reflects variation.
Have learners determine suitable measures for
different data sets:
Present two or three different data sets:
Example 1: A set of quiz scores with values close
together.
Example 2: A set of class heights with a wider
spread of values.
Guide learners in calculating the mean and range
for each data set, discussing which measure (mean
or range) gives more insight into the data’s
characteristics.
Have learners compare different data Sets:
Show two data sets with similar means but
different ranges (e.g., scores from two different
quizzes).
Ask learners to compare them based on the mean
and range, discussing how the difference in range
affects our understanding of the data.
Lead learners in a whole class discussion on how
these differences in range suggest varying levels of
consistency or variability.
Provide learners with a set of data and have them:
Calculate the mean to find the centre.
Calculate the range to understand the variation.
353
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Write a short paragraph summarizing the data,
focusing on the centre (mean) and variation
(range).
Provide learners with a set of data on a dot plot
https://vt-vtwa-assets.varsitytutors.com/vt-
vtwa/uploads/problem_question_image/image/3
6075/1.png
Ask learners a series of questions:
What is the typical amount of money spent on
school lunch?
How is the data set spread out in comparison to
the centre?
Learners are questioned to elicit the idea that
some data sets are best described using the
measures of centre while some are using the
measure of variation.
354
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Measures of central tendency
Mode - this is the most frequently occurring value in a data set. It is the least used of all the measures of centre because a data set may not have a mode or may
have more than one.
Median - this is the value that occurs in the middle of a set of arranged (ascending order or descending order) data. Also, half of the values in the data set lie
above the median and half lie below. Furthermore, the value of the median is easier to understand when compared to the mean because its value is not affected
by any extreme value (small or large)
Mean - this is calculated by finding the sum of the values in the data set and then dividing the sum by the number of data values in the set.
Measure of variation
Range - this the value obtained by finding the difference between the maximum (largest) and minimum (smallest) values in the data set.
Additional Resources and Materials
Linking cubes, Whiteboard, and markers
Projector or smartboard
Printed or digital copies of sample data sets
Calculators (if allowed)
Graph paper or digital graphing tools
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics and Science: Analyse experiment data (e.g., plant growth) using mean and range to observe trends.
Mathematics and Social Studies: Calculate the mean and range of historical data (e.g., population growth) to understand trends.
Mathematics and Physical Education: Use class performance data (e.g., running times) to compare measures of centre and variation.
Mathematics and Technology: Use spreadsheet software to calculate and graph data, enhancing tech and data skills.
Mathematics and Art: Create visual representations of data, using art to illustrate measures of centre and variation.
Mathematics and Language Arts: Write summaries explaining data findings and building communication skills.
.
355
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: D3.1. Evaluating Inferences and Making Predictions Based on Data – Making Inferences with Data Sets
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Read, explain patterns, and make predictions from data represented in line plots or graphs.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Observation Have learners look at a video clip about line plots. Hold a
Observe learners as they work in groups to discuss and discussion with them to reinforce their understanding of the
Knowledge make predictions about data presented in a line plot. features of line plots and their usefulness in the real world.
Introduction to line plots | Measurement and
1. Read data in a line plot data | Early Math | Khan Academy
2. Identify patterns presented in a line plot
Provide opportunities for learners to read and
Skills interpret line plots. For example, present a
diagram of a line plot to the class. Have learners
3. Interpret data presented in a line plot observe the data to identify patterns and make
4. Make predictions based on data predictions. Use probing questions to guide
presented in a line plot learners into exploring concepts such as range,
mode etc.
Values Source: https://www.shutterstock.com/search/learner-talking- - Which number occurs most often in the
teacher?image_type=illustration data set?
5. Work collaboratively to create and solve - Which number lies in the middle of the
real life questions about given line plots data set?
6. Discuss the importance of using line Product
plots to represent data. Learners complete a worksheet which will require them
to use the information presented to answer related
questions.
Source: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/what-is-line-plot/
356
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Place learners in groups of four. Present each
group with diagrams of line plots to observe. Ask
learners to make a list of at least 5 things they
observe from the line plot. Have them paste their
responses on post-it notes around the classroom.
Source: https://www.classcover.com.au/3-ways-to-use-
post-it-notes-classroom/
Think Pair Share
Learners write a story of the different line graphs
below, share with another learner to decide the
most appropriate story that the graph depicts and
Source:/https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/math/data-
share results with the class.
graphing/grade-3-interpreting-line-plots-a.pdf
Group work
Place learners into groups. Provide each group with
diagrams of line plots representing the same data set.
Ask learners to examine the data to identify patterns
and make predictions. Ask learners to share their
observations.
357
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners also create graphs given different real-
life situations. For example:
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Collected data can be displayed using various types of graphs - e.g. Line plot, pictograph, bar graph, line graph etc.
Line plot - This is a graph that displays data using a number line. To create a line plot, you first draw a number line that includes all the values in the data set.
Next, you place an X (or dot) above each data value on the number line. If a value occurs more than once in a data set, you place an X over that number for each
time it occurs. The Xs or dots represent the number of occurrences.
Line plots are often used in various fields, including statistics, science, and business, to represent data and highlight patterns over time or across categories. It is
useful to provide a clear and concise representation of trends, patterns, and changes that occur over time.
Examples of line plots
Source: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/what-is-line-plot/
358
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Source: https://www.mometrix.com/academy/line-plot/
Additional Resources and Materials
Whiteboard and markers
Sample line plots on printed worksheets or a digital display
Graph paper and pencils
Sticky notes or index cards
Optional: digital tools for creating line plots (e.g., Excel, Google Sheets)
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Maths: Answering questions about line plots
Language Arts: Completing a cloze passage using words relating to line plots
Social Studies: Using line plots to identify migration patterns of a population
HFLE:
Science: Drawing line plots to represent data
Art: Drawing diagrams of line plots to be displayed in the classroom.
359
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: D3.2. Evaluating Inferences and Making Predictions Based on Data – Making and Testing Conjectures Based on
Data Sets
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Interpret a given line graph to draw conclusions; Analyse the effect of different issues on data
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Conversation Teacher will brainstorm with learners on the
Teacher observes learners as they deliberate/discuss usefulness (shows the attainment for every
Knowledge their opinions in support of or against a conclusion variable being studied/tested) and key
made on a line graph. components of a line graph (title, axes, scale, data
1. Describe the key components of a line E.g. Assume the line graph below shows the points, and legend).
graph including title, axes, scale, data temperature reading for your community and this Then the teacher presents learners with various
points, and legend. conclusion was made: “the temperature is very examples of line graphs, and through oral
2. Read specific data points for a line graph consistent”. Discuss your reason(s) “for” or “against” questioning, assesses learners ability to identify
and describe what the data represents this conclusion. key components on the graph as well as the
attainment for specific data variables on the
Skills graph.
Examples
3. Analyse trends and patterns in a line
graph
4. Analyse patterns in a line graph to draw
logical conclusions and/or predictions
about the data presented.
Values
5. Communicate effectively their reasoning
for deriving at their
conclusion/prediction for a line graph
360
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Source:
https://www.ixl.com/screenshot/da87f5b4bbc6865c378
8a43bd88260627b5da8be.png
https://i.ytimg.com/vi/qfs1ksnwAJA/maxresdefault.jpg
After this oral discussion, the teacher can mention
that these answers given were exact/accurate for
learners to recognise that no prediction was made
from the data set.
Source: https://tamelia-
Teachers will continue to guide learners to
stickdesign.de/line+graph+for+temperature#gallery-6
develop an awareness of the possible approaches
to make a conclusion on a data set: by calculation
(mean, mode, median, range…) or by Prediction
through the study of the patterns and trends in
Group work
the graph.
Place learners in groups and assign one line graph to each group.
When studying the trends and patterns in a graph,
Each group will be instructed to use a line graph to answer basic
learners need to focus on what things are
questions and to make a prediction on future occurrences. Note,
changing and what remains the same. Further, see
some groups could be given the same line graph to strengthen the
if there is a reasonable consistency in the
presentation and discussion phase of the lesson.
attainment for every consecutive x-variable or for
E.g.
every other set of x-variables.
After this level of “reasonable consistency” is
determined then the teacher can train his/her
361
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
learners to use this evaluation to make a
prediction on the data set.
Note: learners must be made aware that the idea
of the prediction supported by the data is very
important. Also, emphasize that it is normal for
learner’s predictions on a data set to differ.
However, there is a level of reasonableness that
must be applied to the accuracy of the prediction
made.
https://www.mathworksheets4kids.com/line-graph/interpret-
easy1.pdf
https://d138zd1ktt9iqe.cloudfront.net/media/seo_landing_files
/line-graph-solved-example-1-1-1624257560.png
362
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Prediction in statistics involves using a model to estimate future values or outcomes based on existing data. It is a forward-looking process where the goal is to
make informed guesses about what will happen based on the patterns observed in the data.
A conclusion in statistics is a judgment or decision reached after analysing data.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts: Writing a composition on the topic: Line Graphs
Social Studies: Studying and predicting population and migration trends
Health: Studying health trends
Science: Analysing temperature changes and their effects on plant growth
363
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: D3.3. Evaluating Inferences and Making Predictions Based on Data – Evaluating Data Descriptions and Reports
Analyse Misinterpreted Data
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Determine the range as a measure of spread and the measures of central tendency for various data sets, and use this information to compare two or
more data set
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Observation Video clip
Present similar data sets to groups of learners. Have learners Present a video clip to the learners to review the
Knowledge work together to calculate the mean, median, mode and range. A measures of central tendency - mean, median,
checklist will be used to assess learners as they perform mode and range. After watching the clip, have a
1. Explain the meaning of each of the calculations. discussion with learners about the procedure for
measures of central tendency (mean, calculating each measure of central tendency.
median, mode, range). Mean Mode Median and Range | Year 6 Maths lesson
2. Explain how to calculate the mean,
Help learners understand the range, mode,
median, mode, and range.
median, and mean, provide them with a set of
data, such as T-shirt prices:
Skills
$15.50, $12.25, $15.50, $35.00, $44.50, $28.75,
3. Calculate the mean, mode, median and Self - assessment
$15.50, $35.00, $20.00, $17.25, $31.50, $8.75,
range of a set of numbers. Present each learner with a worksheet to calculate the mean,
$22.25, $10.75, $46.00.
4. Compare data sets using the measures of median, mode and range. After calculating each, learners will
Range: $46.00 − $8.75 = $37.25
central tendency. complete a self-assessment sheet.
Mode: $15.50 (appears most frequently)
Mean: $358.50 ÷ 15 = $23.90 (average)
Values
Median: $20.00 (middle value)
Ask learners questions like:
5. Discuss the importance of being able to
calculate and apply the measures of
What is the range (difference between the highest
central tendency in real life situations
and lowest values)?
What is the mode (most frequent value)?
What is the median and what does it indicate?
How do you calculate the mean, and what does it
represent?
364
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Explore how removing the highest or lowest
values or increasing all prices by 50% would
impact these measures.
Online game
Have learners practice calculating the mean,
median, mode and range of a data set.
https://www.turtlediary.com/game/mean-median-mode-range.html
Product
Present learners with worksheets requiring them to calculate the
measures of central tendency (mean, mode, median, range).
365
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Source: https://mathmonks.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/7th-Grade-Mean-
Median-Mode-Range-Worksheets.jpg
366
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
The mean, mode, and medium are different types of averages from a data set. They are referred to as measures of central tendency.
● The mean is the average of a data set. It can be calculated by adding up all of the numbers in the data set and then dividing by the total number of values
in the set.
● The median is the middle value (or midpoint) when a data set is ordered from least to greatest. So list the numbers in your dataset from the lowest value
to the highest value. The median is the number that is in the middle of the list of numbers.
● The mode is the value that appears the most number of times in a set of data.
● The range is the difference between the largest value and the smallest value. To calculate the range, subtract the smallest value in data set from the
largest. The difference is called the range.
Additional Resources and Materials
Online worksheet: Mean, Median, Mode and Range worksheet
Worksheet: https://www.math-salamanders.com/image-files/5th-grade-statistics-worksheets-mean-median-mode-range-1.gif
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Maths: Solving problems involving the calculation of the mean, median, mode and range of data sets
Language Arts: Writing a composition to explain how to calculate each measure of central tendency
Social Studies: Calculating the mean age of a selected population/group
Science: Calculating the mean (average) height of plants/learners etc.
Art: Creating a poster for the classroom with the definitions for mean, median, mode and range
367
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: D4.1. Understanding and Applying Concepts of Probability – Predicting and Describing the Likelihood of Events
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Explore events involving two or more steps; represent data using charts and diagrams
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Have learners supply their predictions about the popularity of the Experiment 1
usage of the vowels in the names of children in the class. Learners Five learners can be given five chances to score a
Skills will make predictions by supplying their percentages of each letter ball in a basket. Learners will predict the
1. Predict possible outcomes of events up front then the teacher will show the actual results. (This can likelihood of learners scoring in the basket. They
be reflected using a table or a graph; learners given will check their predictions at the end.
Knowledge a choice) Experiment 2
2. Describe the likelihood of an event This is a table of a player rolling two dice and
occurring Vowel Prediction Actual probability looking at the sum of all the rolls. Learners will
E - create a chart with all the possible outcomes of
Values A- rolling both dice at the same time. Teacher make
O- sure to explain the table well to learners.
3. Discuss the importance of determining the I-
likelihood of an event occurring. U-
Josh has 4 green ties and three blue ties. He selects one of the ties
at random for himself and them another tie at random for his
friend.
1. What is the probability of choosing a green tie?
2. If Josh has already chosen his tie, what is the probability of
choosing a blue tie for his friend?
1. What is the probability of getting a sum of 10?
2. What is the probability of getting a total of 6?
3. What is the probability of getting a sum that is
the result of a double?
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: Two-step experiments are those that incorporate two simple experiments. For example
tossing a coin and rolling a die, or tossing a coin twice. Finding probabilities of two-step experiments is easier if we use a list, table or tree diagram to show all
possible outcomes.
Reminder: P = Number of favourable outcomes
368
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Total number of outcomes
Learners can describe what is taking place in the diagram as to the probability of
Learners who like math only
Learners who like physics only
Learners who do not like math nor physics
https://encrypted-tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcRKPkE5aN_hOwrVO10trWBNPDgQLmRpw3f0AQ&s
Additional Resources and Materials:
https://www.google.com/search?q=bk8_10.pdf&sca_esv=5fbf67e4323cad9e&sca_upv=1&udm=2&biw=1366&bih=607&sxsrf=ADLYWIIxwXTx0JwaWpZ9
HRYYpxu1TSUlKA%3A1726076168053&ei=CNXhZtH4AoOq5NoPhuqTkQM&ved=0ahUKEwjRnOjmtruIAxUDFVkFHQb1JDIQ4dUDCBA&uact=5&o
q=bk8_10.pdf&gs_lp=Egxnd3Mtd2l6LXNlcnAiCmJrOF8xMC5wZGZI14IBUMoGWMN9cAF4AJABAJgBhASgAcIUqgEMMC4xMC4yLjAuMS4xuAEDyA
EA-AEBmAIDoAKaBsICChAAGIAEGEMYigXCAgUQABiABMICBhAAGAcYHpgDAOIDBRIBMSBAiAYBkgcHMC4yLjQtMaAH7iU&sclient=gws-wiz-
serp#vhid=aEH-pO3nDLJ2sM&vssid=mosaic
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Maths: Predicting and describing sales from a small business operated by learners over a period of time.
Language Arts: Based on a story, what is the likelihood of a character successfully completing a task based on the obstacles present?
Social Studies: What is the likelihood of population increase or decrease in the country over a particular period?
Health: Predicting and describing weight loss or gain over a period of time.
Science: Explore the use of probability in weather forecasts. What is meant by ‘a 20% chance of rain’? Where in the world would the probability of rain be close
to zero? Or close to 1? What does it mean?
369
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: D4.2. Understanding and Applying Concepts of Probability – Calculating Probabilities
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
• Compare experimental results and theoretical probabilities of an experiment; explain that as the number of trials in a probability experiment increases the
experimental probability approaches the theoretical probability of a particular outcome.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Conversation Group Work Activity
Based on prior knowledge, learners are invited to The learners are placed into groups of 3-4. Each
Knowledge discuss the theoretical probability of the outcomes of group is given a coin, a dice and an activity sheet.
flipping a coin or rolling a dice. They will conduct a number of events and record
1. Explain the difference in experimental Teacher probes learners to state why their predicted the outcomes. The learners will flip a coin twenty
and theoretical probability (theoretical) outcomes did not match the results of the times, and roll the dice twenty times.
experiments.
Skills Observation
Teacher observes learners as they carry out each activity
2. Compare the results of experimental of flipping the coin and rolling the dice a specific
probability versus theoretical probability number of times.
Values Product
3. Discover that as the number of trials in a
probability experiment increases the
experimental probability approaches the
theoretical probability of a particular
outcome.
370
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
After conducting the experiment, the learners
state how many outcomes they received for each
event.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Experimental probability: the likelihood of an event occurring based on trials that were performed. This is often considered what actually happened.
Experimental probability formula: number of times event occurs
number of trials
Theoretical probability: the likelihood of an event occurring based on knowledge of the situation. This is often considered what should happen.
Theoretical probability formula: number of favourable outcomes
number of possible outcomes
Steps for Comparing Experimental and Theoretical Probability
371
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
Step 1: Find the experimental probability of the event as a percentage.
Step 2: Find the theoretical probability of the event as a percentage.
Step 3: Compare the experimental and theoretical probabilities based on the problem.
Additional Resources and Materials
Grade 7 Theoretical and Experimental Probability
Comparing theoretical to experimental probabilities | 7th grade | Khan Academy
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Maths:
● Fraction, decimals and percentages
● Consumer Maths: A learner selling popsicles as a small business will want to know what fraction of her sales will be her new soursop flavour. She
tallies the products sold on the first day of the week (12 vanilla and 8 soursop) and finds that 8/20 = 4/10 = 2/5 of her weekly sales will probably be
soursop popsicle.
Language Arts: Make predictions when reading stories
Social Studies:
● Government and Election - use historical data to understand how a constituency voted previously to understand who they will vote for this time.
372
Grade 6 Mathematics Curriculum
● Population - Estimate human and animal populations in an area.
Health: Diseases. - produce more accurate information relating to rates of disease and other health conditions.
Science: Weather Forecast: e.g. It rained 15 days in January (a probability of 12/31). Using this information, learners can predict that the probability of the
number of rainy days next January is 15/31.
Art: Create or construct game boards or charts e.g. number spinners, colour wheels
P.E.: Predicting Games outcome e.g. A learner playing cricket wants to know the probability he has of scoring a goal in his first match in a football
competition. Historically, the player scored 9 goals in 20 games. The probability he will score a goal in his first match is 9/20 = 0.45 = 45%
373
