May 2023
OHPC Grade Mathematics Curriculum
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Number Sense
Introduction to the Subject: Whole numbers are numbers exclusive of any fractions, negatives or decimals. Whole numbers can be created from a combination of basic
numbers and zero (basic numbers are 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9). The need for students to be able to use counting and grouping strategies is important as it helps to develop confidence
in students and encourages the flexible thinking needed for comprehending and creating relationships between numerals and quantities.
Strand (Topic): Number Sense
Essential Learning Outcomes: 1.1: Using whole numbers - learners will meaningfully sequence and use a range of counting and grouping strategies.
Grade One Level Expectations: Whole numbers up to 20 with exploration to 100
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
Learners will be expected to: Observation Students should begin counting initially from 1-20 and engage in one-
● Count with meaning to ● Concrete: Check to see whether to-one counting using manipulatives.
20 by building learners can use manipulatives to
quantities; and count and build quantities up to Give students opportunities to represent any single number from 1-20
matching quantity with 20. using concrete manipulatives (coloured tiles, counters, counting sticks,
numeral. cubes, marbles, toothpicks, buttons, corks, square tiles etc.) to count
● Pictorial: Observe learners as they and build quantities to 20 and by pictorial representation. For example,
● Orally sequence match pictorial representation of have students fill small containers with a specified number of objects.
numbers to 100 by 1s, quantities with the correct
2s, 5s and 10s. number up to 20.
● Count backwards from ● Symbolic: Listen to learners as
20 by 1s, 2s, 5s and they call out numerals based on
10s. a representation shown of a
particular quantity up to 20.
● Count backwards from Observe learners write the
100 by 5s and 10s. numeral in figures and words Use stories to enable students to demonstrate spatial comparison using
after being shown a ordinals. e.g. Which boy came first in the race?
1
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
● Identify error/s in a representation of a particular
counting sequence up quantity up to 20. Give students opportunities to build numbers using blocks through
to 20. play. For example, identify and say the number name that is presented
Think, pair, share to them.
● Use Number lines ● Have learners select a card of
(vertical and their choice then pair with each
horizontal) and number other to match the symbolic
charts to support representation of the quantity
counting and skip shown on their card.
counting.
Observation
● Counts by 2s, and 5 to ● Allow learners to draw quantities
find a total in to represent a given amount up ● Identify the learner who has the identical quantity in relation to
multiplicative contexts to 20. their number then pair up and present their findings to the
(repetitive addition). class.
● Listen to learners as they count
● Quantify sets up to 20 in sequence to 100. ● Draw the given quantity to the given number.
and state that the last
number said is the Talking circles
amount counted. ● Learners form a circle and take
turns to skip count.
● Identify numeral for Allow learners to come up with
quantities and vice their own sequence up to 20 and
versa. explain to the class how they
formed that sequence.
● Allow learners to use
● Counting to 100
manipulatives, interactive games
and number lines to identify
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=JxaXmTokjqI
errors in a counting sequence up
Play games to enable students to count backwards and forwards e.g.
to 20.
Snake and the Ladder.
2
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
● Pictorial: Check as learners use ● Allow students to sing and dance along to a song that counts to
vertical and horizontal number 100.
lines to count forward to 100 by https://youtu.be/Rj95a48yn4Y
1s, 2s, 5s and 10s and forward
and backwards from 20 by 1s, ● Teacher introduces Counting up to 20 and backwards with the
2s, 5s and 10. aid of videos and sing along.
https://youtu.be/By2hmo323xM
Product-Group work
● In groups, allow learners to form Allow students to demonstrate skip counting by making jumps in 2’s,
sets of 2s and 5s with objects 5’s and 10’s on a number line (starting at zero) as well as when playing
given (up to 20). Learners will games like hopscotch.
then count the number of
groups made in each case. ● Skip count numbers using a number chart and other interactive
games
Product-Exit ticket https://youtu.be/Eer3bFhN5HA
● Ask learners to draw a picture
showing the number of
cupcakes in 4 packages if there
are three cupcakes in each
package.
● Using given sets of
manipulatives, allow learners to
count and state the final number
for each set.
● Using manipulatives, allow ● Use manipulatives and number lines to identify and correct
learners to form sets up to 20 errors on number strips.
and match numerals for each set.
3
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
● As groups, learners fish for
numerals up to 20 and draw
quantities to represent the
numeral.
Are students able to recite number
sequences beginning with 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
● Circle the number that is in the wrong place in each row.
7… etc.?
a) 5, 6, 7, 8, 4
b) 1, 5, 2, 3, 4
Are students able to count using one to
c) 11, 12, 13, 15, 14, 16, 17
one correspondence?
d) 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 4, 5, 3
e) 20, 19, 18, 16, 17, 15
Can students identify the number that
Allow students to participate in activities that demonstrate the ‘zero’
comes after or before a number from 1-
concept. e.g. Have 8 to 10 containers placed in a straight line with
20?
marbles in a few of the containers. Allow pupils to choose the
container without any marble.
Are students able to skip count in 2’s,
5’s and 10’s on a number line?
Can students recognize 0 as the absence
of items in a set? As a starting point for
counting on the number line?
4
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
● Use manipulatives in sets of 20’s to formulate groups of 2’s, 5’s
and10’s
● Fish a number from a bag and draw the quantity (vice versa)
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: Quantifying is counting or expressing something in numbers. A numeral is a
symbol or name that stands for a number.
When children are able to count, they can then begin to build meaning around counting. This involves an understanding of the following principles:
1. One number is said for each item in the group and is counted once and only once. (one-to-one correspondence)
2. Counting begins with the number 1, and there is a set number sequence. (stable order)
3. The quantity in the set is the last number said. (cardinality)
5
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
4. The starting point and order of counting the objects do not affect the quantity. (order irrelevance)
5. The arrangement or types of objects does not affect the count. (Conservation)
6. It does not matter what is being counted, the resulting count will always be the same. (abstraction)
Learning to count involves associating a number with how many or with how much. Children must learn the first twelve numeral names while
thirteen through nineteen follow a definite “teen” pattern. The pattern shifts again when working with numbers between twenty and ninety-nine.
When students count beyond 20, they begin to see the regularity of the counting patterns, i.e. twenty-one, twenty-two, twenty-three…., thirty-one,
thirty-two, and thirty-three… and so on. They can then see that the naming of numbers from 11–19, inclusive, does not follow the same regular
pattern as the names of numbers between 21–99. Asking students to discuss patterns in counting and to reflect on how numbers are said, promotes
the development of counting skills. The role of the teacher is to support students in developing an understanding of the meaning of counting.
Quantifying is counting or expressing something in numbers.
The multiplicative content of addition relates to being able to represent equal groups using a repeated addition expression and relate multiplication to
repeated addition.
5 + 5 + 5 can be written as 3 ×5
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists - texts, worksheets, videos, bricks, shells, stones, sticks, fruits, fingers
Concrete materials such as Corks, buttons, square tiles, toothpicks, 10 frames, two-color counters, etc.
Games such as snake and the ladder, hopscotch etc.
Number lines
Additional Resources and Materials
Youtube videos
Site: liveworksheet.com
6
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Science: Allow students to count. e.g Let them count the number of living things they observe in their environment.
Take them on nature walks, let them count the banana trees or other organisms seen by 2’s,5’s,10’s.
Language Arts: Use of counting in Poetry
Social Studies: Allow learners to draw the people in their family and write the number of members next to their drawing.
Elements from Local Culture: Use of seeds, stones, shells, bottle tops, fruits and sticks as manipulatives
7
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
Youtube video: koohi kids (counting)
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
b) Match
column A column B
2+2+2 3x10
5+5+5+5 4x5
2+2+2+2+2 3x2
10+10+10 5x2
5+5 2x10
10+10 2x5
8
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Science : grouping and numbering
number of males /females
Living and nonliving things
Different types of leaves
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Counting charts, calendars, bottle caps, garden/plants
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
9
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Introduction to the Subject:
Number sense is the ability to manipulate numbers with great flexibility. It involves a student's ability to understand and represent quantities as well as,
compare and order numbers. These skills are critical for the development of competency in Mathematics.
This unit is organised to cater to the needs of all learners.
Strand (Topic): Number Sense- Representing and Partitioning Quantities to 20
Essential Learning Outcomes: 1.2 Learners will recognise, represent and partition whole numbers up to 20
Grade Level Expectations: Whole numbers up to 20
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learner will be expected to: Observation Students should begin with representing and
● represent a given number up to 20 - Concrete: Observe learners as they work with partitioning quantities to 5, then 10, then 20.
using a variety of concrete models, concrete materials. Are they able to represent Using the 10-frame with two-color counters
including ten- frames and created numbers accurately? allows students to build and recognize
materials. relationships to 5, 10 and 20. For example, 8
- Check to see if learners are making use of is 2 less than 10.
● Model a given number up to 20 using resources correctly.
a variety of pictorial representation.
• Pictorial: Observe students as they make
● Find examples of a given number in pictorial representation of numbers. Have them
the environment. explain representations.
Have students represent given numbers
● place given numerals on a number Count the stars, then colour the same amount in using bottle caps, counters, sticks, seashells,
line (vertical and horizontal) with the ten frames. stones, marbles, dots, magnetic numbers,
benchmarks 0, 5, 10, 15 and 20. fingers, blocks or any available material in
their environment.
10
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● partition any given quantity up to 20
into two parts and identify the
number of objects in each part.
● model a given number using two
different objects.
● subitize for quantities 1-10.
e.g. Give students multiple opportunities to
make and break apart given quantities
concretely and pictorially e.g. 2 mangoes and
3 bananas represent the quantity 5 as the
total number of fruit.
Have students identify the number of
objects when quantities are partitioned into
two.
Play the ‘Number Hunt’ game. In groups,
students will be given numbers and allowed
to find a group of objects in their
environment that represent these numbers.
Students will match the number card to the ten-frame
representation.
11
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Product-Group Work Have students identify numbers on the
number line to 20. E.g. Stand at specific
Observe as they find examples of given numbers in the points, hop to given numbers, etc.
environment.
Students will play a number line game. They
Guide students as they label number line or put the will order numbers on the number line.
numbers in order on a chart.
Teachers create a giant number line for the
Think Pair Share class, have students select a number and say
where on the number line it should be
Have students place numbers on a number line with placed. Let them explain why.
benchmarks. Listen to them as they convince their
partner that they have placed the numbers on the line Partitioning number:
correctly. Students should have many opportunities to
build quantities using a variety of materials
and in a variety of contexts.
“Snap” the blocks into parts:
This game is played individually. Variations
include using counters, match sticks or beads.
12
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
To play: Form a given number of unifix
blocks into a stick and “snap” it into two
parts. Draw the parts. How many different
combinations can you find?
Give students the opportunity to model given
numbers using pictorial representations.
Students will match different objects
representing a number e.g five stoppers -
five pegs.
Show quantities using different types of
objects.
Product- Exit Tickets
Have students use two different objects to create a
model for a given number.
(Have them create a poster using art material or
something of that nature)
Subitizing Rings and some wooden clothespins.
Write the numerals on each end of the clothespins, and
Subitizing Rings (1-20)
then encourage your students to match the numeral on
the pin to the matching amount of dots on each of the
Subitizing Rings.
13
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Challenge them by timing how fast they can match the Provide students with the opportunity to
pins to their correct spots on the ring. recognize and name numbers in a group
without counting.
Give students dice and pop-it.
Ask students to roll the die and pop the
corresponding number of buttons on pop -
it.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Ten-Frames are two-by-five rectangular frames into which objects like counters can be placed to show numbers less than or equal to ten.
14
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Ten Frames can be used to teach learners the relationship between the numerical number, the word number, and the visual representation of the
number. See video 1 for guidance: https://youtu.be/wgXDksV0kyw
Subitise - being able to recognise at a glance familiar arrangement of dots or objects e.g dice patterns and ten frames.
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists - videos, varied manipulatives including the die, worksheets.
Additional Resources and Materials
How to make this counting board?
● Draw 5 ice cream cones on the cardboard. Write number 1 to 5 on the ice cream cones.
● Stick bottle caps (I used glue dots) above the ice cream cones, according to the numbers.
15
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
● Set out this counting board with 15 pompoms and invite your child to scoop and count.
● Math tips: What is subitizing?-https://youtu.be/j0ceWNFCuUQ
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the curriculum)
● Arts and Crafts :
Draw and colour shapes to show quantities.
Build teen numbers using ten frames, tallies, place value etc using flower craft activity.
Create a number chart using pictorial representation of numbers 1-20
● Language Arts:
Make connections between numbers and everyday life
Recite Poem …
One, two buckle my shoe
3, 4 shut the door
5,6 Pick up six
7, 8 lay them straight
9,10 a big fat hen.
Dramatise stories, twenty little monkeys jumping on the bed, one fell down and bumped his head. Mother called the doctor and the doctor said, no more monkeys jumping on the bed.
Reading :
➢ The Icky Bug Counting Book by Jerry Pallotta
➢ 10 Little Rubber Ducks by Eric Carle
➢ Centipede’s One Hundred Shoes by Tony Ross
➢ Fall Is Here! Counting 1-10 by Pamela Jane
➢ Five Little Monkeys Jumping on the Bed by Eileen Christelow
➢ Five Little Monkeys Sitting in a Tree by Eileen Christelow
● Social Science:
16
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
➢ Allow students to draw members of their family. In pairs allow students to write the numbers represented in each picture.
➢ Subitise for number of rooms in house, chairs at dining table
● Science:
➢ Allow students to identify the number of senses, sense organs, and body parts e.g Ear: 2, Tongue - 1
➢ Using numbers to represent number of organisms in a habitat
Elements from Local Culture:
Bottle caps, stones, sticks , doors, windows, desks, stairs, chairs, trees , light bulbs, baskets,
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
● Allow students to build lego stacks by putting the pieces together in order written on blocks
● Allow students to build quantities using playdough
● https://www.twinkl.com/resource/roi-n-5189-count-and-colour-activity-sheet
● https://www.splashlearn.com/class/grade-2-jbps/grades/kindergarten/math_worksheet
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
https://themumeducates.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/Number-Bonds-to-10-Ten-Frame_TME.pdf
Activity sheets on Number Representation -https://themumeducates.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/I
Software: Prodigy Math; where learners can be challenged to represent quantities at various levels of difficulty
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
17
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Introduction to the Subject: Number sense refers to the ability to make connections and demonstrate an understanding of how numbers relate to
each other. It is important for students to develop an appreciation of the size and scales of numbers and be able to use their knowledge to make
comparisons between numbers (more and less) as well as to order objects numbers ordinally.
Strand (Topic): Number Sense
Essential Learning Outcome: 1.3 Students will be able to demonstrate their understanding of numbers and their values by comparing and ordering
quantities up to 20
Grade Level Expectations: Whole numbers up to 20 with exploration to 100
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners will be expected to: Observation The learners will:
● Concrete: Check to see whether learners can count ● Build sets to show the comparison with
● Build sets and set models to show how manipulatives in two given groups and identify the bigger and smaller; more and less.
numbers compare group with more or the one with fewer
● Arrange given groups/sets of numbers
● Explain which set has more and which Game: in either ascending or descending order.
set has fewer. Students will be placed into groups of 3. 2 will
dip a number and jump on the number line based ● Uses comparative language to show
● Build a set that has fewer or more than on their chosen numbers. The distance (number of greater than, few, more, less and same
a given set up to 20 squares) jumped by each will be observed and
recorded by the 3rd group member. ● Use the three relationships
● Build a set that is between two given (more/greater than, less/less than, and
sets. same/equal to), and construct sets
using counters as well as make
● Use ordinal language (first, second, comparisons or choices between two
third……) given sets.
18
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Discuss the importance of the number ● Provide activities in a spirit of inquiry
10. with requests for children’s
● Explain that teens numbers are explanations, such as “Can you show
represented as 10 and more. me how you know this group has less?”
● Use models such as ten frames to ● count objects placed in groups to
show numbers up to 20 as 10 and some identify the larger set
more.
● Pictorial: Observe students as they count given
quantities and identify the larger and smaller
group.
● Symbolic: Have students count and write
● Use number lines to compare numbers
numerals based on a representation shown for
by jumping.
groups to identify the one that has less or more
(students may be given groups with less first or
● Use worksheets to identify the group
more)
with more or less by coloring / shading
the box.
19
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Draw one object less and one more of
a given number in the given columns.
Product -Exit slip
● In the given columns students will draw one more
or less object of a given set
Product-Group work
20
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● In groups, students will be given two numbers and
be asked to create a set that comes between the
numbers . Each group will share their set with the
other groups.
● List the ordinal positions going forward as well as
in reverse order.
Match pair share activity
➢ Have learners pair with each other to arrange
different given coloured objects (eg. marbles, small
● Order numbers presented in various
balls, eggs etc) based on assigned ordinal positions.
formats, (numerical, pictorial,
concrete/digital) and explain reasoning;
i.e. Least to greatest and greatest to
least
Think , pair share
Engage in activities to help them explain an object's
1. Have students work in pairs and choose and write or event's position in a sequence:
in symbols a number from eleven to nineteen and
Watch 10 students run a race and say what the
take that many sticks. Have them count out and
person who wins is called, the person who came next
make one bundle of ten using the hair tie, then
and so on
write and draw what they have. For example:
Answer question on the placement of animals using
ordinal numbers
21
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
https://www.liveworksheets.com/ua1828994qk
Have ten students stand in straight line and have
their peers give their position as an ordinal number
Arrange cards with ordinal numbers in order
12 is ten and two
2. Ask the pairs to return to the whole group with
their drawings, keeping them hidden. Have the
pairs take turns to describe to the class what they
have drawn, and ask classmates to say what
number it is. The drawing done by the pair will
then be shown.
Exit Slip Match ordinal numbers to their numerals
Several pictures of different quantities will be presented.
Students should look at pictures, count the amount, order
them and provide the ordinal position of the picture .
Write the number that is formed based on ten plus
some
22
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Use of self assessment tools and checklist for observable behaviors from students’ e.g. students attitude while they continue to work in groups and the extent to which students
are able to complete tasks
Ordinal numbers - An ordinal number is a type of number that is used to represent the position or rank of an object or a person. Ordinal
numbers or ordinals are written using numerals as prefixes and adjectives as suffixes. 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 6th
23
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Number line - a pictorial representation of numbers on a straight line. The numbers on a number line are placed sequentially at equal distances along
its length.
Subitise - being able to recognise at a glance familiar arrangements of dots or objects e.g dice patterns and ten frames.
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists
● Variety of manipulatives such as plastic eggs, ten frames, fingers, sticks
● Worksheets
● Number lines
● Textbook
Additional Resources and Materials
Comparing Numbers and Making Teens Worksheets:
https://www.slps.org/cms/lib/MO01001157/Centricity/Domain/1432/TeenNumbersWorksheetsMEGAPACK.pdf
More or less worksheets https://www.mathworksheets4kids.com/one-more-one-less.php
https://www.k5learning.com/free-preschool-kindergarten-worksheets/more-than-less-than
https://mathskills4kids.com/comparing-numbers-worksheets-for-grade-1
https://www.mathbrix.com/skills/comparison ( interactive)
Making Teens https://www.splashlearn.com/math/identify-teen-numbers-games ( interactive )
Ordinal Numbers https://www.mathworksheets4kids.com/ordinal-numbers.php
https://www.k5learning.com/free-preschool-kindergarten-worksheets/ordinal-numbers
https://www.softschools.com/math/ordinal_numbers/games/ ( interactive )
I can write a teen number song https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=al5OqpARGD8
Ordinal Numbers https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AYZ0iWGopA8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fR8KyCt5XtA
Atwood , Megan Balancing Bears : Comparing Numbers ( counting, comparing numbers )
24
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
https://www.education.com/game/urple-and-burple/ - story about two troll brothers which will help students practice counting up sheep and yams to find out
who has more and who has less while they read.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Speaking / Cooking /Science : Students can be asked to talk about how to make a simple food item and if possible have students create an item at school by following
the steps e.g. For those just learning the concept of ordinal numbers, let them complete 3 steps. “First, pour in the pudding mix. Second, pour in 2 cups of milk. Third, stir it
all together.”
Arts and Craft: Students will be asked to fill a teen number lift-the-flap craft
Multiple Subjects: Write their dates at the start of each subject using ordinal numbers eg. Monday 10th April 2023
Social Studies: Comparing family size (single parent, nuclear, extended)
Independence Dates of islands and other important feast days are written using ordinal numbers
Have students discuss the grouping of islands, Greater and Lesser Antilles and determine which grouping has more and which has Less
Writing: Ordering sentences/ pictures to tell a story
Comprehension: Read a story and answer questions based on the sequence of events https://www.liveworksheets.com/cr2788191zm
Physical Education: Record positions for places in races, and other sporting activities or any competitions
Science:
25
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Elements from Local Culture:
• comparing various islands
• number of members on their family
• compare family sizes
• recording
Resources for a learner who is struggling: (Links to earlier learning activities for similar knowledge, links to resources for special education needs)
Use of Ordinal story-the animal race: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-IAIrsUIcUo and https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-IAIrsUIcUo
• Marbles
• Plastic eggs
• Counters
• Base 10 rods and single blocks
• Worksheets
• Sticks
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
Software: Prodigy Math; where students are challenged at various levels on ordering numbers
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
You may be tired , beat up and worn out but you are making a difference. Never give up!
Teaching tip: Repeated oral counting helps them hear what numbers sound like and to learn their order.
26
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Introduction to the Subject: An understanding of the place value of numbers is extremely significant to learning operations. It allows learners to compare numbers;
line up numbers vertically; make sense of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division with larger numbers; and is the foundation for regrouping ("borrowing" and
"carrying"). This learning outcome will provide the foundation for regrouping, multiple-digit multiplication, and more in the decimal system, as well as a starting point for the
understanding of other base systems as learners develop mathematically.
Strand (Topic): Number and Operations - Place Value of two digit numbers
Essential Learning Outcomes: 1.4 Learner’s will comprehend the importance of the number ten and its role when counting from eleven to nineteen, as well as
creating and solving simple problems involving place value
Grade One Level Expectations: To demonstrate understanding of the number ten as an important number for aiding in counting and that the teen numbers are
represented as ten’s and some more.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Key Skill/ Concept: Identify and recognize quantities in teens using tens The students will:
and ones in concrete, pictorial and symbolic forms.
Learners will be expected to: Students should be given opportunities to
Entrance Slip make and display sets of tens and ones in a
● Count teen numbers using number of ways (E.g., using whole number
familiar numbers. ❖ Concrete- Allow children to count rods)
teen numbers using tens and ones.
● Model teen numbers up to 20 in Observation Visualize and interact with teen numbers as
a variety of ways using sets of ten and “some” more.
❖ Pictorial- Introduce The Number
tens and ones.
Slide. The Number Slide transforms
the expanded form numbers (e.g., 10
1, 10 2, etc.) into the conventional
number (e.g. 11, 12, etc.).
27
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Recognize that in a teen Product-Groups Work
number, the 1 represents one
group of ten. ● In small groups students will be given unit
cubes to make stacks of tens which will be
● Explain that teen numbers are traded for a single base ten rod.
composed of one ten and one,
two, three, four, five, six, seven, ● Given other manipulatives such as shells,
eight, or nine ones. bottle tops, candies etc and two plastic
glasses of different sizes, students will place
● Compose and decompose only ten in the larger cup and the remainder
numbers from 11 to 19 into tens in the smaller cup and record their findings.
and ones.
Think and share
1. Count from eleven to nineteen using
● Learners will be given a group of the expanded form.
manipulatives less than 20. Each learner will
count the amount given and record it and
expand the given amount to represent the
amount of tens and ones. The learner will
share their findings with the class.
Observation
● Given a worksheet to complete, learners will
circle groups of tens and count the
remaining as ones.
Product-Playing Games
● Roll, Build and write: allow students the fun
of rolling dice, along with the opportunity to
28
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
practice building a number with tens and
ones.
● I Have/ Who Has, this game is played
with an I Have/ Who Has deck. Each
student gets one card. The person with
“start” begins by reading their card. All
cards follow the pattern, “I have_____.
Who has___?” So a student with 1 tens and
4 ones on their card, would say, “I have 14,
who has 18?” Then the learner with one ten
and eight ones would read their card. Play
2. Use the Number Slide to transform
continues until all students have had a turn
the expanded form of teen numbers
or you reach the card that says end.
into conventional numbers.
Exit Slip
● Several pictures depicting different
quantities is presented:
★ Look at the picture, count the
amount and represent it in a
mathematical equation.
29
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
3. Use base ten blocks or other manipulatives
that are available to create stacks of tens.
4. Listen and answer questions from a
video, a story or simple discussion on
tens and one with numbers between
ten and twenty.
Teenage Numbers - Ten and Ones
30
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
TEEN NUMBERS ARE SO MUCH
FUN! (Identifying teen numbers &
quantities)
5. Generate simple mathematical
equations using base ten materials to
represent teen numbers. example 16 =
10+6
31
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Since we are expected to go up to 20
should we show that we no longer have
teens when we get two groups of 10?
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Teen Numbers: Numbers from 11 to 19 are considered teen numbers.
Place value is the value of each digit in a number. For two-digit numbers, there is the TENS place and the ONES place.
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists
Base ten materials,
Manipulatives such as seashells, bottle tops, marbles etc
Recommended text
Additional Resources and Materials
Software
www.splashlearn.com
www.quizziz.com
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Social Studies: grouping families, islands
Language Arts: Stories, fill in missing letters in Spelling of teen numbers given the representation and number
eg.
__ __ __ teen
32
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Art and Craft:
Elements from Local Culture:
● Grouping fruits
● Number of persons in different sports
● Seashells
● Stones
● Sticks - to make their own bundles
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
● Place value charts
● Counter tops
● Shells
● Base Ten
● Worksheets
● 2D shape of a house to represent the storyline on family
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
● Worksheets
● Work with numbers up to 30 or 40 depending on the learners need
● Problem solving pertaining to place value
33
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
34
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Operations with Numbers
Introduction to the Subject: Additive thinking is built upon counting strategies but is different in that it considers what students know about numbers and the
relationships between the numbers, and not just the counting sequence. This enables learners to manipulate numbers by joining, separating, and comparing while engaging
in flexible mathematical reasoning. When applying additive strategies, students may manipulate numbers using their part-part-whole knowledge, renaming and partitioning
of numbers (including using place value knowledge) and the inverse relationship between addition and subtraction.
Strand (Topic): Operations with Numbers
Essential Learning Outcomes: 1.1 Additive Thinking- Learners will understand the meaning of addition and subtraction and how they relate.
Grade Level Expectations: Totals or missing values up to 20
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
● Entrance Slip which assesses The students will:
1. Learners will be expected to: students’ ability to match or draw
● Combine quantities quantities up to 10 . Give students opportunities to separate and combine quantities
(sets, lengths, etc.) using a variety of concrete materials and explain their thinking.
using concrete Can students make multiple representations from a story
materials to get the problem structure? e.g. There are 5 pieces of fruit in a bowl. If
total or find a missing there are two kinds of fruit, what might they be and how many
value up to 20. of each?
● Partition and If there are 12 counters in a bag. Some are red and some are
recombine quantities blue. If there are 8 red counters, how many are blue?
to relate to addition
and subtraction. Use games to demonstrate how addition and subtraction relate
to each other, ex. walking on a number line.
● Explain how addition
and subtraction are Collect materials outside and compare, combine, and separate
related. quantities. e.g. leaves, shells, popsicle sticks, bottle caps, etc.
(Connect to data collection)
35
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
● Add and subtract
within 20, using a Sing action songs that focus on taking away or removing. e.g.
variety of strategies. Ten little monkeys, ten green bottle, etc.
Comparing
● Determine if
Children will use a pan scale to show different amounts and talk
equations involving
about which is larger, which is smaller, and what is the
addition and
difference.
subtraction are true.
Children can make towers with blocks to talk about which is
● Separate quantities to
taller, which is shorter and what is the difference.
find a missing value
from a number up to
Students can compare heights (link to measurement).
20.
Playing with sets of objects, students can act out combining,
● Comparing two
separating, and comparing. Students can model different story
quantities to find the
problems to find the missing value.
difference from a
number up to 20
Give students opportunities to show how addition and
subtraction undo each other. e.g. 6 + 3 = 9 and 9 – 3 = 6
Students should be able to demonstrate that 3 + 2 = 5 then 5 –
3 = 2
36
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
● Learners are introduced using a
diagram or picture to communicate
an addition equation. The numbers
may be adjusted in the lesson based
on student’s aptitude.
Observation
● Introduce learners to the idea of
recording what the diagram shows
by allowing them to write the
number sentence.
How many blue counters are there? (Write 5.)
And how many red counters are there? (Write 3)
5 and 3 make how many counters?
Record the equation 5 + 3 = 8.
Think and Share
Students will create their own number
sentences using manipulatives and tens
frame provided and share them with the
class.
Product-Playing Game
Give students opportunities to look at a group of numbers and
Using an egg carton with a given amount,
say how they are related (fact family e.g. 4 + 3 = 7, 3 + 4 = 7,
students will find out how many are
7 – 3 = 4 and 7 – 4 = 3)
needed to fill it, then write the number
sentence.
From given diagrams students will complete the fact family
vertically and horizontally.
37
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
Use caution tape to model a bus with 16 Give students opportunities to build their vocabulary e.g. a way
spaces by wrapping around 8 double or 16 to add is by counting on from a given number 6 + 2 = 8; a way
single seats in the class or any amount to subtract is by counting backward from the greater number
within 20 based on class size. 5 – 2 = 3
Probe students by asking -
Give students the opportunities for them to brainstorm that a
fact family includes all the addition and subtraction facts that
• How many passengers can the bus hold?
use the same numbers.
• How do you know? Some students may
recognise based on the number of seats.
1. Counting On
Place 7 students in the taped area and ask
Place counters in a tens frame, any amount up to ten. The tens
the following:
frame will support subitising (instant recognition of number in a
set)
• How many passengers are on the bus?
• The bus needs to be filled. How many
more passengers do we need?
Product- Group Work
Make copies of the tens frames and allow
students to complete addition equations
for stories you give them.
Observation
Place 2 red counters in the tens frame and ask:
● Number bonds to 10:
How many counters are in the ten frames now?
Learners explore the different
number combinations that add up
to make 10.
38
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
● Check that learners can work out Using two different colours will help encourage students to
the different number combinations count on and support subitising (recognising 7 counters
that add up to 10. instantly)
● Allow students to place Repeat the process by manipulating the numbers from 1 to 20.
manipulatives on a number line to
represent the story that is being 2. Write number sentences.
told. As the students model with
the materials, say:
"Grade 1 students are baking cupcakes.
Yesterday, they baked 4 cupcakes. Today
they baked another 3. How many cupcakes
did Grade 1 bake?”
Think Pair Share
● Check that learners can work in
pairs to link story problems to the
corresponding expression. This is
then shared with the class and
learners are to explain why they
chose their answer.
Observation
● Concrete: Have learners use
manipulatives to subtract; Give
students 10 buttons and make
them take away different quantities
from it.
39
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
● Symbolic: Check that students can
write equations to represent their ● Use number line as a way to represent addition
work. problems up to 20 from concrete to abstract.
● Pictorial: Have students use a
number line to count back to
subtract.
Using manipulatives such as counters or unit cubes, allow
students to place them on a number strip (e.g., 4 red counters).
● Modelling: Check that learners can
Let another student add another amount, let's say three
represent the difference between
counters in a different colour.
two numbers using concrete
materials and diagrams
Product- Playing Game
● Allow learners to work in pairs
using number grids to answer
questions on subtraction by
counting back.
40
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
Use an egg carton, can add up to 12 or children on a bus.
3. Use manipulatives to represent addition equations.
They work on simple “change unknown” problems (e.g.
5 + □ = 12)
● Watch this video to learn the number bonds to ten song
I Know My Number Bonds 10 | Number Bonds to 10 |
Addition Song for Kids | Jack Hartmann
41
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
42
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
● Link the terms take away and minus when showing
students how to write out equations involving
subtraction.
9 take away 2 is equal to 7
43
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
● Use phrases such as ‘the difference between’ to help
learners compare quantities.
● Give a number grid and a coloured counter to each pair.
Students place the counter on whatever number the
teacher calls and counts back to find the answer based
on how much they are asked to subtract.
E.g. Teacher: 12
-Students place counter on number 12
-Teacher rolls die to tell students how much to subtract
(4)
-Students move the counter back 4 times and raise their hands to
call the answer they land on.
44
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
● Apply the terms ‘add’, ‘plus’, ‘equals’, ‘is equal to’, ‘is the same as’, ‘take away’, ‘minus’ and ‘the difference between’ to describe combining
and separating quantities.
● Use the equals sign to record equivalent number sentences involving addition, and to mean 'is the same as', rather than as an indication
to perform an operation.
● Use the number line to represent numbers on a straight line. The numbers on a number line are placed sequentially at equal distances
along its length. It can be extended infinitely in any direction and is represented horizontally or vertically.
● Number bonds are pairs of numbers that bond through addition to form another number. Number pairs that bond to form 10 are
particularly useful when adding or subtracting.
Addition and subtraction problems can be categorized based on the kinds of relationships they represent. It is important that all of the following
structures of problems be presented and that these are developed from students’ experiences. These structures include:
45
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
source Van de walle et al.(2018)
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists:
● Variety of manipulatives such as cubes, counting bears, buttons, five and ten frames, fingers, or counters.
● Number grids
● Worksheets
● Number lines
● Grade mathematics text
46
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
● Apps such as Quizziz and NUMBOTS, Khan Academy, BuzzMath, splashlearn
Additional Resources and Materials
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Art and Craft: Poetry/Music:
47
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Elements from Local Culture:
● Use of local manipulatives for adding and subtracting- beads, bottle caps, sticks, food items etc.
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
● Increased use of concrete materials including fingers
● Simple worksheets with quantities up to 10
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
● Addition and subtraction of quantities greater than 20
● More challenging word problems- to include quantities exceeding 20
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
48
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
49
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Introduction to the Subject: Additive thinking/computing fluently builds on counting strategies when developing mathematical reasoning. It uses prior knowledge
of relationships between numbers and to make references about the sum (US Department of Education, n.d.).
Developing computing fluency through additive thinking will boost students’ confidence in Mathematics concepts and problem solving as they will be more motivated and
have a more positive attitude towards mathematics. Students will develop a love and appreciation for numbers and how to use the relationship that exists between numbers
to solve problems.
Strand (Topic): Operation with Numbers
Essential Learning Outcome: 1.2 Additive Thinking - Compute Fluently
Grade Level Expectations: Use symbols to record what has been built with concrete materials; no expectation to calculate, use symbols only.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Students will be able to: Observation Have students -
• Using symbols for addition • count and combine objects into different groups and move them
(+) and subtraction (-) as a ● Have students use around to find the answer.
manipulatives/pictures) make,
way to record calculations • show the part + part = whole using small objects to practice
draw and or tell the number
done through stories,
solving problems. For example Set up 20 bowling pins (or
amount in a group or set.
building, and drawing.
cups) and use a ball to knock some down. Record subtraction
● Have students write symbols equations to represent what is left standing (i.e. 20 pins –? =
• Make reasonable estimation (numbers) to represent an amount ?).
in a group/set.
when combining, separating, • Practice decomposing whole numbers into various parts using
comparing & partitioning concrete objects and record using symbols.
Whole Class Activity
quantities to 20. • Represent number sentences after decomposing using numerals
● Class discussion on the symbol (+)
of addition. and symbols.
• Use concrete models (blocks), drawings, and then symbols
(numbers) to represent number facts.
50
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Teacher demonstrates/prompts as • Use storyboards to add/subtract items and record results.
students come up with their own
words that tell (+) addition. ● Match the set to its number symbol.
Think Pair Share
● In small groups, students are given
cards or manipulatives to write the
symbolic representation of what is
on the card or what they made using
the manipulatives.
Observation
● Have students write/transfer
manipulatives/pictorial addition
amounts to symbolic representation.
Exit ticket: Game
In pairs, small groups or whole class
e.g: students roll two dice, then write symbolic
representations showing additive thinking.
51
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Write the number (symbol) to the set/group shown.
● Use symbols to represent the pictures shown.
52
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learner difference:
Students self evaluation activity.
1. Draw any amount of objects in the circles then write the
correct number symbol to match.
2. Students needing a challenge would be given a working card
same as above but would move to numbers greater than 20.
Eg: show: 23 + 17 =
or
************ + **************** =
*********** **********
3. Match the pictorial representation to its symbolic
representation e.g.
**** +********* 3 + 5
53
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
***** + ******* 16 + 5
*****
*** + ***** 4 + 9
****** + ***** 10 + 7
******
****
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Number symbols are figures or digits that represent a set or amount. Eg . (number symbols: 0, 5, 18 etc)
Vocabulary words related to (+) e.g: sum, total, altogether, add, join, increase, combine, plus)
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists
Working Boards, Text books, counters, picture cards, students and students PK.
Interactive site: liveworksheet.com
Additional Resources and Materials
Youtube.com (type in count and match)videos
Coco Kids
Koohi Kids
Kids Academy
Nono TV
54
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language/Reading/Comprehension/Writing
eg: Mum has bananas.
______
Write a sentence about the picture.
Vocabulary
Inclusion of the number names during vocabulary lessons: zero to twenty.
Social Science
Draw your family and different family types then write the number to say how many people in total make up that family.
Science
Draw and write the number to say how many….
Toes……
Eyes..
Ears..
Finger..
Nose…
All of your fingers + all of your best friend’s fingers
55
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Elements from Local Culture: Use of stones, shells, beans, bottle caps, twigs, fruits as manipulatives to demonstrate additive thinking.
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
Site: liveworksheet.com
youtube .com: videos as in other resources
Software: Khan Academy, BuzzMath, Marble Math Junior
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
Site: liveworksheet.com
(match number to its name/ match number to the amount)
Present students with worksheets that go beyond 20
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Social Science and math
Number of days of the week/month and months of the year.
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Song: Days of the month
30 days has September, April, June and November.
All the rest have 31 days except February alone, which has 28 days clear and 29 in each leap year.
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
56
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
The students in your care are NEVER wrong. They have just NOT YET understood.
Teaching Mathematics isn’t about teaching the concept but rather showing the relevance of the concept in the lives of the students at their age.
Teaching tip: Remember that math has to be ALIVE and REAL. Take the students outside to experience the lesson. LET THEM
TALK/EXPLAIN. (the lesson is not for you the teacher but for the students)
57
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Introduction to the Subject: Multiplicative thinking builds on counting strategies and additive thinking. Learners can begin thinking about multiplication as
repeated addition, but in order to reason multiplicatively, learners must be introduced to bigger sets than one group at a time. This demands that learners consider the number
of groups, the number in each group, and then skip count to find the totals.
Strand (Topic): Operation with numbers
Essential Learning Outcome: 1.3 Multiplicative thinking - Learners will understand the meaning of multiplication and division and how they relate.
Grade Level Expectations: Skip counting, repeated addition and the concept of sharing objects into equal groups
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners will be expected to: Observation Learner will be -
● Listen to learners describe equal
● Model and describe equal groups by saying ___ groups of Provided with opportunities to work with Equal group
collections of objects as ___ ___ problems involve three quantities: the number of
groups of ___. groups (sets or parts of equal size), the size of each group (set
● Concrete: Check to see that or part) and the total of all the
● Form equal groups of learners can build groups (1s- groups (whole or product) in a variety of ways.
objects and use repeated 10s) using manipulatives.
addition to represent the Learners can form groups using
group. 20 objects however, advanced
learners can form groups
● Skip count to find the total exceeding 20 objects.
number of objects in
groups. ● Symbolic: Have learners
represent their work by writing
● Write mathematical repeated addition equations.
statements to represent
Make the connection that multiplication and repeated addition
groups of equal objects. ● Pictorial: Have learners count
produce the same results for positive whole numbers. For
groups of objects on a
example
worksheet to find a total.
1 × 3 means add 3 one time.
2 × 3 means add 3 two times.
58
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Share objects into equal Group work That is 2 × 3 = 3 + 3 = 6
groups and state how many ● Check that learners can build a
Similarly, 3 × 2 means add 2 three times.
objects are in each group. group of numbers in rows and
That is, 3 × 2 = 2 + 2 + 2= 6
columns using an array.
● Write mathematical In the multiplication of 3 × 2 = 6, 3 and 2 are called
factors and 6 is a product. The first number (3) in
statements to represent Game
equal groups of objects ● Have learners create different
equation 3 × 2 is called a multiplicand and the
second number (2) is called a multiplier.
shared. groups, as a class, in the form
of a game.
Provided with the opportunity to write story problem using
Discovery learning the multiplication sign and explain what the two factors mean.
● Allow students to discover the
For example 4 * 8 refers to 4 sets of 8,
different ways in which an even
number of items/manipulatives
can be shared equally.
Observation
● Pictorial: Check that learners can
share items into equal groups
by circling and then counting
the number of groups made.
● Check learners’ understanding
with an exit ticket. This ticket ● Use manipulatives to build groups, e.g. learners group
can be given at the 20 objects into (2s, 3s, 4s…10s). Learners will count
beginning of the topic as well the number of groups formed (remaining objects that do
as the end of the topic. The not form a group can be placed on a side) as well as the total
teacher can compare them to number of objects used. The rest forms a group but
see whether learners have made not an equal group like the other sets.
progress.
59
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
e.g. Placing 20 objects into groups of 3s gives 6 groups of 3.
Learners skip count to find the total of 18 items. Learners
write mathematical statements to represent their findings: e.g.
3+3+3+3+3+3 =18; six groups of three make 18.
● Show students a Youtube video on how to group
objects and write a repeated addition equation to
represent the grouping.
● Show Equal Groups with Repeated Addition
● Alternate Video Multiplication as Repeated Addition
This video goes up to 40. Video can be paused to suit
grade level expectation. However, it can be used
entirely for learners who need a challenge.
60
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Count the number of items represented in the picture.
Learners skip count to find the total of each grouping
shown on their worksheet.
61
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
62
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● In small groups, learners use objects to form arrays,
e.g. Ask learners to make 3 groups of 4. Learners first
place 3 objects in a row and then fill each row with 3
additional objects until there are 3 rows with 4 objects
each.
Learners skip count the total number of objects and
then write a mathematical statement to represent the
array; 4+4+4=12, three groups of 4 make 12.
● In a musical chairs fashion, the teacher will roll a die
and call out the number in which students are to group
themselves before the music ends; e.g. If the teacher
says “4s”, the music starts and students will form
groups of 4. Any student who is not part of a group
when the music ends will be out of the game. At the
end of each grouping task, the students are to count
the number of students in their group, the number of
groups in the class and the total.
63
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Place learners in pairs and give them an even number
of items. Allow pairs to discover how many ways these
items can be shared equally between them, e.g. 20
items can be shared in 2s, 4s, 5s and 10s. Learners fill
out cards similar to these for each equal group that
they make.
Solve problems in which the size of the group is unknown to
illustrate fair-sharing or partition division problems. The whole is
shared or distributed among a known number of groups to
determine the size of each.
Provided opportunities for students to work with problems
where the number of groups is unknown but the size of the
equal group is known, the problems to make the connection
of division with repeated-subtraction problems.
For example: John has 20 apples. He wants to give equal
shares of them to his 4 friends. How many apples will each
friend receive? Or
64
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
John has 2O apples. He put them into bags containing 5
apples each. How many bags did John use?
.
● Assist learners to write mathematical statements to
represent the ‘division’ e.g. 20 counters shared into 5s
give 4 groups.
● Give students activity sheets to complete such as the
one shown in the picture below. Observe as students
circle groups of items equally then write the total
number of groups in each case.
Assist learners to write mathematical statements to describe
what is shown in each instance. Learners first count the total
number of items then say how many groups were formed
65
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
when these items were shared accordingly; e.g. 2 bears shared
into 2s is 1 group.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher About the Outcome:
● Repeated addition is adding equal groups together, which is the same as the multiplication.
● Division is an operation by which you separate into equal groups or find the number of equal groups.
● A multiplication array is an arrangement of rows or columns that matches a multiplication equation. You can make arrays out of objects or
pictures.
● For this level, it is not necessary to use the multiplication or division signs.
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists:
● Edible or non-edible manipulatives (blocks, counters, beads, cereal, skittles etc.)
● Worksheets
● Laptop, projector, speakers, wifi
66
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials:
● Show Equal Groups with Repeated Addition
● Multiplication as Repeated Addition
● https://www.mathplayground.com
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
● Science: grouping foods, flowers etc.
● Arts and Crafts: creating a multiplication array of concrete objects on manila sheet
Elements from Local Culture:
Local manipulatives (use local objects that students are familiar with for groupings e.g. local foods/confectionary, seed, coins)
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
● Worksheets with simple examples
● Manipulatives up to 10 for groupings
● Youtube videos with simple language
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
● Challenging worksheets ( more examples, larger groups)
● Introduce simple word problems with a multiplicative context
● Manipulatives exceeding 20 for groupings
● Challenging online games
● https://youtu.be/dpFOvoiYDaQ (used entirely for learners who need a challenge)
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
67
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
68
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Introduction to the Subject: Whole numbers are numbers exclusive of any fractions, negatives or decimals. Whole numbers can be created from a combination of basic
numbers and zero (basic numbers are 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9). The need for students to be able to use counting and grouping strategies is important as it helps to develop confidence
in students and encourages the flexible thinking needed for comprehending and creating relationships between numerals and quantities.
Strand (Topic): Pattern and Relationships
Essential Learning Outcomes: 1.1: Recognizing, Describing and Extending Patterns - Describe, create, extend and generalise patterns
Grade One Level Expectations: Create and extend simple repeating patterns (2 elements); copy a given repeating pattern; extend a variety of given
repeating patterns to two more repetitions, create a repeating pattern using manipulatives, musical instruments, or actions, and identify and describe a
repeating pattern in the classroom, the school, and outdoors.
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
Learners will be expected Observation and Discussion: ● Allow learners to listen/view and
to: Teacher will observe by listening to students as they discuss the participate in a pattern song
1. Describe, copy and contents of the video and engage in reproducing the pattern https://rb.gy/fc8q. At the end of the
extend a repeating embedded in the video. The checklist below will record the video, pose questions at various cognitive
pattern with 2 to 4 identified behaviors. levels to help learners recall,
elements (using describe/explain, reproduce and extend
manipulatives, AB the pattern that was presented in the video.
Pattern
diagrams, body Example: What did you observe about the
movements/actions Success indicators Other cars in the video? How do you call what
r e AB patterns Remarks
/sounds) n you observed?
r
a e L s e Y o N
2. Translate a ● In pairs, learners use their cut-outs or cars
Can call out the elements in the
repeating pattern pattern in the order that they to demonstrate their solutions to questions
appear (left to right/right to
from one being asked. Can you use your cut-
left)
representation or outs/cars and arrange your cars in the
Can reproduce a pattern
modality to another order that they appeared in the video?
Predict the missing elements in
(E.g., a repeating the pattern Which car came in first? Which car came
orientation pattern in after the red car? Look at the
69
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
to a repeating sound Identify the pattern core at any arrangements of the cars. Which car do
point in the pattern
pattern, etc.) you think will come next?
Or
Show the part that keeps
3. Spot and correct repeating in the pattern
errors in a repeating Describe a pattern
pattern. Create a pattern red blue red blue red blue
4. Identify and Think pair-share (Exploring Patterns)
describe repeating Provide opportunities to explore, create and talk about repeating
patterns in the patterns with two, three, and four-element cores progressively. Pattern Pattern Pattern
environment (both E.g. in pairs or small groups inspire/guide learners to rotate the core core core
man-made and different activity centers to create patterns and share their
nature) creations with their partner/group members. Inspire learners to
create different patterns with different elements in the core.
Observe learners as they construct their patterns. Ask questions
Values: at various cognitive levels to help learners conceptualize the
1. Show appreciation characteristics of a repeating pattern. red blue red blue red blue
for their peers’
creation of patterns Listen to learners as they respond to check for their conceptual
and patterns in our understanding.
environment by ● Look at the pattern core. Each car is called
identifying and Pay attention to their use of repeating pattern terminology. a term. How many terms are in the
describing the pattern core? How many terms were used
pattern observed. Make use of an observational checklist to check and take note of to make up the whole pattern? The pattern
around them misconceptions that the learners may have and to assess their core tells the rule of the pattern. Which car
conceptual and procedural understanding of repeating patterns. comes first? Which car comes next in the
pattern core. Can you tell me the rule of the
2. Identify and enjoy pattern?
patterns in poems,
stories, (folk and
70
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
modern) within ● Can you follow the rule and make the
their culture. For example, pattern longer? Use your cut-outs and add
a pattern core to the pattern. Can you find
another way to extend the pattern? We can
C
3
o
e
l
l
o
e
u
m
r
e
p
n
a
t
t t
-
e
co
rn
re
D D D D D D e
h
x
a
t
s
e
a
n d
fi x
a
e
p
d
a
p
tt
a
e
t
r
t
n
e r
f
n
r
.
o m any direction, once it
Changing attribute - colour
● Can you tell me which car is missing? How
did you know?
shape pattern
3 element - core
C hanging attribute - shape
Colour pattern
4 element -core
c
a
h
n
a
d
n
c
g
o
in
lo
g
u
a
r
ttribute – size
red blu e
red blue
red
blue
● Give learners the opportunity to create
their own patterns using a variety of
Independent Practice materials in different forms and contexts
using the ABABAB (2 elements in the
Allow learners to complete the task cards to demonstrate their core), ABCABCABC (3 elements in the
understanding of a repeating pattern. For example,
core) formats. For example
Manipulative Art Music Physical
center center center education
71
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
Leaves Water, Tins Students
Put a check (√) on the T-shirt with a repeating
Sticks paint bottle own Body
pattern.
Pebbles Stones drawing spoons, movements
Sea shells materials wooden
Building blocks sponges sticks Pictures of
Toys including Leaves, pebbles different
soft toys Different shak-shak body
Slices of (homemade movements
plantains rattles )
Circle the pattern core /
potatoes
Cotton
buds
Copy the pattern
● As learners create their patterns, pose
questions to help them think about the
characteristics of a repeating pattern. For
Circle the missing term in the
example, ask: Can you show me your
pattern.
pattern core/what is the rule of your
pattern? How many elements/terms make
up your pattern core? How are you sure
a
b
c
that you have a pattern? How many times
did you repeat your pattern core? Can you
Checklist and Think Pair Share: extend your pattern a little more? Can you
In pairs, learners will select materials from the stations presented
add another core to the front? If I take off
to them. A pattern will be created and presented to the class with
(physically pull out the element) one of
explanations directed at why it is a pattern, how it can be extended
your elements, will you know which one is
with a focus on vocabulary enrichment.
missing? How did you know? Can you
make a pattern with different colors? Size?
Learner(s): Yes No Comments Shapes, a mixture of materials?
72
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
● Provide opportunities for learners to work
Selects own
materials with patterns which contains up to four
unassisted by element cores (ABCD ABCD ABCD
teacher
format)
Selects a pattern
format (ABABAB Translating repeating patterns
or ABCABCABC)
● Gather the children around a physical
Demonstrates an
circle. Make available a collection of
understanding of
different types of materials., including
the pattern format
with materials writing materials and things that can be
selected used as musical instruments. Direct the
learner’s attention to the repeating AB
Explains
letter pattern on a piece of cardboard in
confidently the
the center of the circle. As learners
pattern using the
correct reproduce the pattern, allow them to place
terminology their patterns in the center of the circle to
match the AB letter pattern. Give learners
Worked
opportunities to demonstrate sound and
cooperatively
movement patterns that match the AB
during the activity
letter pattern in the center of the circle.
Enjoyed the
process in creating ● Ask thought-provoking questions to lead
their product
learners to see that: We can change the
attributes of a pattern without changing its
structure. When we translate a pattern, we
change the attributes from one form to
another but the structure/letter core
remains the same.
73
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
● Provides opportunities for learners to
create and translate patterns from one
form/mode to another. For example,
Body
parts to
words F oot foot hand foot foot
hand foot foot hand
Talking Circles (translating repeating patterns)
As students explore the patterns, change attributes and engage in
translating them in circles, they will discuss their observations and
share with each other. They will use actions, letters, and physical
Action to shapes
objects to create those repeating patterns. Teacher will observe
and record student observable behaviours using an observation
M ake the actions
checklist.
s tump stump snap stump stump snap stump stump snap
Needs Not yet Approaching Mastery
Intervention approaching Mastery
mastery
Learner can Carries out the Carries out the Carries out the Carries out
task with task task the task
assistance independently independently accurately
from the with 3 or more with less than for
teacher for errors, and/or 3 errors, translating Letters to objects/shapes
translating omissions for and/or repeating
repeating translating omissions for patterns
patterns repeating translating
patterns repeating
patterns
correctly
translates a
74
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
repeating
pattern with 2
A A B A A B A A B
to four element
core from one
form to another
Describes/
explains a
pattern or
pattern
core/rule using Error Pattern (ABCABCABC): Robocop
the correct
terminology for
• Invite learners to take on the role of
translating
repeating Robocop but their main job is to spot errors
patterns with 2
that have been made in the creation of
to 4-element
cores. patterns and correct them. Present a
Observation: Choral Singing/ Chanting sequence of objects, drawings or pictures to
pairs/small group of learners.
Students will have a choral singing/chanting exercise where one
group will begin singing or chanting the pattern (example
ABCABCABC) and the other group will respond/translate by
saying/singing their select pattern (example hop jump skip hop
jump skip hop jump skip). This will be done with a few pattern
examples following the formats ABABAB, AABAABAAB etc.
Teacher will observe students’ chants to ensure that they have ● Allow learners to study the arrangement of
understood the translation of patterns. The checklist above can be the objects then ask: What do you observe
used to assess the translation behavior demonstrated by the
learner.
Think-Pair Share (spot and correct errors in patterns)
about the arrangements of the objects? Does
it show a pattern? How do you know? Can
75
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
Let learners put on their Robocop hats (prepare beforehand) you describe the rule of the pattern? How
before they begin the activity. Ask probing questions to help many terms are there in the pattern core? Are
learners think about the characteristics of a repeating pattern. In
all the elements in the pattern following the
pairs, allow students to work on spotting and correcting errors in
rule? Is there any object that does not
patterns presented in different contexts. Include patterns with no
belong? Was any term in the pattern left out?
errors also. Give learners opportunities to share their discoveries.
Encourage learners to think about the
answers and share their thinking with their
partners. Then together with their partner,
decide what should be done to correct the
error and make the correction. Provide
Art- Border Creation
opportunities for learners to share their ideas
Students’ work will be assessed by the teacher using any of the with the class.
checklists above to ensure that they use any of the pattern
● Students will be given the opportunity to
formats to create their designs using items found in and around
create border patterns of their choice in
the environment. (ABABAB, ABCABCABC, AABAABAAB)
OR groups with 2- 4 elements in the core, for
Create their borders using the 3 shapes given, using any of the their desks using items found in the
formats and an observation checklist will be used to assess their environment. Students will source the items
products.
from home to create those patterns.
OR
● Learners will be given 3 shapes as seen below
and create borders as the instructions state.
76
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
Mrs. James wants the children to use all the shapes
below to make boarders for the desks. Mr. James
wants the shapes to be arranged differently for each
desk.
Vocabulary:
repeating pattern core elements describe explain extend translate error color size shape
direction in front before after next in front behind between
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Any arrangement (objects, movements, sounds, events etc.) that follows a specific order based on a specified rule is known as a pattern. Patterns that
repeat over and over and over following a specific rule is known as a repeating pattern. A repeating pattern has two main parts. These are the core and
the term.
core
1 term
In the pattern above the core is a triangle followed by a square, hence the number of terms/elements in the core is two. The changing attributes are
shape and colour (blue triangle, yellow square). The structure of the pattern can be described as AB. Hence, the pattern can be called an AB
repeating shape pattern.
77
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
NB: It can be very difficult/impossible especially for children, to identify a pattern from a short string. Therefore, the pattern core should have at
least three repeats in other for a pattern to be seen or understood.
Patterns can be extended in both directions.
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists (texts, family &community knowledge and resources, contextually relevant professional web
resources)
Additional Resources and Materials
Make use of Repeating patterns, story books, poems.
songs/videos
https://rb.gy/fc8q
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sSi3EDw0fuI
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the cu
The following are some of the areas/ways in which the concept of Patterns and Relationships, Repeating patterns can be reinforced.
English Language Arts: learners can select or be given 2 to 4 words to form a pattern core then use these words to write simple songs/poems.
ss an idea or point of view
Physical Education/Music: use the concept of repeating patterns to choreograph song verses. These short series of dance steps can be used as
warm-ups in physical education classes.
Art/show: Repeating Pattern Galore to showcase learners’ creation of patterns in all forms. Invite students of other classes and parents.
Social Studies Project: Patterns in our environment: Compilation of a book of repeating patterns. Developing a pattern wall in the class. Invite
parents to be part of the project
78
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Elements from Local Culture: (References that learners might know from their local environment)
Patterns can be identified with folk dances and songs. For example,
Folk Dances: quadrille, be’le’ debot, moulala, etc
Folk songs: chanté kont, traditionally sang at funeral and wakes.
Festivals: La Rose and La Marguerite
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qIah3CyY1F0
79
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Patterns and Relationships
Introduction to the Subject: Logical patterns exist in and around us in the environment and it is a regular occurrence in many Mathematics
concepts. Patterns can be recognized, extended and generalizations are formed using words and symbols based on observations. The same pattern
can be replicated/translated/represented using different formats, using numbers, geometric representations as well as physical resources. For learners
of grade one, patterning activities should involve opportunities for manipulating physical resources. This clearly allows them to extend, create
patterns and make changes as they engage in the activities with a feeling of accomplishment. Moreover, the use of physical items creates a hands-on
approach for students and encourages trial and error which is an important strategy in Mathematics. Patterns are observed in multiple areas; singing,
writing, poetry, story-telling, the observed environment. Therefore, opportunities for developing the concept of patterns should be presented to
students whereby their senses are stimulated and every learner has an opportunity to succeed through dance (body movements), singing, piecing
physical materials together; ultimately catering to students at the concrete level so that full concept formation takes place.
Strand (Topic): Pattern and Relationships
Essential Learning Outcome: 1.2: Learners will recognize, describe and extend for increasing and decreasing patterns
Grade One Level Expectations: Create and extend simple growing patterns. Can explain what they are doing and why; e.g. can use counters to
build a pattern that grows by 1 or 2 each time.
Key skills: counting, pattern searching, representing, analyzing, interpreting, drawing, problem solving, reasoning, creating, predicting.
Concepts: elements, growing pattern, sequence, order, term
80
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners will be expected to: Product-Role Play and Think, Pair, Share: Repeating pattern:
● Interpret, describe and extend a given Learners will listen to a chant by the
increasing and decreasing pattern that Learners in pairs will discuss and create their own teacher and demonstrate the body
grows by 1 or 2 each time with no more increasing pattern to reflect body movements and movements to reflect a given increasing
than 4 elements in the core. share with the class their creations (e.g. clap, stomp, pattern by one each time,(ABBABBABB)
stomp, clap, stomp, stomp, clap, stomp, using physical movements, steps, hand
● Use a variety of tools and models to stomp,…shake your body, nod your head twice movements or full body movements e.g.
create, generate and interpret patterns (repeat 3 times). Demonstration of the repeating up down down, up down down, up
that increase or decrease by 1 or 2 each pattern will be observed by the teacher and recorded down down.
time (blocks, pattern strips, pattern for understanding using an observation chart for
blocks, etc.) each pair of students. A B B A B B A B B
● Identify missing elements and/or The pattern will be chanted again and
errors in a given increasing and students will listen and demonstrate the
Learner(s) Yes No Needs
decreasing pattern. actions.
Practice
Students will then be asked the following
● Show an appreciation for patterns guiding questions to reflect on:
Created and
found in the environment around them demonstrated a ❖ What did you notice while you were doing
by recognizing, talking about, repeating pattern using the actions?
the ABBABBABB
describing and recreating their own ❖ Can you tell me what action we should do
pattern
examples based on observations. next?
Presented and ❖ Are you sure this is what comes next?
explained their pattern Why?
thinking process, using ❖ Can you continue the pattern?
content vocabulary
❖ Can you describe the pattern? Can you
such as next, pattern,
identify what is being repeated? (element,
after, etc.
core)
Had fun while
engaging in the pattern
● Increasing pattern:
creation process
●
81
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● The learners will be presented with a
Observation: sequence made out of blocks, bottle caps
or any physical objects to observe a given
Engage learners in a discussion on what they are increasing pattern (ABABBABBB). First
observing in the given sequence using the coloured a discussion will follow to answer the
blocks and/or bottle caps. Behaviours will be following:
recorded using an observation checklist. In pairs, ❖ What do you notice?
students will then create a sequence of their own ❖ Is there a pattern? Is there anything
reflecting the ABABBABBB pattern and share with alike/similar?
their peers when completed. Students' progress will ❖ Do you think you can continue the
be monitored by the teacher as they engage in the pattern?
activity. ❖ What comes next? Why?
●
Learner Yes No Comments
● After students have extended the pattern
Can identify a pattern in a they will now create a sequence reflecting
given sequence
a pattern of their own using physical
coloured blocks, bottle caps, emoticons
Is able to explain the
or any physical objects as illustrated below
pattern in the demonstrated
sequence using the format (ABABBABBB)
Is able to extend the
continuing pattern within
the sequence with at least 2
to 3 elements
Is able to explain their
reason for selecting the
continued pattern in the
given sequence
Uses appropriate vocabulary
82
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
associated with patterns
(next, after, beside,
sequence, pattern)
Able to create a a sequence
reflecting the pattern
ABABBABBB in pairs.
Product:
A B A B B A B B B
As the story is read, guiding questions will be asked
based on patterns observed such as; How many
buttons do you think will be on the third shirt, 4th
shirt, 5th shirt? Attention will be paid to the use of
the vocabulary associated with increasing patterns
(next, one more than, more). Observable behaviours
will be noted, such as students' ability to reproduce
the pattern using different modes of representations
(play dough, using blocks, drawings, or any
manipulative to depict the increase in the sequence)
as reflected by the story.
● Increasing Pattern:
●
● Learners will listen to a story about
Peter’s Missing Buttons which reflects
increasing patterns by one: Have you ever
83
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
picked up your school shirt and noticed
buttons were missing? Today we will
listen to a story about a boy who needed
a shirt for school and needed to choose
the best shirt to wear.
Story: Peter went to his wardrobe to get his
school shirt this morning, He pulled out a shirt
and it had only one button, he pulled out another
and it had 2 buttons, another shirt, 3 buttons.
Oh, mom would be angry today! Can you guess
how many buttons the next shirt might have? Yes,
4 buttons! Peter was getting tired of pulling out
shirts. One more time and that is it! One more
Self- Assessment Faces: shirt and finally he got his 5 button shirt. He was
happy and ran off to the shower to get ready for
Students’ ability to demonstrate their understanding school.’
of an increasing or decreasing pattern using objects
of their choice such as patterned sponges, leaves or After listening to the story, a discussion
any item found in the environment, will be observed will follow and students will draw, use
by the teacher and students will use a self assessment objects representing the 5 shirts based on
to determine how they felt about completing the task what was heard within the story. They will
below: explain the patterns observed in the story.
An extension to the story can be added: If
Peter had pulled out shirt number 10, how
many buttons do you think it would have?
84
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
I’ve got it I am struggling I need some
but learning help
Student Self- Assessment Checklist for Error
Analysis in Sequence
● Draw, paint, create an increasing or
Students will complete a self -assessment checklist as decreasing pattern by 1 or 2 elements,
they analyse the sequences with errors given. The using patterned sponges or leaves or items
teacher will also be monitoring the observable
found in the environment or demonstrate
behaviours of students as they complete the task. For growing/ increasing/ decreasing patterns
students who have challenges reading, they will be by using cut outs, bottle caps, blocks or
given assistive devices. or a peer to work with. cubes.
I can identify the pattern in the sequence.
I can spot the error and say what it is
I can fix the error.
I can extend the sequence
85
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Error Analysis
●
● Present students with a few patterned
sequences. They will analyze the
sequences to determine whether the
patterns presented follow a given
sequence. They will spot the errors and
give their reasons why an error exists and
determine what needs to be changed or
adjusted in the sequence, through guided
questions such as:
❖ Is there a pattern?
❖ What pattern do you see?
❖ Does the pattern continue in a
sequence?
❖ Can you identify the element that
is missing or needs to be removed?
❖ Can you fix the error?
-
- Extend the pattern. (students who are
struggling with extending the sequence
will be given manipulatives to complete
the task.
- Examples below:
86
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
What are patterns?
A pattern is a repeated design, sequence, structure, shape, quantity. Patterns can be represented using words, letters, shapes, orientation, pictures,art,
diagrams, charts, videos, songs.
Parts of a sequence
- sequence: a list of things/numbers/objects that follow a particular order with a specific rule
- element/term: the object(s) that form the pattern
- core: the string of elements that repeat the pattern
-
87
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Types of patterns
Repeating Patterns
A group of elements that repeats itself as the pattern grows/extends. A repeating pattern takes the format of ABABAB eg Hi Low, Hi Low, Hi Low
ABCABCABC e.g. Jump Squat Stand, Jump Squat Stand, Jump Squat Stand,
AABAABAAB e.g. clap clap stop, clap clap stop, clap clap stop
Growing Patterns
A growing pattern is a pattern that includes something or an item every time the sequence repeats.
88
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Examples of some patterns found in and around the environment:
Pedestrian Crossing Stone formation in a wall Floor Tiling Design Burglar Bar Design
Caterpillar Honey-comb Material (madras) Flowers Pineapple
89
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Other examples of patterns using manipulatives
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists:
beads blocks stickers leaves shoes bags paper shapes solids/3-D Shapes
sponge prints
coloured push pins coins magnetic numerals and letters buttons toy cars crayons and or
coloured pencils
candy interlocking cubes number lines assorted shapes pattern strips coloured paper clips
geoboard
pegboard paint sidewalk chalk candy such as M and M’s and skittles Madras cloth or pieces of
cloths with patterned designs
Chess or checker board Dominoes plain and coloured popsicle sticks
Additional Resources and Materials
● Story Books
❖ Pattern Fish by Trudy Harris
❖ Teddy Bear Patterns by Barbara Mc Grath
❖ Lots and Lots of Zebra Stripes by Stephen Swinburne
90
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
❖ Busy Bugs: A Book About Patterns by Jayne Harvey
❖ A-B-A-B-A Book of Pattern Play by Brian Cleary
❖ National Geographic Kids Look and Learn: Patterns
● https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wfAyddSr9_w
● https://proudtobeprimary.com/pattern-activities/
● https://www.akteacherlife.com/resource-library/
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
● Art: create patterns using cutouts, paint, hand or finger prints, beading, crotchet, a class rug using cut outs of cloth, items found in the
environment such as leaves, stones, etc
● Music: listen to songs and identify patterns in the songs played or sang, create patterns based on rhythms demonstrated
● Language Arts: Use transitional words as well as vocabulary associated with patterns: next, before, order, etc. Identify patterns in stories
read or created, patterns in poetry, read-alouds with patterns embedded in the text
● Earth Science: patterns in nature, e.g the formation of flowers such as the hibiscus, the pineapple, the water cycle
● Physical Education: body movements for exercise as well as skill development, e.g. squat, jump (repeat)
VOCABULARY: PATTERN AND RELATIONSHIP
repeating pattern colour size shape after before next sequence order
rule direction
direction order position first second beside term predict
Elements from Local Culture:
● Local songs: verse, chorus, verse, chorus
● Poetry
● Planting alternate seedlings on a bed
91
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
● Use of verbal prompting at each stage of the activity for students
● use number pegs or a peg board for student(s) to create patterns
● Lego blocks for students needing tactile support
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
● Patterns that extend to use of numerals
● Use of multiple colours to create other patterns
Example.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
92
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Introduction to the Subject: As learners continue their learning through experiences with Mathematics, it is important that they develop algebraic
thinking/reasoning at a very early stage. Algebraic thinking is a process and allows opportunities for learners to analyse patterns, study and represent,
make generalisations, and analyse how things change. Learners make generalisations about patterns that seem similar or different, they use patterns
to help recognize numbers, as they explore operations (+, ―) they look for patterns to help with facts and relationships among facts.
Development or promotion of learners’ algebraic thinking can be done through three approaches: problem solving, generalizing and functional.
Opportunities are given to young learners through activities such as analyzing parts and wholes, generalizing and doing and undoing to aid with such
development. Moreover, learning algebra in the early years, primarily focuses on visual representation and problem-based context introduced first,
followed by symbolic representation where learners are presented with the idea of unknowns using rectangles or dashes.
Three aspects of mathematical instruction which provide a framework to recognise and develop learners’ algebraic thinking are generalizations,
concepts of equality and thinking with unknown quantities.
Strand (Topic): Pattern and Relationships
Essential Learning Outcome: 2.1: Variables and Relationships - Representing Unknowns
Grade One Level Expectations: Missing quantity in numbers to 20, modeling equivalence in sets and linear models, writing number sentences
using the equals sign, can write open sentences (e.g. 2 + __ = 5 or __ - 3 = 7) to show what was done in additive situations (Connect to additive
thinking)
Key skills: Representing Unknown
93
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners will be expected to: Observation: Have learners represent unknowns using concrete
materials such as: connecting
❖ Identify and describe Observe and check whether learners are able to cubes to build towers.
missing quantities in represent unknown quantities from stories or situations,
numbers up to 20 by using a using concrete materials. Make observations about the Present learners with a set of
variety of concrete materials math material that the learners use to show the connecting cubes. Ask
to represent situations. unknown quantities. students to build a tower of
six. Afterwards ask students to
(Use a simple observational checklist: specific skill in build a tower of two cubes.
❖ represent missing
the form of a question, yes/no)
quantities in numbers up to
Example: Is the learner able to write a number
20 by writing number
sentence to represent unknown quantities; 1+ ___ = 4?
sentences in semantic and
Yes or No
computational forms:
● using joining,
Sample Checklist
separating, part - part
whole and comparing
Skill/Behaviour Yes No Observations
structures/
Can the learner write a number
relationships
sentence to represent unknown
Question students: How many more or fewer?
quantities?
● using the inverse of the
(4 more to make 9)
given operation Can the learner represent
unknown values using concrete
materials and drawings?
Can the learner use part – part
whole relationship to represent
unknown quantities?
Can the learner use joining and 9 5
separating to find unknown
quantities?
94
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Can the learner use the inverse Provide opportunities for learners to use materials
of the operation to represent to represent ‘Part - Part Whole’ relationships and
and find unknown quantities?
to find unknown quantities. Use Number Frames
(Five Frames, Ten Frames) to model unknowns.
Give students the number frames with some
coloured counters. Question students about the
Think - Pair Share:
number of counters and how many more are
missing to form the quantity. As students share
Have learners read stories/ situations about unknowns.
responses, model using different coloured counters
Allow them to work in pairs and discuss
and place the missing part.
representations/ solutions. Allow learners to make
presentations using concrete materials or role play
situations to represent unknowns.
This ten-frame has 6 counters.
How many more are missing to make 10?
Product: Play Games
A five frame can be used.
Have learners play games in small groups using “missing
part cards”. use number frames (5, 10 …). Each card
(ten frames - Google Search)
can have a different number of dots in the frames or a
specific number can be the focus.
Use a box diagram or number lines as alternative
Observe and listen as students read the cards, discuss
strategies.
the visible parts, represent the unknown etc.
(Model the game)
(a) Example with use of a box diagram
Learners can also engage in the game “I wish I had…”
7
They will listen to, observe or read situations and then
3 ?
determine the representation for the unknown.
Concrete materials or pictures can be used with the
(b) Example with use of a numberline
presentation of the situations.
95
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Product: Exit Cards
Distribute cards to learners and allow them to write/
complete number sentences to represent unknowns
from situations read to them.
Or
Distribute cards and allow students to write their own
stories/ situations for representing unknowns and
complete them.
Collect cards or allow students to place them up in
specific area in the classroom for the topic done.
(number lines to show unknown numbers -
Google Search)
Allow learners the opportunities to write the
number sentences after studying pictorial
representations of situations, listening to or reading
stories/situations. Provide a variety of situations
relating to the join, separate, part - part whole and
comparing problem structures.
96
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Example:
Sam has 8 sweets. Gina gave him some more.
Sam now has 10 sweets. How many sweets
did Gina give to Sam?
8 + ____ = 10
Sam has some sweets. Gina gave him 2
sweets. Sam now has 10 sweets. How many
sweets did Sam have at first?
____ + 2 = 10
Use Mental Starters:
Relate situations to students where they will use
manipulatives or drawings to represent situations.
Upon introduction, the teacher may model to
students and explain using concrete materials.
Example:
I think of a number. I added 3, I now have 7.
What number did I think of?
My number is 8. I subtract a certain number
from it, I now have 4. What number did I
subtract?
97
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Provide opportunities for learners to represent the
unknown using joining and separating situations
using drawings/pictures.
Example:
4 + 3 = _____
4 - ____ = 3
____ - 1 = 3
Let learners find unknown quantities using the
inverse of the operation. Learners can use
concrete materials, pictorial representations to
help with solutions.
Example:
5 + ___ = 6 6 - 5 = ____
____ - 3 = 4 4 + 3 = ____
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Addition and Subtraction are inverse operations of each other or in other words they are opposites.
Addition undoes Subtraction and Subtraction undoes Addition. Example: 5 + 2 = 7, 7 - 5 = 2, 7 - 2 = 5
Commutative Property: The commutative law for addition states that regardless of the order of the two numbers which are added, the total is the
same. Example: 2 + 3 = 5, 3 + 2 = 5
98
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Fact Family: Example: 4 + 5 = 9 9 - 4 = 5
5 + 4 = 9 9 - 5 = 4
Unknown quantities can be found by the learner using situations for joining, separating, part - part whole and comparing structures.
Examples of situations for Addition and Subtraction:
Result Unknown Change Unknown Start Unknown
(Add to) Five birds were sitting on a branch. Five birds were sitting on a branch. Some Some birds were on the branch. Three
Joining Three more birds came to sit on the more birds came to sit on the same more birds came to sit on the same
same branch. How many birds are on branch. There are eight birds on the branch. There are eight birds in all on
the branch now? branch now. How many birds came to sit the branch. How many birds were on
5 + 3 = ____ on the branch? the branch before?
5 + ____ = 8 ____+ 3 = 8
(Take There were nine mangoes in the basket. Nine mangoes were in the basket. Mother There were some mangoes in a basket.
from) Mother ate four mangoes. How many ate some of the mangoes. Now, there are Mother ate four of the mangoes. Now
Separating mangoes are left in the basket? five mangoes left in the basket. How there are five mangoes left. How many
9 - 4 = ____ many mangoes did Mother eat? mangoes were in the basket before?
9 - ___ = 5 ____ - 4 = 5
Total Unknown Addend Unknown Both Addends Unknown
(Put Six red apples and four green apples are Ten apples are on the tree. Six of the There are six apples on the tree. How
Together/ on the tree. How many apples are on apples are red and the rest are green. many apples can be red? How many
Take the tree? How many apples are green? apples can be green?
Apart) 6 + 4 = _____ 6 + ____ = 10 6 = 0 + 6 6 = 0 + 6
Part - Part 10 - 6 = _____ 6 = 1 + 5 6 = 5 + 1
Whole 6 = 2 + 4 6 = 4 + 2
6 = 3 + 3
Difference Unknown Larger Unknown Smaller Unknown
99
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Compare Jon has four pencils. Kim has six Kim has two more pencils than Jon. Jon Kim has two more pencils than Jon.
pencils. How many more pencils does has four pencils. How many pencils does Kim has six pencils. How many pencils
Kim have than Jon? Kim have? does Jon have?
Jon has four pencils. Kim has six Jon has two fewer pencils than Kim. Jon Jon has two fewer pencils than Kim.
pencils. How many fewer pencils does has four pencils. How many pencils does Kim has six pencils. How many pencils
Jon have than Kim? Kim have? does Jon have?
4 + ____ = 6 2 + 4 = _____ 6 - 2 = _____
6 - 4 = ____ 4 + 2 = _____ ____ + 2 = 6
Use appropriate questioning techniques or prompts to guide or extend learners thinking:
- Tell me what you were thinking…
- Did you or can you solve this in a different way?
- How do you know it’s true?
- Does it always work?
The equal sign means “the same as” not the answer is. This is a common misconception introduced at a very early stage.
Problem solving strategies include discussing the problem and role play (act it out). As learners solve problems or situations, they should not rely on
key words as they have multiple meanings
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists:
❖ Number Frames - Five frames, Ten Frames (other number frames can be made)
❖ Number lines
❖ Interlocking cubes
❖ Concrete Materials: beads, counters, popsicle sticks, blocks, straws, seeds
❖ Cuisenaire rods
100
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials (Learner’s Literature Suggestions)
- Leedy, Loreen Missing Addition
- Leedy, Loreen Missing Math: A Number Mystery
- Leedy, Loreen Subtraction Action
- Silverstein, Shil The Missing Piece
Appropriate Vocabulary
addend sum total less
inverse part/whole more equal (same as)
unknown pattern fewer
subtract difference minus
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts:
- Reading: Stories and situations can be used as fluency reading pieces for reading activities.
- Reading Comprehension: Stories/ situations/ problems can also be used to reinforce Comprehension skills (Literal Comprehension: Who?
What? As students represent the situations using drawings and pictures, this aims at students visualizing (another comprehension skill).
- Vocabulary/ Word Building: New vocabulary words can be used when creating the stories/ situations/ problems that students will encounter
to help them understand or determine the meaning. Students can also learn appropriate mathematics vocabulary. (NOTE: Key words in
problem solving situations have multiple meanings and it is critical not to rely on key words in problem solving)
- Writing: Students engage in writing stories/ situation/ problems: Conventions of writing are applicable such as Types of sentences:
statements and questions, the specific ending marks, Capitalisation of proper nouns and at the beginning of the sentences. Writing stories of
their own – include characters
Social Studies:
- Study simple graphs/ tables / charts including information about population, area, location, districts
- Collaborating and working together in groups
- Communicating with peers
General Science:
- Plant and Animals – compare sets which contain specific species, parts of a plant etc.
101
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
- Questioning techniques used in the classroom can lead to students experiencing and representing the unknown in all aspects of the
curriculum.
- Other topics: Solar System, Moon Phases
Health and Family Life:
- Develop an appreciation for peers, value the contribution and ideas shared. Cooperation with peers is also encouraged through group
activities.
- Cooperation and group work
- Roles and responsibilities of group members
Mathematics:
- Stories/ situations/ Problems presented in this topic can provide reinforcement for other topics in Mathematics.
Money: Situation where an amount of money is spent from a total with an amount left. What amount was spent?
Time: Situation that use basic time units (hours or minutes or days) where students represent unknown by writing number sentences
Geometry: Attributes of plane shapes; number of sides total how many more are missing to complete the shape.
Measurement: Situations of comparing linear measurements such as length, height and distance, mass and capacity
Art and Craft:
- Students can draw representations using shapes or other relevant pictures.
Elements from Local Culture:
Transportation: Students who travel by bus frequently can associate where number of passengers are missing for the bus to leave the bus stop
Shopping: Students can relate as the purchase items, being able to tell how much less they have or how much more the are missing to purchase item
Sports: Number of runs, laps, goals missing to emerge winner
Cooking: the number of cups/ teaspoons or eggs needed for a recipe, what has been used and the amount missing
102
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Resources for a learner who is struggling: (Links to earlier learning activities for similar knowledge, links to resources for special education needs)
https://www.ixl.com
www.boddlelearning.com
Ten Frame | Manipulatives | Coolmath4Kids
Photo Math
Todo Math
Time4MathFacts
Resources for a learner who needs challenge: (Links to learning activities and resources in later grades)
https://www.mathisfun.com
www.KhanAcademy.org
https://www.ixl.com
Quizlet
Wolfram MathWorld
103
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Introduction to the Subject: Logical patterns exist in and around us in the environment and it is a regular occurrence in many Mathematics
concepts. Patterns can be recognized, extended and generalizations are formed using words and symbols based on observations. The same pattern
can be replicated/translated/represented using different formats, using numbers, geometric representations as well as physical resources. For learners
of grade one, patterning activities should involve opportunities for manipulating physical resources. This clearly allows them to extend, create
patterns and make changes as they engage in the activities with a feeling of accomplishment. Moreover, the use of physical items creates a hands-on
approach for students and encourages trial and error which is an important strategy in Mathematics. Patterns are observed in multiple areas; singing,
writing, poetry, story-telling, the observed environment. Therefore, opportunities for developing the concept of patterns should be presented to
students whereby their senses are stimulated and every learner has an opportunity to succeed through dance (body movements), singing, piecing
physical materials together; ultimately catering to students at the concrete level so that full concept formation takes place.
Strand (Topic): Pattern and Relationships
Essential Learning Outcome 2.2: Variables and Relationships - Understanding and representing equivalence
Grade One Level Expectations: Can show various partitions of a quantity are equivalent, can construct two equal sets or lengths, can determine if
two given sets or lengths are equal and explain how they know, can record different representations of the same quantity using the equal sign (e.g. 3
+ 4 = 5 + 2) as a way of recording what was built.
Key skills: counting, pattern searching, representing, analyzing, interpreting, drawing, problem solving, reasoning, creating, predicting.
Concepts: elements, growing pattern, sequence, order, term
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners will be expected to Group Work The learners view a video on number combinations
• Use different number In pairs the learners create equal lengths using building with the sum of ten and they sing along.
combinations and linear blocks for given lengths given to them. https://youtu.be/n2Nfez2e67k?t=65
The same rhythm and melody is applied to other
models to create equivalent
number combinations made for other sums.
number values and lengths
up to a total of 20.
The learners classify objects based on equal lengths.
For example- building blocks, strips, strings etc
• Identify and use equivalent
relationships of equal They are also given a pair of lengths that they need to
The learners use objects to create equal lengths. For
length, number and number make equal to each other.
example, String equal lengths of beads, stack equal
sentences adding up to 20.
lengths of blocks etc.
Tools used to monitor the above activity
104
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
• Compare lengths, number, The learners match the equal lengths using the letters
and number sentences assigned to each length on the grid using the equal
using the equal sign. Activity Skills used by the Learners
Create Stacked the blocks one at a time
lengths of keeping in mind the previous
building number
blocks that
are Stacked the blocks evenly as they
equivalent. created the equal lengths
Manipulate a Added blocks to the shorter
pair of given length.
lengths to
make them Removed blocks from the longer
equivalent to length.
each other
sign.
Observation using a Rubric
The following assessment tool is used to determine
whether the students are able to match the equal lengths
on a grid. For example: D = F
Matching equal lengths Score
The learners solve stories/problems involving equal
number combinations.
The learner identified three pairs of equal lengths 3
The learner identified 2 pairs of equal lengths 2
105
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
The learner identified 1 pair of equal lengths. 1
The learner identified no equal lengths. 0
In small groups, the learners create different number
combinations for a given example. They follow the
illustrated pattern to explain the equivalent
combinations that they have created.
Mary needs to find all the dominoes in the case with
For example:
combinations adding up to 8. Which dominoes must
she take?
5 and 0 make 5
Jane has to make other equal combinations of cards
3 and 2 make 5 of a given suit. she is given 2 of hearts and five of
hearts. What combinations will Jane make?
4 and 1 make 5
Think, pair, share
106
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
1. The learners are asked to create other number Other combinations include:
combinations equal to a given number combination
using playing cards. The learners use the guess and
check method to help them make equivalent playing
card combinations.
For example:
What other number
combinations are equal to the
combination shown on the cards
below in the same suit?
Mark has 2 five-dollar notes.
2. The learners, within a minute,
Sue has 1 five-dollar note and 3 one-dollar coins.
individually draw marbles to create equal combinations
for the given one.
How much more money does Sue need to make the
3. They then in their groups, discuss and compare their
two amounts equal. Complete the diagram below to
responses. The use the remaining cards in the suit to
make the amounts equal.
create the other equal combinations.
4. Then share their answers with the class.
NB: A similar assessment can be done using
dominoes.
Exit Cards
The learners write another combination for a given
combination on a given card.
For example:
107
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
The learners complete representations to make
equivalent number combinations.
For e.g.
Exit Ticket
Draw marbles to complete the following. Use the number line to create equivalent
combinations as shown in a and b below. Complete
combinations for given combinations.
For example: complete c below given a and b.
108
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Reflection
The learners compare three given number lines to
identify the pair showing equal number combinations.
They also discuss how they can make the number
combination shown on the non example, equal to the
others identified.
The learners are given a set of dominoes to find the
odd one out. The number combination on one of the
dominoes will not be equivalent to the others.
The learners state their reason for choosing the equal For example:
number combinations. They state the reason for not Which does not belong?
choosing the domino which does not belong to the set.
The learners will analyze the following pairs of number
combinations below.
They check true or false to state whether the pair are
equal number combinations.
109
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
The learners state why the chosen domino does not
belong.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
https://www.mathsisfun.com/definitions/equivalent.html
https://youtu.be/epIQV8ixqoA)
Vocabulary
- number combinations
- compose
- decompose
- equal to
- sum
● Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists (texts, family &community knowledge and resources, contextually relevant professional
web resources)
playing cards
dominoes
counters
110
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
beads
string
strips
building blocks
number cards
number line worksheets
Video- https://youtu.be/n2Nfez2e67k?t=65
Additional Resources and Materials
https://youtu.be/G05AgnEGmgw
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the curriculum)
● Language Arts
Write and discuss reasoning for selecting and creating equivalent combinations.
Write mathematics stories or word problems relating to finding equivalent combinations.
Read stories relating to equivalence and discuss their understanding.
● Art
Represent their understanding of Mathematics stories or word problems as a drawing
● Music
Students sing songs and create their own rhythms and melodies for equivalent number combinations.
Elements from Local Culture: (References that learners might know from their local environment
● Bottle caps
● Playing cards
● Dominoes
● popsicle sticks
Resources for a learner who is struggling: (Links to earlier learning activities for similar knowledge, links to resources for special education needs)
● pegged mats with pegs
● big lego blocks
111
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Resources for a learner who needs challenge: (Links to learning activities and resources in later grades)
https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.liveworksheets.com%2Fok2591971jn&psig=AOvVaw2-
A3EZsluqwxdOsKHAJqHj&ust=1681288081910000&source=images&cd=vfe&ved=0CBEQjRxqFwoTCJixxMy1of4CFQAAAAAdAAAA
ABAE
https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.liveworksheets.com%2Fjk726722ir&psig=AOvVaw1bcD9hswa22QnXq
PU2dT1-&ust=1681288270863000&source=images&cd=vfe&ved=0CBEQjRxqFwoTCOiw36a2of4CFQAAAAAdAAAAABAJ
112
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Introduction to the Subject: Logical patterns exist in and around us in the environment and it is a regular occurrence in many Mathematics
concepts. Patterns can be recognized, extended and generalizations are formed using words and symbols based on observations. The same pattern
can be replicated/translated/represented using different formats, using numbers, geometric representations as well as physical resources. For learners
of grade one, patterning activities should involve opportunities for manipulating physical resources. This clearly allows them to extend, create
patterns and make changes as they engage in the activities with a feeling of accomplishment. Moreover, the use of physical items creates a hands-on
approach for students and encourages trial and error which is an important strategy in Mathematics. Patterns are observed in multiple areas; singing,
writing, poetry, story-telling, the observed environment. Therefore, opportunities for developing the concept of patterns should be presented to
students whereby their senses are stimulated and every learner has an opportunity to succeed through dance (body movements), singing, piecing
physical materials together; ultimately catering to students at the concrete level so that full concept formation takes place.
Strand (Topic): Pattern and Relationships
Essential Learning Outcome 2.3: Variables and Relationships - Writing Expressions and Equations
Grade One Level Expectations: Can write number sentences to record what has been built
Key skills: counting, calculating, analyzing, proving, problem solving
Concepts: expressions, equations, number sentences, equivalence
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners will be expected to: OBSERVATION: Using a pan balance or arm balance, learners will
• Determine whether given Use a simple observation checklist while learners use understand the concept of a balanced equation and will
pairs of expressions are the pan balance or arm balance to form equations. manipulate coloured counters of equal size to form as
equivalence or balance many equations as possible. An ‘=’ sign can be stuck in
using concrete objects, as EXAMPLE: the middle.
well as operations on whole
numbers.
The Learner: Yes No Sometimes
• Interpret the meaning of the
equal sign correctly and Uses counters
correctly to maintain
determine if equations
balance.
involving addition and
subtraction are true or false.
113
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
https://werg
Correctly forms
• Determine the unknown `www.mathcoachscorner.com/2012/11/the-meaning-
equations using
whole number in an addition counters. of-the-equal-sign/
or subtraction equation with
three whole numbers.
Expresses equalities as
• Formulate number different
sentences to solve word representations of the
same quantity
problems (including real-life
scenarios/situations)
involving addition of two or
Formulates equations
three whole numbers and
for given stories/word
subtraction of two whole problems.
numbers.
• Express equalities as Creates stories/word
Use number bonds to develop an understanding of the
different representations of problems for given
commutative property of addition (for example, 2+ 3 =
the same quantity (0 to 20). equations
3+2), as well as the part-part-whole relationship of
numbers.
• Use addition and
subtraction up to 20 to solve
In the example above, the progression of the
one step word problems
concept can be seen from the first to last item.
involving adding to, taking
from, putting together and
The checklist can be modified for the use of
taking apart, with unknowns
stackable blocks, as well as 5 and 10 frames.
in all positions.
TALKING CIRCLES
Have students pull their chairs and/or desks in a
physical circle in the classroom. The teacher calls out
(or writes) three numbers and students are to
114
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
formulate a number sentence using all three Use counters and cards to make the connection from
numbers. The first person to answer gets to hold a concrete to abstract when forming equations.
ball. This ball will be sent to the next person who
answers correctly and so on.
PRODUCT - PLAYING GAMES
Have learners play fishing games in small groups to
collect numbers that will make number sentences
true. Observe learners as they discuss what is needed
to make number sentences true and why.
THINK PAIR SHARE
https://www.mathcoachscorner.com/2012/11/the-
meaning-of-the-equal-sign/
Allow learners to work in pairs or groups where they
discuss different scenarios for given equations.
Provide them the opportunity to present to the class
Use stackable blocks of different colours (but same size)
using concrete materials/role play/discussion.
to form equations. For example, they can form two
stacks with eight blocks each and can manipulate those
In mixed ability groups, allow learners to formulate
stacks with different colours to form different equations
equations for given word problems/stories. This will
using fact families.
provide an opportunity for struggling learners to
Examples of equations:
become more engaged (inclusion). Allow them to
7 + 1 = 8 ( 7 blue and 1 red)
present, by reading the problem to the class and then
3 + 5 = 8 (3 blue and 5 red)
explaining how they arrived at the equation. Ensure
6 + 2 = 8 (6 blue and 2 red)
that each group member plays an active role in the
activity.
Note:
115
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
For presentations, a scoring rubric can be used as
formative assessment.
EXIT TICKETS
https://www.mathlearningcenter.org
Ask learners to write a number sentence that equals
Note: Both addition and subtraction will be done.
12. Each learner will be given a blank card or sticky
Learners will master the use of 5 frames and will then
note to write his/her number sentence. These can
use 10 frames to formulate number sentences for given
be posted on a board in the classroom.
scenarios/ situations. Allow them to manipulate those
frames to formulate as many equations as possible.
https://iteachwithipads.com/2015/01/23/using-the-
ipad-for-addition/
116
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
https://www.twinkl.co.uk/resource/ten-frame-step-
pattern-flashcards-t-m-30509
Have learners play a game of dominoes and formulate
number sentences while the game is being played.
Give learners cards with number sentences and have
them determine which ones are true or false.
Encourage divergent thinking by encouraging learners
to write equations in different ways, with the unknown
at varying positions.
SIMPLE EQUATIONS
➢ 12 = 7 +
➢ 5 + 7 =
➢ + 5 = 12
117
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
➢ = 5 + 7
COMPLEX EQUATIONS
➢ 9+1 = 3+
➢ ! + = 3+4
➢ 9 +1 = +4
➢ 9 + = 3+4
Note: The above example can also be applied to
subtraction.
Give learners two sets of cards, one with number
sentences, and the other with word
problems/stories/scenarios. Have them engage in
cooperative learning where they match those cards
correctly.
For example:
Janai had 12 apples. She ate 3 of them.
How many apples does she have left?
Chaz saw 3 sheep, 4 cows and 6 birds on
the way to school. How many animals did he
see in all?
12 - 3 = 9 3 + 4 + 6 = 13
118
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Allow learners to engage in reversible thinking by
creating their own stories/scenarios/word problems for
given equations.
NOTE:
Problem Solving should be incorporated in most, if not
all learning strategies.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Expressions versus Equations
An expression refers to a mathematical statement with a minimum of two numbers and at least one math operation (+, -, ×, ÷).
Examples of expressions: 1+4 6-0 13-6
An equation is a mathematical sentence that has two equal sides separated by an equal sign (=).
Examples of equations: 2+3=5 5=3+2 7-2 = 5 4+1=3+2
Equality refers to the relationship between quantities that have the same (or equal) value. Equality is represented using the symbol “=”.
Number Bonds
Number bonds show how a given number can be split, or how two numbers can be combined to form another number. Number bonds are used to
demonstrate the part-part-whole relationship of numbers.
119
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Examples of number bonds:
● Number bonds to 5: 1 and 4, 2 and 3
● Number bonds to 10: 9 and 1, 8 and 2, 7 and 3, 6 and 4, 5 and 5
● Number bonds to 20: 19 and 1, 18 and 2, 17 and 3, 16 and 4, 15 and 5, 14 and 6, 13 and 7, 12 and 8, 11 and 9, 10 and 10
The number bonds above can be used to form simple addition number sentences, for example, 1+4=5, 2+3=5
Another way of representing the aforementioned relationships is using the diagram below.
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists
- dominoes, candy, pebbles, sea shells, beads, money, counters, popsicle sticks, number cards
120
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C9HRCjEHVp4&t=574s
https://www.twinkl.co.uk/teaching-wiki/ten-frame
https://www.twinkl.co.uk/resource/t-n-4601-new-number-bonds-to-10-on-robots-worksheet
https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/number-frames-by-the-
math/idlcfdihcafblaoadpfeofbcbcmfogbc?hl=en#:~:text=Number%20Frames%20help%20students%20structure,in%20relation%20to%2
0benchmark%20quantities.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
- Physical Education: Use different exercises (for example, jumping jacks) to form number sentences.
- Music: Use different rhythm combinations to clap up to 5 or 10 times.
- Language Arts: Count the number of letters in a compound word, and decompose it to form an addition number sentence.
Write stories for given number sentences using correct grammar and mechanics.
- Craft: Create representations of number bonds using items in their surroundings, for example, leaves and stems, popsicle sticks/string and
bottle caps
- Health and Family Life : Use number of family members, immediate and extended, to form number sentences, for example, number of
children + number of adults = total number of family members
Elements from Local Culture:
Use the game of “Ticky Toc” to form number sentences.
Resources for a learner who is struggling: (Links to earlier learning activities for similar knowledge, links to resources for special education needs)
Resources for a learner who needs challenge: (Links to learning activities and resources in later grades)
121
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
GEOMETRICAL THINKING
Introduction to the Subject:
Geometry is one of the oldest branches of mathematics and is concerned with the study of shapes, sizes, and positions of objects in space. Our world is
filled with shapes and objects of different designs; therefore, a deep understanding of geometric thinking is important. Geometric thinking is an essential
skill that involves visualizing, analyzing, and manipulating shapes, objects, and space. It is a critical skill that students need to develop to understand many
mathematical concepts and to solve real-world problems. To develop geometrical thinking students should observe pictures , diagrams and models
,participate in hands-on activities ,provided with the opportunity to make real -life connections ,collaborative learning and opportunities to engage in
technological activities.
Strand (Topic): Geometrical Thinking
Essential Learning Outcome 1.1: Explore and Analyze Geometric Shapes and Relationships - Developing spatial sense
Grade Level Expectations: Use language that describes shapes, objects, and space (3D Objects: cube, cone, cylinder, sphere; Polygons: square,
rectangle, triangle; Circle) orally and in writing to describe a picture or object in real world contexts or an object undergoing a transformation; Use
positional language (such as beside, above, below, behind, in front of, next to); Use gestures that aid in the understanding and communication of a
description; Find shapes or paths hidden in a picture or space (locate an object in a simple picture, complete a maze); Draw, build and make predictions
about 2D shapes and 3D objects in picture or in real world context and 2D shapes undergoing a transformation.
122
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
• Use language that Observation: Real world examples:
Observe and monitor students as they identify 2D
describes 3D objects,
shapes and 3D objects in picture or in real world
such as cube, cone, • Use real-world examples: Start by using real-world
context.
cylinder, sphere, examples of shapes and objects to help students
orally and in writing understand their characteristics and properties. For
Real-World Contexts:
example, showing them a cube-shaped box or a cylindrical can
to describe a picture Can the student identify the shapes in real-world objects, such as
help them understand the properties of a cube and a cylinder.
or object in real- in a classroom, playground, or home?
world contexts. Can the student name the shapes they see correctly?
Can the student identify the characteristics of each shape (number • Allow students to create their own story about shape and
• Use language that
of sides, corners, curves, etc.)? use the author’s chair for students to tell their story about
describes polygons,
Can the student identify the shapes from different perspectives (e.g., their shape.
such as square,
recognizing a triangle when it is upside down)?
rectangle, and
Once upon a time in the beautiful Caribbean, there was a little fish named
triangle, orally and in Comments/Notes:
Sunny who loved to swim around the coral reef. One day, while exploring the
writing to describe a ___________________________________________
reef, Sunny found a shiny seashell that was shaped like a cylinder. Excitedly,
picture or object in
Hands-on Manipulation: Sunny swam back to show his friends the seashell and teach them about the
real-world contexts.
Use string or craft wire to create shapes. shape of a cylinder.
• Recognize and name
3D shapes.
As Sunny and his friends continued to swim, they noticed a starfish hiding
• Recognize and name under a rock. The starfish was shaped like a five-pointed star, which
2D shapes. reminded Sunny and his friends about the shape of a pentagon. They were
• Identify 2D shapes amazed at how shapes could be found all around them in the ocean.
in real world context.
• Identify 3D shapes As the sun began to set, Sunny and his friends saw a school of fish swimming
in real world context. in the distance. The school of fish was shaped like a cone, which prompted
Use ice lollies, matchsticks, pipe cleaners, playdough to
• Identify and name make 2D and 3D shapes. Sunny and his friends to discuss the differences between 2D and 3D shapes.
the 2D and 3D
123
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
shapes whenever Have students use rubber band to create shapes on With their minds full of new knowledge about shapes, Sunny and his friends
they undergo geoboard. swam back to their homes in the coral reef, excited to share their discoveries
transformation. with their families.
Use Manipulatives :
• Have students use cut outs to make solid figures.
Use a checklist to observe students as they sort
shapes into 2D shapes and 3 D objects.
Sample checklist
Student's Name: ___________________________ • Students use the given solid figures and make a completely
Date: ___________________________ new object.
• Students make a collage with different shapes and
Shapes to Sort: Circle, Triangle, Square, Rectangle, Sphere,
YES NO materials.
Cube, Cone, Cylinder
• Have students trace the sides and faces of shapes with
2D SHAPES
Can the student identify the 2D shapes correctly? their fingers.
Can the student sort the 2D shapes into the correct category
(circle, triangle, square, rectangle)?
Does the student understand the concept of flatness in 2D
shapes?
3D OBJECTS
Can the student identify the 3D objects correctly?
Can the student sort the 3D objects into the correct category
(sphere, cube, cone, cylinder)?
Does the student understand the concept of depth in 3D objects
124
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
Can the student identify the number of faces, edges, and vertices • Use ice lollies, matchsticks, pipe cleaners, playdough to
of each 3D object?
make 2D and 3D shapes.
Comments/Notes:
___________________________________________
Interviews:
Conduct interviews with students to assess their
understanding of shapes and space. Ask open-ended
questions and encourage students to use descriptive
language and gestures to communicate their ideas.
• Have students choose a shape and allow them to speak
about it.
Sample interview questions: • Mystery Bag of Shapes - students are blind folded, choose
❖ Can you tell me the names of some 2D shapes that you a shape from the mystery bag then give a description of
know? the chosen shape.
❖ Can you show me a 2D shape using your hands or fingers? • Students use geoboards to make geometric shapes.
What is it called? Questioning
❖ What is the difference between a circle and a square? Can • Have students identify the relationship between a 2d and
you show me with your hands or draw it on paper? 3d shape. For example; What are the differences between 2D and
❖ Can you tell me the names of some 3D shapes that you 3D shapes? What are the similarities? How many 2D shapes
know?
combine to make this 3D shape? Is a cube a 2D or 3D? Explain.
❖ Can you show me a 3D shape using toys or objects? What
Shadow is 2D or 3D? Explain.
is it called?
Provide students with the properties and they must find the name
❖ How do 3D shapes differ from 2D shapes? Can you show
of the shapes in the word search puzzle.
me with your hands or draw it on paper?
❖ Can you describe a real-life object that is shaped like a
Field Trip: Allow students to make real life connection with
cylinder?
shapes. For example:
❖ Can you tell me what a cube looks like and give me an
example of a real-life object that is shaped like a cube?
125
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
❖ How do shapes and space relate to each other? Can you give • Engage students in a shape walk to identify different
me an example of how shapes are used in our daily lives? shapes in their school/community/church/ recreation
❖ Can you think of a fun activity we can do to learn more areas.
about shapes and space? • Have students identify a shape and state the uses of it in
real life setting.
Shapes to Identify: Circle, Triangle, Square, Rectangle,
Oval, Diamond, Star, Heart • Shape hunt outside: Take students on a nature walk and
ask them to find shapes in the environment such as circles
Observe students using a checklist as they find shapes in tree trunks or triangles in leaves. Encourage them to
or paths hidden in a picture or space (locate an object in
describe the shapes they find and possible purpose of the
a simple picture, complete a maze).
shape. Use positional language to describe the location of
Question students about shapes or paths hidden in
the shapes.
a picture or space (locate an object in a simple
picture, complete a maze). • Have students interview each other about the missing
shape.
• Provide opportunities for students to recall facts about
properties of shapes. For example; have students make a shape
book which will include the shape, properties about the shape and
where it can be found in the environment.
Virtual Reality: Virtual reality (VR) technology can be used to
immerse students in 3D environments and allow them to explore
shapes, objects, and space in a more interactive and engaging way.
Teachers can use VR to create virtual tours of real-world spaces,
such as museums or historical landmarks, or to create immersive
experiences that allow students to explore imaginary worlds.
Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History Virtual Tour:
https://naturalhistory.si.edu/visit/virtual-tour
126
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
Predictions British Museum Virtual Tour:
Students are asked to make predictions about 2D shapes https://britishmuseum.withgoogle.com/
and 3D objects in picture or in real world context and The Louvre Virtual Tour: https://www.louvre.fr/en/visites-en-
2D shapes undergoing a transformation. ligne
For example : Which 2D shape will look the same if it is turned NASA Virtual Tour:
upside down? https://www.nasa.gov/centers/kennedy/about/information/virt
ual-tour.html
Questioning: Mount Rushmore Virtual Tour:
Ask students questions about shapes, objects, and space https://www.nps.gov/moru/learn/photosmultimedia/virtualtour
to assess their understanding of the concepts. .htm
Students are required to identify and name shapes with The Great Wall of China Virtual Tour:
different size, colour, orientation, as well as when they https://www.thechinaguide.com/destination/great-wall-of-china
undergo transformation. Yellowstone National Park Virtual Tour:
For example : Can you identify examples of triangular shapes https://www.nps.gov/yell/learn/photosmultimedia/virtualtours.
in the classroom ? htm
Formative Assessment:
Use formative assessment techniques, such as
observation, questioning, worksheets and discussions, to
gauge students' understanding of geometric shapes. Digital Games: Digital games can be used to teach concepts
Students draw, build, and make predictions about 2D related to shapes, objects, and space in a fun and interactive way.
shapes and 3D objects in picture or in real world context
Teachers can use games that challenge students to find hidden
and 2D shapes undergoing a transformation.
shapes in a picture or complete a maze using positional language.
Digital games can be a great way to engage students in learning
Games:
and encourage them to practice new skills.
Play interactive games that require them to identify,
name shapes, match shapes, Draw, build and make
predictions about 2D shapes and 3D objects in picture Geoboard - This game allows students to create and manipulate different
or in real world context and 2D shapes undergoing a shapes using a digital geoboard:
transformation.
https://www.mathlearningcenter.org/web-apps/geoboard/
WEBSITES: https://www.splashlearn.com/math/shapes-
games-for-1st-graders
127
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
https://www.abcya.com/games/shapes_geometry_game Tangrams - This game challenges students to use tangram pieces to recreate
https://www.education.com/games/first-grade/geometry/ different shapes and objects: https://www.coolmathgames.com/0-
https://www.smashmaths.com.au/measurement-and- tangrams
geometry/location-and-transformation/flip-slide-and-turn
Shape maze activity: Provide students with a simple maze and
ask them to find the path that leads to a specific shape. Encourage
them to describe the shapes they see in the maze and use
positional language to describe their location. E.g. square shape
maze
128
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
Inquiry-Based Learning
Shape Transformations: Provide students with a set of 2D shapes
(e.g., square, rectangle, triangle) and ask them to transform them
into different shapes (e.g., cutting a square to make two triangles).
Encourage students to use positional language and gestures to
describe the changes they make.
Shape transformation game: Provide students with a set of cards
that show different shapes undergoing a transformation such as
stretching or shrinking. Encourage them to describe the changes
they see and use positional language to describe the location of the
shapes.
Projects :
• Create a shape book using pictures of shapes taken in the
environment or use cut outs of shapes.
• Create a transformation shape book showing geometric shapes before
and after transformation.
• Students design a maze to find shapes.
• Students create a video highlighting.
• Find shapes or paths hidden in a picture or space (locate an object in
a simple picture, complete a maze); Draw, build and make
predictions about 2D shapes and 3D objects in picture or in real
world context and 2D shapes undergoing a transformation.
129
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Geometric Shapes
Any object around us with a fixed structure can be considered a geometric shape. These shapes are made up of lines, curves, angles, and surfaces.
In geometry, 2D shapes (2 dimensional shapes) can be defined as plane figures that are completely flat and have only two dimensions - length and width.
They do not have any thickness and can be measured only by the two dimensions.
A circle, square, rectangle, and triangle are some examples of two-dimensional shapes and these shapes can be drawn on paper.
All the 2-dimensional shapes have sides, vertices (corners), and interior angles, except for the circle, which is a curved figure. 2D shapes with at least three
straight sides are called polygons and these include triangles, squares, and rectangles.
https://www.cuemath.com/geometry/2d-shapes/
Two-Dimensional Geometric Shapes
Show both 2D and 3D shapes of different size, colour and orientation and position
TRIANGLE
130
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
131
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
RECTANGLE
SQUARE
CIRCLE
132
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
• A triangle is a closed two-dimensional geometric shape with three sides. Square: A square is a two-dimensional geometric shape that is formed
by four sides of equal length.
• Rectangle: A rectangle is a four-sided, two-dimensional geometric shape in which the length of the opposite sides is equal. For example,
laptop screens, etc.
• Circle: A circle is a closed two-dimensional geometric figure that is round in shape. A circle does not have any lines or corners.
Solid Shapes
Solid shapes are nothing but solids that consist of 3 dimensions, namely length, breadth, and height. Solid shapes are also known as Space figures and 3D
shapes.
133
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Types of solid shapes-
• Sphere
• Cylinder
134
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
• Cone
• Cube
• Cube: a shape with six square faces that are all the same size.
• Sphere: a round shape that has no corners or edges.
• Cylinder: a shape with two circular faces that are the same size and a curved surface that connects them.
• Cone: a shape with a circular base and a pointed top.
135
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
• Cuboid
http://smal1fan.weebly.com/3d-geometry.html
Positional language words:
In Under On top Over Beside Next to Inside Outside Beneath Between Right Left
Shapes and space are related in that shapes exist in space. Space is the area where shapes exist, and shapes help us understand how objects are organized
in space. For example, a circle is a shape that can be found in the space around us, such as a round ball or a tire. Similarly, a cube is a shape that can help
us understand how objects can take up space in different ways, such as a box or a building block.
• Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists (texts, family &community knowledge and resources, contextually relevant
professional web resources)
• Manipulatives: Manipulatives such as pattern blocks, popsicle sticks and geoboards can be used to help students visualize and manipulate basic
shapes and construct composite shapes.
• Virtual Manipulatives: Online virtual manipulatives such as the National Library of Virtual Manipulatives can be used to help students interact
with shapes and objects on a screen and reinforce their understanding of geometry concepts.
136
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
• Videos: Videos that showcase real-world examples of shapes and objects can be used to help students develop an understanding of the properties
of shapes and objects.
• Games: Interactive games such as Shape Match or Shape Builder can help students practice identifying, sorting, and patterning shapes and objects.
• Books: Children's books that include geometric concepts can help students learn about shapes and objects in a fun and engaging way.
• Visual Aids: Posters or anchor charts that display examples of basic shapes and 3D objects can be used to help students recognize and name these
shapes.
• Augmented Reality: Augmented reality apps such as GeometryAR can bring 3D shapes and objects to life and allow students to interact with them
in a unique way.
• Interactive whiteboards and digital tools: Interactive whiteboards and digital tools such as iPads and laptops can be used to engage students in
interactive activities and games that promote spatial sense.
• Graphic organizers: Graphic organizers such as Venn diagrams and T-charts can be used to help students compare and contrast different shapes
and objects. For example, a T-chart could be used to compare the attributes of a cube and a cylinder.
• Sentence frames: Sentence frames can be used to support students in using appropriate language to describe shapes and objects. For example, a
sentence frame might be "The shape of the window is a ____ because it has ____ sides."
• Outdoor exploration: Students exploring their environment can provide opportunities to develop spatial sense. For example, students might
identify and describe the shapes they see in nature, such as the round shape of a flower or the triangular shape of a mountain.
Additional Resources and Materials Books
Worksheets
Board games
Wheel of Fortune (spinner)
The Price is Right.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language
Make a shape book or posters.
Use adjectives to describe shape. For example. The square is big. The yellow triangle is small.
137
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Science
Identify and name the shape of objects in their natural environment.
Sort and classify objects based on their shapes.
Art
Do finger painting to create shapes.
Make a collage of different shapes or same shape from different materials.
Use match or lollies sticks to create 2D and 3D shape.
Use string or craft wire to create shapes.
Use colour code to colour each shape
Social Studies
Students should be able to identify different shapes of important buildings and signs in their community
Elements from Local Culture:
Games such as Old Grady and musical chairs
Materials: play dough, match sticks, popsicle sticks,
Fruits and vegetables come in a variety of shapes and sizes and can be used to teach 3D shapes. For example, mangoes can be used to teach about
spheres, a yam to teach about cylinders,
Musical instruments: For example: a drum can be used to teach about cylinders while a maraca can be used for teaching a compound shape since it
comprises of a sphere and a cylinder.
Sporting equipment: A cricket ball and football can be used to teach about spheres, or a basketball to teach about spheres
Local architecture can provide examples of various 2D shapes such as squares, rectangles, triangles and circles. For example, a classroom can use images
of local buildings such as houses, temples, mosques, churches or monuments to teach about different shapes.
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
Games
Manipulatives
Visual Support
Interactive games
Songs
138
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
Worksheets
Using local materials to create both 2D and 3D shapes.
Creating videos on shapes on tik tok
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
2D shapes can only be represented as a picture and are only faces on solid figures.
It should be noted that cutouts of 2D shapes become 3d shapes.
Ensure shapes are presented in different size, colour and orientation.
Allow shapes to undergo transformation.
139
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Introduction to the Subject:
Geometry is one of the oldest branches of mathematics and is concerned with the study of shapes, sizes, and positions of objects in space. Our world is
filled with shapes and objects of different designs; therefore, a deep understanding of geometric thinking is important. Geometric thinking is an essential
skill that involves visualizing, analyzing, and manipulating shapes, objects, and space. It is a critical skill that students need to develop to understand many
mathematical concepts and to solve real-world problems. To develop geometrical thinking students should observe pictures, diagrams and models,
participate in hands-on activities, provided with the opportunity to make real -life connections, collaborative learning and opportunities to engage in
technological activities.
Strand (Topic): Geometrical Thinking
Essential Learning Outcome 1.2: Explore and Analyze Geometric Shapes and Relationships - Explore and Analyze Geometric Shapes and
Relationships - Sorting, patterning, and building with 2D & 3D Shapes
Grade Level Expectations: Recognize, name, represent, construct, and justify shapes (specifically circle, square, rectangle, triangle); and 3D objects
(cube, cone, sphere, cylinder) Replicate and construct composite 2D shapes (using aforementioned shapes to build composite shapes) and 3D objects;
Compare the characteristics of shapes (number of sides, number of corners) and objects (sides, stacks, rolls, number of corners); Sort and pattern with
shapes and objects based on characteristics.
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
Games Games (Useful for reinforcement)
• Recognize and name Play musical chairs and Old Grady on shapes so that Have students play the ‘Shape is Right (modification of the
the basic 2D shapes students' ability to identify and name shapes will be price is right) - place properties of the screen and students must
(circle, square, highlighted. name the correct shape and state the attributes.
rectangle, and
triangle) and 3D Mystery Bag of Shapes - students are blind folded, Have students spin the wheel of fortune and allow them to
objects (cube, cone, chose a shape from the mystery bag then give a speak about the shape that the needle points.
sphere, and cylinder). description of the chosen shape .
Have students play interactive games on tablet or computer.
140
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
• Represent and Drawings Students are provided with a bag of shapes to select one then
construct the basic 2D • Allow students to draw 2D and 3D shapes. they provide a description of the shape.
shapes and 3D objects • Create a poster on their favorite shape.
using appropriate • Create a poster to advertise their favourite shape Place a worksheet with an assortment of shapes and have
materials and tools. and its properties. students draw an object where they must use the shapes
• Justify the properties • Use one or more shapes to construct a compound specified by the teacher.
shape.
of the basic 2D shapes
and 3D objects, such • Draw a shape using a variety of plane shapes. Have students identify the relationship between a 2d and 3d
shape.
as the number of
Project Provide students with the properties and they must find the
sides, corners, and
Allow students to create both 2D and 3D shapes using name of the shapes in the word search puzzle.
faces.
local materials.
• Replicate and
Create a shape book which highlights the shapes and their Manipulatives:
construct composite
properties. Have students use cut outs to make solid figures.
2D shapes by
Students make a collage with different shapes and Students use the given solid figures and make a completely
combining the basic
materials. new object.
shapes in different
ways.
Differentiated Instruction:
Have students trace their fingers on 2D shapes made from
• Replicate and
sand to identify the number of sides and corners.
construct 3D objects Differentiate instruction based on students' individual
by combining the needs and abilities. Provide additional support or
Allow students to manipulate shapes so that they can deduce
basic 3D objects in scaffolding for students who may struggle with using
those that roll and stack (provide with a toy ramp and allow
different ways. appropriate vocabulary and offer extension activities for
them to push the shape)
• Compare the those who demonstrate proficiency in using the
characteristics of vocabulary.
Students use geoboard to make geometric shapes.
shapes and objects,
such as the number of
141
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
sides, corners, and Example Differentiated Instruction:
faces, and identify Differentiate instruction based on students' individual needs
Tier 1- Justify the shape appropriateness for its usage in real life
similarities and and abilities. Provide additional support or scaffolding for
context.
differences between students who may struggle with using appropriate vocabulary
them. and offer extension activities for those who demonstrate
Tier 2- State the properties of all shapes
• Sort and pattern proficiency in using the vocabulary.
shapes and objects Example
Tier 3- Classify the given shapes based on the identified
based on their Tier 3: Give shapes to manipulate and videos that highlight attributes.
characteristics/attributes.
characteristics, such Also scaffold students and use guided questions to elicit the properties,
as the number of Performance Assessment Tier 2: Show pictures/videos that depict the properties and give them
sides, corners, and Pupils create a mystery object using 2D shapes and 3D the shapes to manipulate.
faces, and create objects and make oral presentations. Tier 1: Use virtual tools to highlight the attributes of the 3D shapes
patterns using Allow students to do show and tell on a selected shape together with manipulation of objects.
different shapes and (name the shape, properties, importance and objects it can
colors. be seen.) Geometric Art Project: Assign groups to create a piece of art
• Represent and using geometric shapes. This can be a 2D drawing or a 3D
construct the basic 2D For Example: sculpture. This activity encourages creativity, visual-spatial
shapes and 3D objects NAME OF STALL: The Sweet Spheres. skills, and collaboration.
using appropriate
materials and tools. Items on display: Visual aids:
Students are provided with visual aids such as pictures,
• Replicate and
models, or real-world objects to help them visualize the shape,
construct 3D objects
size, and properties of different geometric figures.
by combining the
basic 3D objects in
Field Trip:
different ways.
Students are engaged in a shape walk to identify different
shapes in their environment.
142
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
• Discuss the Construct 3D shapes Have students identify a shape and state the uses of it in real
importance of life setting.
geometrical shapes in Observational Checklist. Have students identify shapes on worksheets.
the environment. • Observe students as they construct 3D shapes. Have students colour each shape with a particular colour
• Students will Use the author’s chair for students to tell their story about
volunteer to role play • Observe students as they sort and group shapes their shape.
according to the number of sides, corners and Have students do an interview about the missing shape.
scenarios involving
faces. Have students make a shape book which will include the
geometry shapes to
shape, properties about the shape and where it can be found
show their
3D Object Investigation: Provide students with a in the environment.
appreciation for
collection of 3D objects (e.g. a cube, cone, sphere,
Geometry.
cylinder) and ask them to investigate and identify the Grouping/Collaborative Learning:
different characteristics of each object (e.g. number of Build a city: Have students work in groups to design and
faces, edges, corners). Have them draw and label each build a city using different shapes. They can use cardboard,
object in their learning log. construction paper, or other materials to create buildings,
roads, and other structures. Each group can present their city
Exhibition to the class, describing the shapes they used and the reasoning
Select a 2D or 3D shape, and students should be able to behind their design choices.
carry from home objects that reveal their shape. Students
make a collage with different shapes and materials.
143
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
Provide students and allow students to select the most
appropriate material and construct 3D shapes.
Rubric Inquiry Based Learning
• Use rubric to assess students’ oral presentation, EXAMPLE
projects, how they present their shapes in their Start with a question: Begin by asking the students a question
booths, videos created that depict the properties of that will spark their curiosity about shapes.
shapes, as they do show and tell on their selected "What shapes do you see around you every day?" or
3D objects. "How can you describe the shapes you see?"
For example,
Always Sometimes Rarely Explore the shapes: Allow the students to explore different
Criteria 3 2 1
shapes by providing them with a variety of materials such as
Student speaks clearly and
pattern blocks, wooden shapes, and paper shapes. Encourage
loudly enough to be heard
by the class them to sort and group the shapes based on their attributes
Student describes their 3D such as the number of sides, the number of corners, and the
object using descriptive length of the sides.
language (e.g. size, shape,
color, texture, face)
144
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
Student shares an interesting Record observations: Ask the students to record their
fact or story about their 3D observations about the different shapes they have explored.
object
You can provide them with a worksheet or chart to record
Student shows confidence
their observations.
and enthusiasm while
presenting
Discuss findings: Have a class discussion about the students'
Journal entries findings. Ask them to share their observations and what they
have learned about the different shapes. Encourage them to
Write about a shape they observe on their way to school. ask questions and to challenge each other's thinking.
Learning Log Apply knowledge: Provide the students with real-world
Have students write about what they are learning and how examples of shapes, such as buildings, vehicles, and everyday
they feel about it. objects, and ask them to identify the shapes and their
Today I am learning about______________ attributes.
I like it because_____________
Pupils create a shape log which records the different Reflect: End the lesson by asking the students to reflect on
shapes that they observe in their environment for a given what they have learned. Encourage them to share how they
period. will use their knowledge of shapes in the future.
Project Based Learning
Paper and Pencil Shape Collage: Have students collect pictures of objects that
Formative Assessment represent different shapes (such as circles, squares, rectangles,
triangles, and hexagons) from magazines, newspapers, and
Provide a list of 2D and 3D shapes and students are online resources. Then, have them cut and paste the pictures
required to match them with their corresponding names or onto a poster board, arranging them into different shapes to
representations. create a shape collage.
145
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes:
• Use exit tickets which require students to identify Shape Museum: Have students create a shape museum by
the shape shown. designing and creating models of different shapes using clay,
• Provide worksheets whereby students are required playdough, or other materials. Each student can choose a
to colour each shape using a specific color code. shape to focus on and create a model of that shape, along with
• Use written responses such as short answer a description of its attributes. The museum can be displayed in
questions or journal prompts to assess students' the classroom or school for others to visit.
ability to compare the characteristics of shapes and
objects. Ask them to describe the number of sides,
corners, stacks, and rolls of different shapes and
objects, and how they are similar or different.
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists (texts, family &community knowledge and resources, contextually relevant professional
web resources)
Manipulatives: Manipulatives such as pattern blocks, popsicle sticks, match sticks play dough, geoboards and fabric can be used to help students
visualize and manipulate basic shapes and construct composite shapes.
Virtual Manipulatives: Online virtual manipulatives such as National Library of Virtual Manipulatives can be used to help students interact with shapes
and objects on a screen and reinforce their understanding of geometry concepts.
Videos: Videos that showcase real-world examples of shapes and objects can be used to help students develop an understanding of the properties of
shapes and objects.
Games: Local games can be tailored to help students get a better understanding of shapes. Interactive games such as Shape Match or Shape Builder can
help students practice identifying, sorting, and patterning with shapes and objects as well as replicate and construct composite 2D shapes and 3D objects.
146
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Children literature: Children's books that include geometric concepts can help students learn about shapes and objects in a fun and engaging way.For
example :
The Greedy Triangle
Mouse Shapes
When a line bends - a shape begins.
Tangled: A story about shapes.
Visual Aids: Posters or anchor charts that display examples of basic shapes and 3D objects can be used to help students recognize and name these shapes.
Augmented Reality: Augmented reality apps such as GeometryAR can bring 3D shapes and objects to life and allow students to interact with them in a
unique way.
Visual aids: Pictures, diagrams, and posters can be used to help students visualize and understand geometric concepts. For example, a diagram showing
the different parts of a two-dimensional shape can help students learn the appropriate vocabulary to describe shapes.
Interactive whiteboards and digital tools: Interactive whiteboards and digital tools such as iPads and laptops can be used to engage students in interactive
activities and games that promote spatial sense.
Outdoor exploration: Students explore their environment can provide opportunities to develop spatial sense. For example, students might identify and
describe the shapes they see in nature, such as the round shape of a flower or the triangular shape of a mountain.
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the
curriculum)
Language Arts: Language arts lessons can incorporate descriptive language to name and describe shapes and objects. Students can write sentences that
incorporate 2D and 3D shapes or use writing activities to reflect on their understanding of geometric concepts.
Science: Science lessons related to objects and their properties can be integrated with 2D and 3D shapes. Students can explore the properties of objects
such as hardness, texture, and buoyancy, and compare them to the properties of 2D and 3D shapes. (sides, stacks, rolls, number of corners)
Art: Art is a great way to explore 2D and 3D shapes. Students can create their own art using basic shapes, composite shapes, and 3D objects. They can
also explore the use of shapes in art and design.
Social Studies: Social studies lessons related to maps and buildings in their local community can be integrated with 2D shapes. Students can explore the
use of shapes and patterns in maps and real life as they observe building containing geometric shapes.
147
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Elements from Local Culture: (References that learners might know from their local environment
Local architecture: Show students examples of buildings in their communities or their homes , which contain geometric shapes. Students can create
their own models of Caribbean houses or buildings using 3D shapes like cubes and cylinders.
Local music and dance: Use music and dance from the Caribbean to inspire movement activities that incorporate shapes. For example, students can
dance in a square shape or use their bodies to create 3D shapes like cones and spheres.
Folktales and legends: Many local folktales and legends involve shapes and objects. Read these stories to the class and have them identify and draw the
shapes they hear about in the story.
Resources for a learner who is struggling: (Links to earlier learning activities for similar knowledge, links to resources for special education needs)
Manipulatives: Provide the student with manipulatives such as blocks, pattern blocks, and 3D shape blocks to help them visualize and build different
shapes and objects.
Visual Aids: Use visual aids such as posters, flashcards, and videos to help the student understand the different shapes and their characteristics. Use
images and videos of real-world objects that have different shapes and ask the student to identify them.
Graphic Organizers: Use graphic organizers such as Venn diagrams and sorting mats to help the student sort and compare different shapes and objects
based on their characteristics.
Differentiated Instruction: Provide differentiated instruction to meet the student's learning needs. Use different teaching strategies such as hands-on
activities, cooperative learning, and small group instruction.
Assessment: Conduct regular assessments to monitor the student's progress and provide feedback on their performance. Provide opportunities for the
student to practice identifying, naming, and constructing different shapes and objects.
Parental Involvement: Involve the student's parents or guardians in the learning process by providing them with resources and activities to support their
child's learning at home.
Peer Support: Pair the struggling learner with a peer who has a strong understanding of shapes and 3D objects. This can help the struggling learner learn
from their peer and develop their own understanding of the concept.
Resources for a learner who needs challenge: (Links to learning activities and resources in later grades)
Advanced Shape Puzzles: These puzzles are designed to challenge students who are already familiar with basic shapes. They require more critical
thinking and problem-solving skills to complete.
Tangrams: Tangrams are a set of seven geometric shapes that can be combined to form a variety of different shapes and objects. They are an excellent
tool for challenging students to think creatively and to visualize shapes in new ways.
148
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
3D Shape Models: Provide students with 3D models of shapes to explore. This can help them better understand the characteristics and properties of 3D
shapes.
Geometry Games: There are many online games and apps that focus on geometry and shapes. These can be a fun and engaging way to challenge
students who are ready for more advanced activities.
Shape Scavenger Hunt: Create a scavenger hunt where students need to find different shapes and objects in their environment. For example, they could
look for rectangles in buildings or circles in nature. This can help them apply their knowledge of shapes in real-world situations.
Shape Art Projects: Challenge students to use shapes to create their own unique art projects. For example, they could create a picture using only triangles
or a sculpture using 3D shapes. This can help them develop their creativity and problem-solving skills while applying their knowledge of shapes.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
149
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Introduction to the Subject:
Geometry is one of the oldest branches of mathematics and is concerned with the study of shapes, sizes, and positions of objects in space. Our world is
filled with shapes and objects of different designs; therefore, a deep understanding of geometric thinking is important. Geometric thinking is an essential
skill that involves visualizing, analyzing, and manipulating shapes, objects, and space. It is a critical skill that students need to develop to understand many
mathematical concepts and to solve real-world problems. To develop geometrical thinking students should observe pictures, diagrams and models,
participate in hands-on activities, provided with the opportunity to make real -life connections, collaborative learning and opportunities to engage in
technological activities.
Strand (Topic): Geometrical Thinking
Essential Learning Outcome 2.1: Recognizing, Naming and Describing Shapes - Analysing and describing shapes
Grade Level Expectations: Recognize and describe attributes and characteristics of 2D shapes (number of sides, number of corners, ) and 3D
objects (number corners, rolls or slides, flat sides or curved sides, uniform thickness or not coming to a point, curved all around) 3D Objects to be
used: cube, cone, cylinder, sphere; polygons: square, rectangle, triangle; circle
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
• Identify and name 2D Virtual Manipulatives: Geometry Scavenger Hunt:
shapes and 3D objects, Divide students into small groups and give each group
Use virtual manipulatives or interactive simulations to allow
including cubes, cones, a list of geometric shapes and objects to find around
students to identify and name plane and solid shape which is
cylinders, spheres, the classroom or school. For example, they might
assessed using a rubric.
squares, rectangles, need to find a rectangle, a sphere, a cone, and a cube.
triangles, and circles. This activity promotes teamwork, observation skills,
Picture-based assessments:
• Describe the attributes and spatial awareness.
of 2D shapes, including Use pictures or diagrams of everyday objects that resemble cubes,
Games :
the number of sides and cones, cylinders, and spheres, and ask students to identify and
3D Bingo
corners, and whether name the 2D shapes within them. This can be done through
150
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
the sides are straight or worksheets or digital platforms where students can drag and drop Students listen to the attributes of geometric shapes
curved. labels to match the shapes they see in the pictures. and match it with the 3D object printed on their
• Describe the attributes bingo card.
Observation:
of 3D objects, including
Use a checklist to observe students as they manipulate 2D shapes
the number of corners, The Wheel of Shapes
and 3D objects to describe the attributes and characteristics as
whether they have flat On a large paper the names of shapes and a spinner is
they manipulate and explore their attributes (number of corners,
or curved sides, and attached. Students spin the wheel when the spinner
sides -flat or curved).
whether they are stops ; students first identify whether the shape is 2D
uniform in thickness or or 3D then state a characteristic.
Questioning:
come to a point. 3D Shape Hunt
For example:
• Compare and contrast 3D Shape Rhyme
Which shape has six (6) square faces and eight (8) corners?
Online 3D Shapes Games:
the attributes of
different 3D objects,
https://www.splashlearn.com/math/3d-shapes-
such as noting that a
games
sphere has no corners or
Paper and Pencil:
https://www.education.com/games/3d-shapes/
flat sides, while a cube
• Provide students with written assignments with shapes https://wordwall.net/en-us/community/2d-and-3d-
has six square faces and
of different size, colour and orientation that require
shapes-games
eight corners.
students to differentiate shapes.
• Create and extend
• Worksheets that require students to colour each shape Manipulatives :
patterns using 2D
using a colour code for each shape.
• Have students use cut outs to make solid
shapes, including
• Allow students to match the shapes that are the same.
figures.
squares, rectangles,
• Identify each shape drawn and use a colour code to
triangles, and circles. • Students use the given solid figures and
colour each shape.
• Sort and classify 2D make a completely new object.
• Write a sentence about each shape.
shapes and 3D objects • Students make a collage with different
Eg. The square is blue.
based on their shapes and materials.
151
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
attributes, such as • Have students trace the sides and faces
Descriptive Drawings:
sorting by the number of shapes with their fingers.
of sides or corners. • Have students choose a shape and state
Provide students with opportunities to create drawings or
• Use appropriate attributes of shape.
diagrams of cubes, cones, cylinders, and spheres, and label the
vocabulary to describe • Students use geoboard to make geometric
features using appropriate vocabulary.
2D shapes and 3D
shapes.
objects, such as using
Encourage them to identify and describe the features of these • Students are provided with a toy ramp to
the terms "corner" and
shapes using appropriate vocabulary. Observe their ability to use observe which 3D shapes can roll and
"vertex"
the correct language. which can only slide and categorize them
interchangeably or
accordingly.
describing a cylinder as Projects:
• Students are given the opportunity to
having a curved surface
work with pattern blocks and create other
Students design their own shape using local materials and writing
and two circular bases.
shapes or objects out of them.
its attributes. Students projects are assessed using a rubric.
https://www.teachingexpertise.com/classroom-ideas/3d-
shapes-projects-ideas-for-kids/
Performance tasks:
Design performance tasks to be assessed using a rubric such as:
Building a specific 3D shape or drawing a 2D shape with a certain
number of sides or corners to assess student understanding of
attributes and characteristics.
• Creation of a shape book Multimedia :
• Have students to work collaboratively to create a shape poster. • Have students write and sing songs about the
• Have students work collaboratively to create a collage of shapes properties of shape.
made from different materials.
152
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
• Use string or craft wire to create shapes. • Students listen to songs and view clippings
• Have students use rubber band to create the outline of shapes on on geometric shapes.
geoboard Ask them to identify the rule for the pattern and to
• Use finger painting to draw shapes. extend the pattern.
• Use ice lollies and matchsticks to make 2D and 3D shapes.
• Involve students in treasure hunts. Group work/Collaborative Learning:
Shape Sorting Activity: Divide students into small
Formative Assessment Tools:
groups and provide each group with a set of 2D and
3D shapes. Have the students sort the shapes based
Use online formative assessment tools that provide instant
on specific criteria, such as shape, color, size, number
feedback to assess students' understanding of identifying 2D and
of sides, etc. This activity can help students identify
3D shapes.
similarities and differences between shapes and
For example, online quizzes or interactive assessments with
improve their sorting skills.
images of 2D and 3D shapes are provided. Students will be given
the opportunity to select the correct 2D shapes or draw on the
images to highlight the shapes they identify.
Differentiated Instruction:
Differentiate instruction based on students' individual
Group or Class discussions:
needs and abilities. Provide additional support or
scaffolding for students who may struggle with using
Foster a collaborative learning environment where students can
appropriate vocabulary and offer extension activities
share their observations and ideas with their peers. Encourage
for those who demonstrate proficiency in using the
students to explain their reasoning and use appropriate vocabulary
vocabulary.
(e.g., edges, vertices, sides, circles, triangles) to describe the
features of the 3D objects and the resulting 2D shapes.
Patterning Challenge: Provide groups with a set of
2D and/or 3D shapes and ask them to create a
Verbal Explanations:
repeating pattern using the shapes. This activity helps
153
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
Students are given the opportunity to describe the attributes and students recognize and create patterns and can be
characteristics of 2D shapes and 3D objects. Students are assessed extended by challenging their critical thinking skills.
using a rubric.
Digital Drawing Tools:
Students use digital drawing tools, such as drawing apps or online
whiteboard platforms, to create their own representations of 2D
shapes and 3D shapes and assessed using a checklist.
Sites for digital drawing
http://www.tuxpaint.org/download/
https://sketch.io/sketchpad/
https://www.google.com/intl/en_in/drive/apps.html
Real-world object identification:
Provide a variety of real-world objects for students to describe
solid shapes. Ask students to identify and name the 2D shapes
they can find in given solid shapes. For example, a soccer ball can
be used to identify a circle (for the patches) and a sphere (for the
overall shape).
Monitor students and provide feedback on pupils’ ability to
transform geometric shapes
154
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: (Links to professional sources that connect back to the Curriculum and Assessment
Principles of Learning and Principles of Assessment)
Geometric Shapes
Any object around us with a fixed structure can be considered a geometric shape. These shapes are made up of lines, curves, angles, and surfaces.
In geometry, 2D shapes (2 dimensional shapes) can be defined as plane figures that are completely flat and have only two dimensions - length and width.
They do not have any thickness and can be measured only by the two dimensions.
A circle, square, rectangle, and triangle are some examples of two-dimensional shapes, and these shapes can be drawn on paper.
All the 2-dimensional shapes have sides, vertices (corners), and interior angles, except for the circle, which is a curved figure. 2D shapes with at least three
straight sides are called polygons and these include triangles, squares, and rectangles.
https://www.cuemath.com/geometry/2d-shapes/
Two-Dimensional Geometric Shapes
Show both 2D and 3D shapes of different size, colour and orientation and position
Triangle:
155
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Rectangle:
SQUARE:
156
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
CIRCLE:
• Triangle: A triangle is a closed two-dimensional geometric shape with three sides.
• Square: A square is a two-dimensional geometric shape that is formed by four sides of equal length.
157
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
• Rectangle: A rectangle is a four-sided, two-dimensional geometric shape in which the length of the opposite sides is equal. For example,
laptop screens, etc.
• Circle: A circle is a closed two-dimensional geometric figure that is round in shape. A circle does not have any lines or corners.
Solid Shapes
Solid shapes are nothing but solids that consist of 3 dimensions, namely length, breadth, and height. Solid shapes are also known as Space figures and 3D
shapes.
Types of solid shapes-
158
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
• Sphere
• Cylinder
• Cone
159
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
• Cube
•
• Cuboid
160
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
• Cube: a shape with six square faces that are all the same size.
• Sphere: a round shape that has no corners or edges.
• Cylinder: a shape with two circular faces that are the same size and a curved surface that connects them.
• Cone: a shape with a circular base and a pointed top.
http://smal1fan.weebly.com/3d-geometry.html
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists (texts, family &community knowledge and resources, contextually relevant professional
web resources)
Manipulatives: such as pattern blocks, tangrams, geoboards, and attribute blocks .
Visual aids: Pictures, diagrams, and posters can be used to help students visualize and understand geometric concepts. For example, a diagram showing
the different parts of a two-dimensional shape can help students learn the appropriate vocabulary to describe shapes.
161
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Interactive whiteboards and digital tools: Interactive whiteboards and digital tools such as iPads and laptops can be used to engage students in
interactive activities and games that promote spatial sense.
Books and literature: Books and literature that incorporate geometric concepts can help students connect math learning to the real world. For example,
a story about building a house might involve identifying and sorting shapes to create the structure.
Picture books: Picture books that feature geometric shapes and patterns can help students connect math concepts to real-world contexts.
Graphic organizers: Graphic organizers such as Venn diagrams and T-charts can be used to help students compare and contrast different shapes and
objects. For example, a T-chart could be used to compare the attributes of a cube and a cylinder.
Sentence frames: Sentence frames can be used to support students in using appropriate language to describe shapes and objects. For example, a sentence
frame might be "The shape of the window is a ____ because it has ____ sides."
Videos: use of children shows which contain geometric shapes.
Outdoor exploration: Students explore their environment can provide opportunities to develop spatial sense. For example, students might identify and
describe the shapes they see in nature, such as the round shape of a flower or the triangular shape of a mountain.
Additional Resources and Materials Books
Worksheets
Board games
Wheels
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the curriculum)
Language
Make a shape book.
Use adjectives to describe shape. For example. The square is big. The yellow triangle is small.
Science
Identify and name the shape of objects in their natural environment.
Sort and classify objects based on their shapes.
Art
Do finger painting to create shapes.
Use colour code to colour each shape
Social Studies
Students should be able to identify different shapes of important buildings and signs in their environment
162
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Introduction to the Subject:
Geometry is one of the oldest branches of mathematics and is concerned with the study of shapes, sizes, and positions of objects in space. Our world is
filled with shapes and objects of different designs; therefore, a deep understanding of geometric thinking is important. Geometric thinking is an essential
skill that involves visualizing, analyzing, and manipulating shapes, objects, and space. It is a critical skill that students need to develop to understand many
mathematical concepts and to solve real-world problems. To develop geometrical thinking students should observe pictures, diagrams and models,
participate in hands-on activities, provided with the opportunity to make real -life connections, collaborative learning and opportunities to engage in
technological activities.
Strand (Topic): Geometrical Thinking
Essential Learning Outcome 2.2: Recognizing, Naming and Describing Shapes - Naming 2D & 3D shapes
Grade Level Expectations: Recognize, name and classify 3D objects (specifically cube, cone, cylinder, sphere) and 2D shapes
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
• Identify and name 2D Shape hunt: Take the students on a shape hunt around the Multisensory Learning: Use a variety of sensory
shapes: Students should be classroom or school. Give them a list of 2D and 3D shapes to find, experiences to engage students, such as touching and
able to recognize and name such as circles, squares, triangles, rectangles, spheres, cubes, and feeling objects, listening to music, and drawing. For
basic 2D shapes such as cylinders. Have them identify and name each shape they find. example, students could use their fingers to trace
squares, rectangles, circles, shapes in sand or create shapes using playdough.
triangles, and hexagons. Verbal questioning: Ask open-ended questions that Students could use their hands to feel the different
prompt students to identify and name 2D shapes. For faces of a cube or create 3D objects using
• Identify and name 3D
example, "Can you point to the shape that has four sides of equal playdough.
objects: Students should be
length and four right angles?" or "What is the name of the shape that
able to recognize and name
has one curved side and no corners?"
basic 3D objects such as
Ask open-ended questions that prompt students to identify
and name 3D objects. For example, "What is the name of the
163
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
cubes, cones, cylinders, object that has a round base and a pointed top?" or "Can you name
and spheres. the object that has six square faces?"
Game-based assessments: Use games that involve
Apply knowledge of 2D and 3D
identifying and naming 2D or 3D shapes, such as shape
shapes in practical contexts, such
memory or shape bingo. These games can make assessment
as solving problems involving shape
more fun and engaging for students while still allowing you
and space, with support
to observe their skills.
appropriate to their individual
needs.
Observation: Observe students as they participate in
• Sort 2D shapes based on
group activities or independent work that involve sorting
their attributes, such as the
2D shapes and 3D objects based on their attributes. Take
number of sides, the length
note of their ability to identify and sort objects correctly.
of sides, and the number of
angles.
• Sort 3D objects based on
Use shapes to make impressions in playdough.
their attributes, such as the
number of faces, edges,
Universal Design for Learning (UDL): Use UDL
and vertices.
principles to create multiple ways for students to
access and engage with the material. For example,
• Compare and contrast 2D
provide audio descriptions of shapes for students who are visually
shapes and 3D objects
Verbal questioning: Ask open-ended questions that
impaired or provide hands-on activities for students who have
identifying similarities and
prompt students to sort 2D shapes and 3D objects based difficulty with verbal communication.
differences between 2D
on their attributes. For example, "Can you sort these shapes
shapes and 3D objects,
based on the number of sides?" or "How would you sort these objects Technology Integration: Use technology such as
such as the number of
based on the number of vertices?" tablets or interactive whiteboards to engage students
dimensions and the
in identifying and naming shapes. For example, students
164
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
presence of faces, edges, Hands-on activities: Provide students with hands-on could use an app that allows them to trace shapes on a
and vertices. activities such as manipulatives or shape and object models touchscreen.
that require them to sort based on attributes. Observe their Students could also use an app that allows them to rotate a
• Create 2D shapes and 3D
ability to use the materials to correctly sort objects. 3D object on a touchscreen.
objects using various
materials, such as paper,
Game-based assessments: Use games that involve Attribute charts:. Provide students with examples of
clay, and blocks.
sorting 2D shapes and 3D objects based on their attributes, each shape/object and have them identify and label
such as attribute matching or attribute bingo. These games the attributes on the charts.
• Use mathematical
can make assessment more fun and engaging for students Allows students to create attribute charts for 2D
vocabulary related to
while still allowing you to observe their skills. shapes and 3D objects that display the different
shapes, such as vertices,
attributes such as number of sides, angles, edges,
edges, faces, and
Venn diagram. Draw two overlapping circles on the vertices, etc
symmetry.
board, one labeled "2D Shapes" and the other labeled "3D
• Identify and describe real- Objects." Ask students to name different shapes and
world objects that are 2D objects and place them in the appropriate circle based on
shapes or 3D objects, such their dimensions. Encourage them to explain why they
as circles on a clock face or placed the shape or object in that circle.
a cone-shaped ice cream
cone.
• Solve basic geometric
problems involving 2D
shapes and 3D objects,
such as counting the
number of faces on a cube
or sorting 2D shapes based
on their attributes.
165
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Sort: Provide students with a set of pictures of 2D shapes
and 3D objects and ask them to sort them into two
categories based on their dimensions. This could be done
individually or in small groups.
Provide clear instructions: Provide students with clear
and concise instructions on how to create the shapes and
objects using the materials provided. Use visual aids and
demonstration to help students understand the steps.
Attribute matching: Create a matching game where
Observe and document progress: Observe students as students match the 2D shape or 3D object with its
they work and take notes on their progress. This will help corresponding attributes. For example, match a square
you to identify areas where students may need additional with the attribute "4 sides, 4 angles."
support or guidance.
166
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Consider different learning styles: Provide different Attribute sorting: Provide students with a set of 2D
options for creating shapes and objects, such as drawing, shapes or 3D objects and have them sort them into
sculpting, or building with blocks. This will help students groups based on a specific attribute. For example, have
with different learning styles to demonstrate their them sort 2D shapes based on the number of sides or 3D objects
understanding. based on the number of faces or other attributes.
Hands-on activities: Providing hands-on activities like
building with blocks or playing with 3D shapes can be an
effective way to help students understand and identify real-
world objects. Observe their interactions with the objects
and listen to their verbal descriptions to assess their
understanding.
Verbal assessments: Engaging students in conversation
about real-world objects can help you assess their
understanding. You can ask them to describe a familiar
object or use open-ended questions to prompt discussion
about the properties of shapes and objects.
Interactive assessments: Games and activities like
Attribute scavenger hunt: Hide 2D shapes or 3D
scavenger hunts or sorting games can be a fun way to assess
objects around the classroom or outdoor area and
students' ability to identify and describe real-world objects.
provide students with a list of attributes to find. For
For example, you could ask students to find objects around the
example, "Find an object with 4 sides and 4 angles."
classroom that are a certain shape or ask them to sort objects by shape.
Real-world application: Provide students with
opportunities to see 2D shapes and 3D objects in real-
life situations. For example, have them identify shapes
167
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
in the classroom or during a nature walk or have them
identify 3D objects in their homes.
Visual aids: Use posters, flashcards, and real-life
objects to help students visualize and understand the
differences between 2D shapes and 3D objects. Use
videos and animations to show how these shapes and
objects look in the real world.
Language and communication aids: Use clear and
concise language, visual aids, and gestures to help
students understand new concepts. Encourage
students to use pictures, drawings, and symbols to
express their ideas and understanding.
168
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Provide multiple materials: Provide a variety of
materials for students to create their 2D shapes and
3D objects, such as paper, clay, cardboard, and
blocks. This will help to cater to different learning
styles and preferences.
Use real-life examples to help students understand
how 2D shapes and 3D objects can be used and
created. For example, you can use pictures of buildings or
bridges to show how 3D shapes can be used in construction.
Provide guidance and support: Provide students
with guidance and support as they create their shapes
and objects. This can include demonstrations, step-
by-step instructions, and feedback on their work.
Visual aids: Incorporating visual aids like diagrams,
pictures, and videos can help students better
understand and describe real-world objects. Use
visual aids to introduce new concepts, reinforce
learning, and provide opportunities for students to
practice identifying and describing objects.
Multisensory learning: Incorporating different
senses into learning activities can help students with
diverse learning needs. Provide opportunities for
students to touch, smell, and taste objects (if
169
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
appropriate), in addition to looking at them and
describing their properties.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: (Links to professional sources that connect back to the Curriculum and Assessment
Principles of Learning and Principles of Assessment)
2D SHAPES
1. Circle: A shape with no corners or angles, and all points on the boundary are at an equal distance from the center.
2. Square: A shape with four equal sides and four right angles.
3. Rectangle: A shape with four sides where the opposite sides are equal in length and parallel, and all angles are right angles.
4. Triangle: A shape with three sides and three angles.
5. Pentagon: A shape with five sides and five angles.
6. Hexagon: A shape with six sides and six angles.
7. Octagon: A shape with eight sides and eight angles.
8. Rhombus: A shape with four equal sides, where opposite sides are parallel, and opposite angles are equal.
SOLID SHAPES
1. Cube: A solid object with six square faces that are all the same size.
2. Cone: A solid object with a circular base and a curved surface that tapers to a point at the top.
3. Cylinder: A solid object with two circular bases that are parallel and the same size, connected by a curved surface.
4. Sphere: A solid object with a curved surface that is the same distance from its center point at all points, creating a round shape.
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists (texts, family &community knowledge and resources, contextually relevant professional web resources)
170
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Khan Academy - Khan Academy is a free online learning platform that offers a variety of math courses. They have a course on geometry that covers 2D
and 3D shapes.
Math Games - Math Games is a website that offers free math games for learners of all ages. They have a section on geometry that includes games to help
learners identify and classify 2D and 3D shapes.
IXL Learning - IXL Learning is a paid online learning platform that offers math courses for learners of all ages. They have a section on geometry that
covers 2D and 3D shapes, and includes interactive exercises and quizzes.
YouTube - YouTube has a wide variety of videos on geometry, including videos that cover 2D and 3D shapes. Some popular channels to check out
include Math Antics, Numberphile, and Crash Course.
Mathway - Mathway is a website and app that offers step-by-step solutions to math problems, including problems involving 2D and 3D shapes. This can
be a helpful resource for learners who are struggling to understand a particular concept.
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the curriculum)
1. Science: In science, students can explore how 2D and 3D shapes are used in the natural world, such as the shape of a leaf or the structure of a
crystal. They can also investigate how shapes affect the properties of objects, such as the buoyancy of a boat or the strength of a building.
2. Art: In art, students can use 2D and 3D shapes to create their own works of art. They can explore how different shapes and colors can be
combined to create different effects and patterns. They can also learn about the use of shapes in different art styles, such as geometric abstraction.
3. Language Arts: In language arts, students can use 2D and 3D shapes to develop their vocabulary and language skills. They can describe objects
using shape-related adjectives and use shapes to create their own stories or poems. They can also use shapes to practice letter and word
recognition.
4. Social Studies: In social studies, students can explore how shapes are used in different cultures and traditions, such as the use of geometric
patterns in Islamic art. They can also investigate how shapes are used in different professions, such as architecture or engineering.
Technology:
Digital Games: There are many digital games available that focus on identifying and naming 2D and 3D shapes, such as shape matching games or shape
building games. These games can be accessed on tablets or computers and can provide a fun way for students to practice their skills.
171
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Interactive Whiteboards: Interactive whiteboards can be used to display 2D and 3D shapes in a large format, making it easier for students to see and
interact with them. Teachers can use these whiteboards to draw shapes and highlight their properties, and students can use them to practice drawing and
naming shapes.
Augmented Reality: Augmented reality apps can provide a 3D visualization of 2D and 3D shapes. Students can use mobile devices or tablets to view
shapes in augmented reality, allowing them to see the shapes from different angles and perspectives.
Virtual Reality: Virtual reality can provide an immersive experience for students to explore 3D shapes. Virtual reality headsets can be used to view 3D
shapes in a three-dimensional environment, allowing students to interact with them in a more realistic way.
Shape Building Apps: There are many apps available that allow students to build 2D and 3D shapes using virtual blocks or shapes. These apps can
provide a hands-on way for students to explore the properties of shapes and practice building and identifying them.
Elements from Local Culture: (References that learners might know from their local environment
Artwork – There is a rich local tradition of colorful and vibrant art, including geometric patterns and shapes. Use local artwork as examples of 2D shapes
and ask students to identify and name the shapes they see in the artwork.
Architecture – Local architecture is often characterized by unique and intricate designs, many of which incorporate geometric shapes. Take students on a
field trip to observe and identify the 2D and 3D shapes they see in local buildings.
Fruits and vegetables – Local fruits and vegetables come in a variety of shapes and sizes and can be used as a fun and interactive way to teach 2D and
3D shapes. For example, students can sort and categorize fruits and vegetables based on their shape and size.
Musical instruments - Music is known for its rhythmic and percussive sounds, often created using a variety of instruments with different shapes and
sizes. You can use local musical instruments as examples of 3D shapes and ask students to identify and name the shapes they see.
Carnival costumes - Caribbean carnivals are known for their elaborate and colorful costumes, many of which incorporate different shapes and patterns.
You can use local carnival costumes as examples of 2D and 3D shapes and ask students to identify and name the shapes and patterns they see.
Resources for a learner who is struggling: (Links to earlier learning activities for similar knowledge, links to resources for special education needs)
Education.com - Education.com has a variety of free resources for learning shapes, including printable worksheets, interactive games, and activities.
PBS Kids - PBS Kids has a variety of games and videos that can help young learners with shape recognition, such as "Shape Quest" and "Cyberchase
Shape Quest."
Funbrain - Funbrain has a section on shapes that includes interactive games and quizzes, such as "Shape Invasion" and "Shape Surveyor."
ABCya - ABCya has a variety of educational games for young learners, including games that teach 2D and 3D shapes, such as "Shape Match" and "Shape
Invasion."
YouTube - YouTube has many educational videos that teach 2D and 3D shapes. Some channels that may be helpful for grade 1 learners include Super
Simple Songs, KidsTV123, and Have Fun Teaching.
172
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Manipulatives - Manipulatives are physical objects that can be used to build and explore shapes. Some examples of manipulatives that can be used for
teaching 2D and 3D shapes include pattern blocks, tangrams, geoboards, and 3D shape blocks.
Whiteboard or Chalkboard - A whiteboard or chalkboard can be used to draw and label shapes, as well as to work through problems and examples with
the learner.
Flashcards - Flashcards can be used to help learners memorize and recognize the names and characteristics of different shapes. For example, a flashcard
might have a picture of a circle on one side and the word "circle" on the other side.
Worksheets - Worksheets can be used to reinforce the concepts learned through direct teaching. Worksheets might include activities such as coloring or
tracing shapes, identifying shapes in pictures, or matching 3D shapes to their names and attributes.
Posters and Charts - Posters and charts can be used to provide visual aids and reminders for learners. For example, a poster might have pictures of
common 2D and 3D shapes with their names and attributes listed.
Resources for a learner who needs challenge: (Links to learning activities and resources in later grades)
Virtual Reality (VR) Tools - VR tools can provide a highly interactive and immersive learning experience for learners. Some VR tools focus on teaching
geometry and shapes, allowing learners to explore 2D and 3D shapes in a virtual environment.
3D Printing - 3D printing technology can be used to create physical models of 2D and 3D shapes. This can allow learners to explore the shapes in a
tangible way and gain a deeper understanding of their attributes and properties.
Advanced Worksheets - For learners who need a challenge, worksheets that involve higher-level thinking skills can be helpful. These might include
activities such as identifying the properties of irregular shapes, creating composite shapes from smaller shapes, or solving geometric puzzles.
Games and Challenges - Games and challenges can be a fun and engaging way to challenge learners who are ready for a more advanced level of
learning. Some examples of games and challenges that focus on shapes include Tangram puzzles, 3D shape building challenges, and shape recognition
games.
Project-Based Learning - Project-based learning can provide a more challenging and in-depth learning experience for learners who are ready for it. For
example, learners might be tasked with designing and building a structure using only 2D and 3D shapes, or creating a digital model of a complex 3D
shape using software tools.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
173
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Introduction to the Subject:
Geometry is one of the oldest branches of mathematics and is concerned with the study of shapes, sizes, and positions of objects in space. Our world is
filled with shapes and objects of different designs; therefore, a deep understanding of geometric thinking is important. Geometric thinking is an essential
skill that involves visualizing, analyzing, and manipulating shapes, objects, and space. It is a critical skill that students need to develop to understand many
mathematical concepts and to solve real-world problems. To develop geometrical thinking students should observe pictures, diagrams and models,
participate in hands-on activities, provided with the opportunity to make real -life connections, collaborative learning and opportunities to engage in
technological activities.
Strand (Topic): Geometrical Thinking
Essential Learning Outcome 2.3: Recognizing, Naming and Describing Shapes – Describing relationships between and among shapes
Grade Level Expectations: Identifying and naming 2D and 3D shapes. Defining 2D and 3D shapes. Highlighting the attributes of 2D shapes
(square, rectangle, circle triangle). Highlighting the attributes of 3D shapes (cube rectangular prism, cone, cylinder) Compare given geometric
shapes according to sides, faces and corners.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
• Identify the basic shapes, Questioning:
such as circle, square, Ask students questions about shapes, objects, and Use visual aids: Visual aids such as pictures, posters,
rectangle, and triangle. how they are related to assess their understanding of and diagrams can help students to recognize and name
• Create and explore with the concepts. geometric shapes. Use colorful images that clearly show
the shape and label it with its name.
different materials such as
Verbal Assessment
playdough, blocks, foam to
Ask students to describe the shapes they see, using
form different shapes.
their own words. This allows them to use their
• Find shapes in the
creativity and helps build their confidence in verbal
environment such as in
expression. Ask students to use manipulatives such
buildings, signs, or everyday
as blocks and play dough to create geometric shapes
objects.
and describe them to you.
• Sort shapes based on their
attributes.
174
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
• Identify and create patterns
using geometric shapes.
Visual Aids
Use pictures and diagrams to help students identify
different shapes. Show them real-life objects and ask
them to identify the shapes within them. You can also
use flashcards with shapes printed on them.
Collaborative Learning
Encourage students to work together in small groups
to identify and describe shapes. This allows for peer-
to-peer learning and gives students the opportunity to
practice their communication and social skills.
Individualise Learning
Provide students with individualized learning plans Verbal instructions: When introducing a new shape,
that cater to their specific needs. For example, some provide clear and concise verbal instructions. Use simple
students may benefit from visual aids while others language and avoid using technical terms that might be
may need more hands-on activities. confusing for young learners.
• A triangle has three straight sides and three angles.
Games
• A rectangle has four straight sides and four right angles
(90-degree angles).
• A circle is a round shape with no corners or angles.
• A square has four equal straight sides and four right
angles (90-degree angles).
175
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Use games such as shape bingo or memory matching • A pentagon has five straight sides and five angles.
games to make learning more engaging and fun for
Hands-on activities: Hands-on activities, such as
students.
building shapes with blocks or using pattern blocks to
make shapes, can help students to understand the
properties of geometric shapes. Students can manipulate
the shapes and explore their characteristics.
Group activities: Group activities can help to foster a
collaborative learning environment where students can
Observation
learn from each other. Students can work together to
Observe students on task as they interact with identify and describe shapes, or play games that involve
different geometric shapes. Observe students as they recognizing shapes.
categorize geometric shapes according to their
attributes. Real-world examples: Use real-world examples of
geometric shapes to help students understand their
relevance and application. For example, point out shapes in
buildings or in nature.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZnZYK83utu0
Multi-sensory learning: Use a variety of sensory
experiences to reinforce learning. For example, students
can touch and feel the different sides and angles of a
shape or listen to a song or rhyme that helps them to
remember its name and characteristics.
Shape sort
Materials
176
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
• Various 2D and 3D shapes (e.g. circle, square, Example of a rhyme
triangle, rectangle, cube, cylinder, sphere, 2D Shapes:
cone) Circle, circle, round and round No corners or edges to be found
Squares are like a box or tile Four sides and corners make them
• A large sheet of paper with two sections
smile
labeled "2D shapes" and "3D shapes"
A triangle has angles three Count them with me, one, two, three
Instructions: Rectangles are like squares stretched wide Two short sides and two
Show the students the different 2D and 3D shapes long sides
and ask them to name each one. Pentagon, oh pentagon, a shape so bold Five sides and angles, it
Explain to the students that they will be sorting the never gets old
shapes into two categories: 2D shapes and 3D shapes.
Demonstrate how to sort the shapes by placing a 3D Shapes:
circle, square, triangle, and rectangle in the "2D A sphere is like a ball or globe Round and curvy, it's a fun shape
shapes" section, and a cube, cylinder, sphere, and to probe
cone in the "3D shapes" section. A cube has six faces, all the same It's like a box, a perfect little
Have the students take turns sorting the shapes into game
the correct section. You can use a timer to make it A cone has one point and a circle base It's like a party hat, a fun
more engaging and challenging for the students. shape to trace
After all the shapes have been sorted, review each A cylinder is like a can or tube Round and long, it's a fun shape
section with the class to ensure accuracy. to cube
Pyramids are pointy on top A shape so strong, it will never flop
Assessment: Observe the students as they sort the
shapes and take note of any difficulties they may have.
You can also ask the students to explain why they
sorted certain shapes into a particular category. This
will help you assess their understanding of 2D and 3D
shapes and sorting.
177
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
A 3D shape is a solid object that has three dimensions: length, width, and height. It is not flat like a 2D shape, but has depth and can be held in your
hand. Examples of common 3D shapes include cubes, spheres, cylinders, cones, and pyramids
Cube
• Has 6 square faces
• All sides are equal in length
• Has 8 vertices (corners)
Examples of cube found in our environment: dice, sugar cubes, Rubik's cube
https://www.vectorstock.com/royalty-free-vector/blue-smart-cube-icon-isometric-style-vector-26803260
Sphere
• Looks like a ball
• Has no faces, edges, or vertices
• Has a curved surface
178
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Examples of Spheres found in our environment: balls, oranges, globes.
https://www.google.com/search?q=images+of+a+sphere&rlz=1C1GCEA_enGD937GD937&sxsrf=APwXEdf8sb7_4xrrSh29-
2JuGcVvM5rrBA%3A1680618080970&ei=YDIsZIHyOq_LwbkPwMqUiAo&oq=images+of+a+s&gs_lcp=Cgxnd3Mtd2l6LXNlcnAQARgAMggIABC
KBRCRAjIFCAAQgAQyBQgAEIAEMgUIABCABDIFCAAQgAQyBQgAEIAEMgUIABCABDIFCAAQgAQyBQgAEIAEMgUIABCABDoKCAAQ
RxDWBBCwAzoECCMQJzoGCAAQFhAeOg0IABAWEB4QDxDxBBAKOggIABAWEB4QCkoECEEYAFD5MVjLSWCQYGgBcAF4AIABogGIA
ZkFkgEDMC41mAEAoAEByAEIwAEB&sclient=gws-wiz-serp#imgrc=-OUfPctD-OvVcM
Cylinder
• Looks like a can
• Has 2 circular faces
• Has a curved surface
• Has no vertices
Examples of Cylinders found in our environment soda cans, water bottles, candles, pencils
https://www.google.com/search?q=image+of+cylinder&rlz=1C1GCEA_enGD937GD937&sxsrf=APwXEdc3Sf86OdZKz6KozRTdpROE14BdZA%
3A1680618579086&ei=UzQsZOX3BPeGwbkP9tKhqAc&oq=images+of+a+sphere&gs_lcp=Cgxnd3Mtd2l6LXNlcnAQARgEMgoIABBHENYEELA
Cone
• Looks like an ice cream cone
• Has 1 circular face
• Has a curved surface that tapers to a point
• Has 1 vertex (the pointy end)
• Examples of Cones found in our environment: ice cream cones, traffic cones, party hats.
https://www.google.com/search?q=image+of+cone&rlz=1C1GCEA_enGD937GD937&sxsrf=APwXEdfiQuHUF-
JEolkU0s8sVihTd2mt1A%3A1680620075512&ei=KzosZNP0HueTwbkPmuyD
179
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Cuboid (Rectangular Prism
• Looks like a box
• Has 6 faces, all rectangles
• Opposite faces are equal in size
• Has 8 vertices (corners)
• Examples of Cuboid found in our environment
https://www.google.com/search?q=images+of+cuboid&rlz=1C1GCEA_enGD937GD937&oq=images+of+cuboid&aqs=chrome..69i57j0i51
2l4j0i22i30l5.20283j0j7&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8#imgrc=nYM9v03ngrNuaM
What is a 2D shape?
A 2D shape is a flat shape that has two dimensions: length and width. It does not have any thickness or depth. Examples of 2D shapes include circles,
squares, rectangles, triangles, and hexagons. These shapes can be found in many everyday objects, such as signs, toys, and buildings.
1. Square: A square is a shape with four sides that are all the same length and four corners that are all right angles.
2. Circle: A circle is a shape that has no corners and is completely round.
3. Triangle: A triangle is a shape with three sides and three corners.
4. Rectangle: A rectangle is a shape with four sides, where the opposite sides are parallel and the angles at each corner are all right angles.
5. Oval: An oval is a shape that is like a stretched-out circle, with no corners and a curved shape.
6. Pentagon: A pentagon is a shape with five sides and five corners.
7. Hexagon: A hexagon is a shape with six sides and six corners.
8. Octagon: An octagon is a shape with eight sides and eight corners.
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists (texts, family &community knowledge and resources, contextually relevant professional web resources)
1. Visual aids - Use visual aids such as posters, flashcards, or pictures to display different geometric shapes.
180
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
2. Interactive games - Interactive games, such as matching games, puzzles, or online quizzes, can be a fun and engaging way to help students learn
about shapes.
3. Playdough - Use playdough or clay to help students create and manipulate different geometric shapes. This can help them develop a tactile
understanding of the shapes, and also enhance their fine motor skills.
4. Storybooks - Use storybooks that incorporate geometric shapes, such as "The Greedy Triangle" by Marilyn Burns or "Shape by Shape" by Suse
MacDonald. These books can be a fun and engaging way to introduce students to different shapes
5. Collaborative activities - Engage students in collaborative activities that involve identifying and describing geometric shapes. For example, students
can work in pairs to create a shape scavenger hunt, where they search for different shapes around the classroom or school and describe their properties to
each other.
and help them understand their properties.
6. Videos - There are many educational videos available online that can be used to teach geometry to grade 1 students. For example, the PBS Kids show
"Cyberchase" has several episodes that focus on geometric concepts such as symmetry, angles, and tessellations. These videos can be used to supplement
classroom instruction and engage students who may be more visually or auditory oriented.
7. Interactive games - Interactive games and activities can help students practice and reinforce geometric concepts in a fun and engaging way. For
example, the game "Shape Invaders" allows students to practice identifying and naming geometric shapes by shooting down shapes in a space-themed
setting. This type of game can be used as a form of formative assessment to gauge students' understanding of geometric concepts
8. Hands-on manipulatives - Providing students with hands-on manipulatives such as pattern blocks, tangrams, or geoboards can help them develop
spatial reasoning skills and better understand geometric concepts. These manipulatives can also be used to create inclusive activities that promote
teamwork and cooperation among students.
Additional Resources and Materials
Geometric shape flash cards
Geometric shape posters
Interactive whiteboard
Shape sorting games
Storybook about shapes
Online resources and websites
Sample models of 3D shapes.
181
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Art and Craft:
- Draw and colour geometric shapes..
- Estimate the number of shapes within a pattern.
Represent arrays of geometric shapes through drawing, painting and
photography.
Language Arts:
- Use adjectives to describe shapes, patterns, sizes, etc. when estimating.
- Write, discuss and share reasons and explanations for decisions made.
- Make comparisons between geometric shapes.
- Write simple sentences about geometric shapes.
- Create stories involving 3D shapes and 2D shapes.
- Read stories highlighting the attributes of 3D shape and 2D shapes
- Write sentences, rhymes and poems recognizing, naming and describing geometric shapes.
Music:
Singing songs about geometric shapes.
- Show appreciation for peers when working in groups
- Show appreciation for the opinions of others, by listening, and allowing peers to speak.
- Demonstrate listening skills, allowing and taking turns when conversing in groups.
- Play games with mathematical skills for enjoyment and skill development.
- Model sharing geometric shapes created by individual students.
Social Studies:
- Divide work among students working in groups.
Students working cooperatively to complete a given task.
Sharing responsibilities among students within groups.
Science
Categorizing geometric shapes according to number of sides, shape, number of corners, made from straight lines, made from curve lines etc.
182
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Elements from Local Culture: (References that learners might know from their local environment
Flags: Use the flags of different Caribbean countries to identify 2D shapes, such as rectangles or triangles, and discuss their attributes, such as the
number of sides or angles.
example: A circle could be a pizza or a calypso drum (face of drum for a circle). tile in the house
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
Online videos: There are many online videos available that can help students learn about 3D and 2D shapes. Some good options include:
• PBS Learning Media has a collection of videos about shapes and geometry that are designed for young learners.
• Khan Academy Kids has a series of videos that cover 2D shapes, 3D shapes, and other geometry concepts.
• Math Antics has a video on 2D shapes that explains the basic concepts in an easy-to-understand way.
https://pbskids.org/games
https://pbskids.org/games/shapes
https://www.khanacademy.org/
https://www.adaptedmind.com/Math-
Worksheets.html?utm_medium=cpc&utm_source=google&campaignid=835890474&campaign_type=&placement=g&utm_content=
Worksheets and activities: There are many worksheets and activities available that can help students practice recognizing and describing shapes. Some
good options include:
Education.com has a variety of worksheets and activities on shapes for grade 1 learners.
Teachers Pay Teachers has a selection of printable activities and worksheets that cover 2D and 3D shapes.
Scholastic has a set of printable activities that help students learn about shapes and geometry.
Games and apps: There are many games and apps that can help students practice recognizing and describing shapes in a fun way.
Manipulatives: Sometimes, students need hands-on experience with shapes in order to fully understand them. Some good manipulatives for teaching
shapes include:-
Pattern blocks: These colorful blocks can be used to create and explore 2D shapes.
Geometric solids: These 3D models can help students understand the properties of different 3D shapes.
Tangrams: These puzzles challenge students to create different shapes using a set of seven pieces.
183
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
1. Shape Up!" Game: This game helps students learn to recognize and name shapes by matching them to their corresponding names. It can be found on
ABCya.com.
2. "Geoboard" App: This app allows students to create shapes on a virtual geoboard using rubber bands. It helps develop spatial awareness and
geometric understanding. It can be found on the App Store or Google Play.
3."Pattern Blocks" Manipulatives: These manipulatives are available in both physical and digital formats and help students learn about shapes and
patterns through hands-on exploration.
4."Exploring Shapes" Worksheets: These worksheets provide opportunities for students to practice identifying and describing the attributes of shapes.
They can be found on education.com or teacherspayteachers.com.
5.Shape Explorer" Book: This book provides a comprehensive overview of geometric shapes, including their attributes and real-world examples. It can
be found on Amazon or at your local library.
6."Geometry for Kids" Videos: These videos provide engaging explanations of geometric concepts in a way that is easy for young learners to
understand. They can be found on YouTube or Khan Academy Kids.
7."Math Playground" Games: This website offers a variety of games that help students practice recognizing and describing geometric shapes in a fun
and interactive way.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
1. Use real-life examples: Use real-life objects and situations to introduce geometric shapes to students. For example, use a pizza to introduce the
concept of a circle, a box to introduce the concept of a rectangle, or a cone to introduce the concept of a cone.
2. Hands-on activities: Provide students with hands-on activities such as building with blocks or creating geometric shapes with playdough. This
will help them visualize and understand the different shapes.
3. Visual aids: Use visual aids such as posters or flashcards to help students recognize and name different shapes. You can also use videos and
interactive software to help students understand geometric concepts.
4. Games: Incorporate games into your lessons to make learning fun and engaging. For example, play a game of "I Spy" where students have to find
shapes in the classroom or go on a shape hunt outside.
5. Assessment tools: Use assessment tools such as worksheets or quizzes to assess students' understanding of geometric shapes. You can also use
performance tasks such as asking students to build a specific shape using blocks or draw a shape on paper.
184
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
185
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Introduction to the Subject:
Geometry is one of the oldest branches of mathematics and is concerned with the study of shapes, sizes, and positions of objects in space. Our world is
filled with shapes and objects of different designs; therefore, a deep understanding of geometric thinking is important. Geometric thinking is an essential
skill that involves visualizing, analyzing, and manipulating shapes, objects, and space. It is a critical skill that students need to develop to understand many
mathematical concepts and to solve real-world problems. To develop geometrical thinking students should observe pictures, diagrams and models,
participate in hands-on activities, provided with the opportunity to make real -life connections, collaborative learning and opportunities to engage in
technological activities.
Strand (Topic): Geometrical Thinking
Essential Learning Outcome 3.1: Developing spatial sense - Composing, Decomposing and Transforming Shapes - Combining Shapes
Grade Level Expectations: Construct composite objects using cubes, cones, cylinders, spheres and identifying characteristics of these objects that
make them easy to build with or not easy to build with.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
• Construct composite Hands-on Manipulatives Concrete Manipulatives
objects using different Provide concrete manipulatives, such as shape blocks,
shapes pattern blocks, or playdough, for students to physically
• Identify the different manipulate and create composite objects. This hands-on
approach allows students to explore shapes through
shapes used in the
tactile and kinesthetic experiences, which can be especially
composite objects created.
beneficial for young learners.
• State the characteristics of
the shapes that make them
easy or difficult to build
with.
• Discuss and describe the
composite objects.
186
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
• Compare and contrast Use hands-on manipulatives, such as shape blocks or
different composite pattern blocks, to allow students to physically create
objects. composite objects and explore different shapes.
Multisensory Instruction
Incorporate multisensory instruction by using songs,
chants, or rhymes that involve movement or gestures to
teach and reinforce shape identification. This can engage
students with different learning styles, including auditory
and kinesthetic learners, and make the learning experience
Multisensory Approaches
more enjoyable and memorable.
Incorporate multisensory approaches, such as using
Chant
songs, chants, or rhymes that involve movement or
Shape Hokey Pokey" chant:
gestures to teach and reinforce shape identification. This
• For circle, put arms in a circle shape
can engage students with different learning styles,
including auditory and kinesthetic learners. • For square, put arms in a square shape
• For triangle, put arms in a triangle shape
Authentic Assessment
Use authentic assessment strategies, such as performance • For rectangle, put arms in a long and short shape
tasks or projects, where students can create composite
You put your circle in, you put your circle out, You put your circle
objects using different shapes. Introduce students to
in, and you shake it all about. You do the shape hokey pokey and
different 2D and 3D shapes and their properties (e.g.
you turn yourself around, That's what it's all about!
number of sides, corners, edges, faces, etc.).
187
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Hands-on Activities
Performance task: Shape creature Provide hands-on activities where students can
1. Have students draw and label different 2D and 3D manipulate and explore different shapes using building
shapes in their math journals or on a worksheet. materials such as blocks, clay, or playdough. Allow
students to experiment with building and observe the
2. Explain that they will be using these shapes to create their
own shape creatures. These creatures can be animals, characteristics that make certain shapes easy or difficult to
monsters, aliens, or anything else they can imagine. work with. Hands-on activities can provide concrete
experiences for students to understand the shapes'
3. Provide students with a variety of materials such as
characteristics through tactile and kinesthetic learning.
construction paper, glue, scissors, and markers to create
their creatures.
4. Have students cut out different shapes and arrange them
on their paper to create their creatures. They can glue the
shapes together to create a 3D effect or keep them flat to
create a 2D creature.
5. Once their creatures are complete, have students label the
shapes they used to create them. You can also have them
count the number of sides, corners, edges, faces, etc. on each
shape. Guided Inquiry
Use guided inquiry approaches to encourage students to
6. Display the students' shape creatures on a bulletin board
observe, question, and explore the characteristics of
or in the classroom for all to see..
shapes that make them easy or difficult to build with. Ask
open-ended questions such as "What do you notice about the
Hands-on Experiences
shape of this block?" or "Why do you think spheres are difficult to
Provide hands-on experiences with actual manipulatives,
stack?" This can promote critical thinking and problem-
such as shape blocks, pattern blocks, or other building
solving skills as students investigate and discover the
materials, for students to explore and experiment with.
characteristics of shapes on their own.
Allow them to build with different shapes and observe
188
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
and discuss the characteristics that make them easy or Simplified Language
difficult to work with. Hands-on experiences can engage Use simplified language and clear instructions to explain
students in kinesthetic learning and promote their the characteristics of shapes in a way that is easy for grade
understanding of the shapes' buildability. 1 students to understand. Avoid using complex or
technical language that may be confusing for young
learners. Use simple and concrete terms to describe the
characteristics of shapes and their buildability.
Guided Questions
Why are the cylinders pinned at the top? Ask open-ended questions that prompt students to think
critically about the characteristics of their composite
Verbal Descriptions objects. For example, "What shape is your object?" "How did you
Use verbal descriptions or oral prompts to guide students connect the different parts?" "Why do you think your object is
in recognizing the characteristics of shapes that make stable/unstable?" "What could you do to make it easier to build
them easy or difficult to build with. For example, ask with?"
students to describe the sides or edges of a cube that make
it easy to stack, or the smooth and curved surface of a Reflection and Metacognition Encourage students to
sphere that makes it difficult to stack. Verbal descriptions reflect on their own work and thought processes during
can support students with different learning styles, the discussion. Ask them to explain their decision-making
including auditory learners, in processing and and problem-solving strategies, and reflect on what they
understanding the information. learned from the activity.
Multimodal Assessments Real-world Applications
Utilize multimodal assessments that incorporate various Connect the learning of comparing and contrasting
modes of expression, such as written, oral, visual, or composite objects to real-world applications. For
189
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
hands-on, to allow students to demonstrate their instance, discuss how different composite objects are used
understanding of the characteristics of shapes. For example, in everyday life, such as in construction, art, or play. This
students can draw or write about the characteristics of different can help students see the relevance of their learning and
shapes, verbally explain their observations, or physically build and understand the practical implications of the characteristics
manipulate shapes to demonstrate their understanding. that make objects easy or difficult to build with.
Show and Tell Play-based Learning
Provide opportunities for students to showcase and Utilize play-based learning approaches to engage and
explain the composite objects they have created using motivate students. Allow them to engage in imaginative
building materials such as blocks, clay, or other play with the composite objects, where they can
manipulatives. Allow students to describe the experiment, create, and pretend. This can foster creativity,
characteristics of their objects, such as the shape, size, and problem-solving skills, and critical thinking abilities while
arrangement of the components, and explain why they making the learning experience enjoyable and fun.
think their objects are easy or difficult to build with.
Think-Pair-Share
Use the Think-Pair-Share strategy, where students can
first think independently about the characteristics that
make their composite objects easy or difficult to build
with, then discuss their ideas with a partner, and finally
share their findings with the class.
Guided Questions
Ask students open-ended questions that prompt them to
compare and contrast the characteristics of different
190
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
composite objects. For example, "What shapes do you see in
each object?" "How are the objects similar or different in terms of
stability?" "Which object do you think would be easier to build with
and why?"
Real-world Connections
Help students make connections between the
characteristics of the composite objects and real-world
objects or structures. For example, discuss how stability and
balance are important in building structures such as houses or
furniture. This can help students see the relevance and practical
applications of their learning.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Identify the different shapes used in the composite objects they create.
191
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Note: Composite shapes should also be placed in different orientations and to include non-examples. That 3D shapes they haven’t encountered as yet.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Science
• Structures and Materials: Help students understand how composite solid shapes are used in structures and materials. Students can investigate how
composite solid shapes are used in architecture, engineering, and everyday objects, such as buildings, bridges, and vehicles. They can explore the
advantages and disadvantages of using composite solid shapes in different contexts, and design and build their own structures using composite
solid shapes.
• Earth and Space Science: Explore how composite solid shapes are present in natural objects and phenomena. For example, students can study
how mountains, rocks, crystals, and other natural formations are composed of composite solid shapes. They can also investigate how composite
solid shapes are used in space exploration, such as spacecraft and planetary rovers.
192
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Language Arts
• Reading: Incorporate literature that features composite solid shapes or related concepts, and engage students in discussions and activities related to
the stories. For example, students can read books that depict characters interacting with composite solid shapes, or books that describe real-world
scenarios where composite solid shapes are used. They can also engage in reading comprehension activities that involve identifying and analyzing
composite solid shapes in text and images.
• Writing: Encourage students to express their understanding of composite solid shapes through writing. For example, they can write descriptive
paragraphs or stories that use appropriate geometric vocabulary to describe composite solid shapes or explain how they are formed. They can also
write persuasive or informative pieces that argue for or against the use of composite solid shapes in a specific context, or provide information
about the properties and applications of composite solid shapes.
Social Studies
• Culture and History: Explore how composite solid shapes have been used in different cultures and historical periods. Students can investigate the
use of composite solid shapes in traditional architecture, art, and artifacts from different regions and time periods, and analyze how they reflect the
cultural and historical contexts. They can also examine how technological advancements have influenced the use of composite solid shapes in
different societies over time.
• Economics: Study the economic aspects of composite solid shapes. Students can research how composite solid shapes are used in manufacturing,
construction, and other industries, and analyze the economic implications of using composite solid shapes, such as costs, benefits, and
environmental considerations. They can also investigate careers related to composite solid shapes, such as architects, engineers, and designers, and
explore the skills and knowledge required for these careers.
Elements from Local Culture:
Traditional Architecture: Explore local traditional architecture and identify composite solid shapes used in buildings or structures. Students can observe
and analyze how local buildings or structures are constructed using composite solid shapes, such as cubes, cylinders, or cones. They can identify different
3D shapes and their properties in the local architecture, and compare and contrast them with other composite solid shapes they have learned about.
Art and Crafts: Introduce local art and crafts that incorporate composite solid shapes. Students can explore local artwork or crafts that use composite
solid shapes as design elements, such as sculptures, baskets, or pottery. They can observe the shapes, patterns, and arrangements in these art forms, and
identify the composite solid shapes used. Students can also create their own art or crafts using composite solid shapes, inspired by local cultural elements.
193
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Traditional Tools and Objects: Explore local tools, objects, or artifacts that are made of composite solid shapes. Students can investigate how
traditional tools or objects in their local culture are constructed using composite solid shapes, such as bowls, drums, or masks. They can identify the
shapes and their properties in these objects, and understand how the composite solid shapes are used for different purposes.
Local Celebrations or Festivals: Explore local celebrations or festivals that involve composite solid shapes. Students can learn about local celebrations
or festivals that feature composite solid shapes as decorations, costumes, or props, and understand the significance and symbolism of these shapes in the
local culture. They can also create their own composite solid shape decorations or props for a class celebration or festival, inspired by local cultural
elements.
Traditional Stories or Legends: Incorporate local traditional stories or legends that involve composite solid shapes. Students can listen to or read local
stories or legends that feature composite solid shapes as key elements, and discuss the shapes and their significance in the stories. They can also retell or
recreate the stories using composite solid shapes as visual aids, or create their own stories that incorporate composite solid shapes and local cultural
elements.
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
1. Visual aids: Provide visual aids, such as posters, charts, or flashcards, that display different shapes and their names. These visual aids can help
learners visually identify and associate shapes with their names, making it easier for them to recognize shapes in the composite objects they create.
2. Manipulatives: Use manipulatives, such as building blocks, interlocking toys, or playdough, that allow learners to physically handle and
manipulate shapes. Hands-on experiences with tangible objects can help learners better understand the characteristics of shapes and how they are
used in composite objects.
3. Interactive online resources: There are many interactive online resources, such as educational websites, apps, or games, that offer engaging
activities for learners to practice identifying shapes. These resources often provide visual cues, prompts, and feedback to support learners in their
shape identification skills.
4. Worksheets and activities: Use worksheets and activities specifically designed for identifying shapes in composite objects. These can include
exercises where learners need to identify and circle or label the shapes used in composite objects, or cut-and-paste activities where learners need to
match shapes with the corresponding composite objects.
5. Small group or one-on-one instruction: Provide small group or one-on-one instruction to learners who are struggling with identifying shapes in
composite objects. This allows for personalized attention and targeted instruction to address their specific needs and challenges.
194
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
6. Multisensory approaches: Incorporate multisensory approaches, such as incorporating auditory, visual, and kinesthetic elements into the
learning process. For example, learners can listen to shape names, see visual representations of shapes, and physically manipulate shapes using
hands-on materials.
7. Differentiated instruction: Differentiate instruction based on the learner's individual needs, abilities, and learning style. Provide varied levels of
difficulty or scaffolding, and offer opportunities for repeated practice and reinforcement.
8. Home-based activities: Encourage learners to practice identifying shapes in composite objects at home with the support of family members or
caregivers. This can include identifying shapes in household objects, creating composite objects using everyday items, or playing shape recognition
games.
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
Online Interactive Games: There are many websites that offer interactive games to help young learners understand composite solid shapes. Some
popular ones include:
• PBS Kids (pbskids.org): PBS Kids has various games that focus on shapes, including composite solid shapes, such as "Shape Quest" and "Martha
Speaks - Dog Party."
• ABCya! (abcya.com): ABCya! offers games that focus on geometry and shapes, including "Shape Invasion" and "Geoboard."
• Funbrain Jr. (funbrainjr.com): Funbrain Jr. has games that introduce basic geometry concepts, including composite solid shapes, such as "Shape
Puzzler" and "Geometry Matching."
Printable Worksheets: There are many websites that offer printable worksheets for young learners to practice working with composite solid shapes.
Some popular ones include:
• Education.com (education.com): Education.com has a variety of worksheets related to geometry and shapes, including composite solid shapes,
such as "Solid Shapes: Identifying 3D Shapes" and "Building 3D Shapes."
• TeachersPayTeachers (teacherspayteachers.com): TeachersPayTeachers is a platform where teachers can share and sell educational resources,
including worksheets related to composite solid shapes. You can find a wide range of worksheets, from simple to more complex, depending on
the needs of your grade 1 learner.
Books: There are also children's books available that focus on geometry and shapes, including composite solid shapes. Some popular ones include:
195
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
• "3-D Shapes" by David A. Adler: This book introduces young learners to various 3D shapes, including composite solid shapes, in a simple and
engaging way.
• "Captain Invincible and the Space Shapes" by Stuart J. Murphy: This is a fun and educational picture book that follows Captain Invincible as he
explores space and encounters various composite solid shapes.
Teacher-created Resources: Many teachers create their own resources, such as lesson plans, activities, and worksheets, to help their students learn
about composite solid shapes. You may find such resources on educational websites, teacher blogs, or online communities for educators.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
196
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Introduction to the Subject:
Geometry is one of the oldest branches of mathematics and is concerned with the study of shapes, sizes, and positions of objects in space. Our world is
filled with shapes and objects of different designs; therefore, a deep understanding of geometric thinking is important. Geometric thinking is an essential
skill that involves visualizing, analyzing, and manipulating shapes, objects, and space. It is a critical skill that students need to develop to understand many
mathematical concepts and to solve real-world problems. To develop geometrical thinking students should observe pictures, diagrams and models,
participate in hands-on activities, provided with the opportunity to make real -life connections, collaborative learning and opportunities to engage in
technological activities.
Strand (Topic): Geometrical Thinking
Essential Learning Outcome 3.2: Composing, Decomposing and Transforming Shapes – Deconstructing Shapes
Grade Level Expectations: Deconstruct shapes identifying 2D shapes that can be found in cubes, cones, cylinders, spheres through making
footprints, making shadows, or slicing
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
• Identify and name at least Visual Identification: Visual Aids:
three different 2D shapes (e.g., Provide visual aids such as pictures or diagrams of cubes,
circles, squares, rectangles, cones, cylinders, and spheres with 2D shapes highlighted
triangles) that can be found in within them. Ask students to identify and name the 2D
cubes, cones, cylinders, and shapes they see, using appropriate vocabulary like circles,
spheres. squares, rectangles, and triangles.
• Create and name 2D shapes by
using physical objects (such as
cubes, cones, cylinders, and
spheres) to create "footprints"
or "shadows" on paper.
197
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
• Describe the resulting cross- Use visual aids, such as posters or charts, that display
section of slicing a cube, cone, images or diagrams of cubes, cones, cylinders, and
cylinder, or sphere is sliced, the spheres, along with the 2D shapes that can be found
resulting cross-sections can be within them. Label the shapes using appropriate
different 2D shapes, and be vocabulary, such as edges, vertices, sides, circles, and
able to identify and name these triangles, to help students associate the shapes with the
shapes. objects.
• Use appropriate vocabulary
(e.g., edges, vertices, sides,
circles, triangles) to describe
the features of cubes, cones,
cylinders, and spheres, and
explain how these features can
be used to identify the 2D
Guided Questions:
shapes within them.
Ask guided questions that prompt students to think
• Apply knowledge of 2D shapes critically about the features of cubes, cones, cylinders,
Verbal Descriptions:
to real-world objects by and spheres, and how these features relate to the 2D
Use verbal descriptions and guided discussions to help
identifying and naming the 2D shapes within them. For example, you can ask questions
students describe the features of cubes, cones, cylinders,
shapes that can be found in like "How many sides does a cube have?" or "What shape do you
and spheres using appropriate vocabulary like edges,
everyday objects that resemble see on the top of a cylinder?"
vertices, sides, circles, and triangles. Encourage students
cubes, cones, cylinders, and
to explain how these features can be used to identify the
spheres, such as a soccer ball
2D shapes within them.
(sphere) or a building block
(cube).
Hands-on Manipulation:
Provide students with actual cubes, cones, cylinders, and
spheres that they can hold, manipulate, and use to create
198
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
footprints or shadows on paper. This hands-on
approach allows students to actively engage with the
objects, feel their shapes, and explore how they create
different 2D shapes when pressed against paper.
Verbal Prompts:
Use verbal prompts to guide students in identifying
and naming the 2D shapes created by the 3D objects.
For example, you can ask questions like "What shape do
Visual Aids:
you see when you press the cube on the paper?", "What shape is
formed when you roll the cylinder?", or "What do you notice
about the shape created by the cone?". Verbal prompts can
help students articulate their observations and make
connections between the objects and the shapes
formed.
199
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Use visual aids such as pictures, diagrams, or illustrations
to demonstrate how cubes, cones, cylinders, and spheres
can create 2D shapes when projected onto paper. Show
Hands-on Activities: examples of "footprints" or "shadows" created by these
Provide opportunities for students to physically slice or objects and help students identify and name the resulting
cut cubes, cones, cylinders, and spheres using safe and shapes.
appropriate materials. Allow them to observe and
identify the resulting cross-sections, and use appropriate
vocabulary (e.g., circles, triangles, rectangles) to name
these shapes.
Guided Exploration:
Guide students through a structured exploration activity
Visual Representations: where they can experiment with the objects and create
Use visual representations, such as diagrams or pictures, different "footprints" or "shadows" on paper. Provide
to show the process of slicing a cube, cone, cylinder, or prompts or cues to help them make connections
sphere, and the resulting 2D shapes. Ask students to between the objects and the resulting 2D shape.
label and name these shapes based on the visual
representations provided.
Hands-on Exploration:
200
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Provide students with actual cubes, cones, cylinders, and
spheres to explore and manipulate. Encourage them to
slice these objects using safe tools or by using their hands
and observe the resulting cross-sections. Help them
identify and name the 2D shapes formed, such as circles,
rectangles, triangles, etc. This hands-on approach can
provide a tangible and meaningful experience for
students to understand the concept of cross-sections.
Vocabulary Checks:
Conduct vocabulary checks during classroom
discussions or one-on-one interactions with students to
assess their ability to use appropriate vocabulary related
to the features of cubes, cones, cylinders, and spheres.
Ask students to explain the meaning of key terms such
as edges, vertices, sides, circles, and triangles, and
provide examples of these features in the context of
these 3D shapes.
Discussion and Language Development:
201
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Engage students in discussions about the concept of
Cooperative Learning Activities: cross-sections and the different 2D shapes that can be
Engage students in cooperative learning activities where formed. Use appropriate vocabulary, such as edges,
they work in pairs or small groups to discuss and vertices, sides, circles, triangles, etc., and model their use
describe the features of cubes, cones, cylinders, and during discussions. Encourage students to ask questions and
spheres. Assess their ability to use appropriate share their observations and interpretations. Provide opportunities
vocabulary in their discussions and explanations and for students to practice using the vocabulary in context through
provide feedback accordingly. discussions, group activities, or role-play.
Real-world object identification: Inquiry-based Learning:
Encourage students to explore and investigate the
concept of cross-sections on their own or in small
groups. Provide them with materials, such as playdough
or clay, to create their own 3D objects and slice them to
observe the resulting cross-sections. Allow them to
experiment, make observations, and draw conclusions
about the different 2D shapes formed. This inquiry-
based approach can foster curiosity, critical thinking, and
problem-solving skills.
Language support:
202
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Provide a variety of real-world objects that resemble Use simplified language and provide clear explanations
cubes, cones, cylinders, and spheres, such as toys, of the vocabulary terms such as edges, vertices, sides,
household items, or images. Ask students to identify and circles, and triangles. Use concrete examples and relate
name the 2D shapes they can find in these objects. For them to familiar objects or experiences that students can
example, a soccer ball can be used to identify a circle (for easily understand.
the patches) and a sphere (for the overall shape).
Multisensory approaches:
Incorporate multisensory approaches such as tactile,
auditory, and visual cues to accommodate different
learning styles. For example, use textured shapes, play
verbal games, or use interactive online resources that
provide visual and auditory cues to help students
connect the features of 3D shapes with the 2D shapes
within them.
https://study.com/academy/lesson/identifying-2d-
shapes-in-3d-figures-lesson-for-kids.html
Inclusive language:
Use inclusive language that promotes diversity and
Picture-based assessments:
inclusivity in the classroom. Avoid gender-specific terms
Use pictures or diagrams of everyday objects that
and ensure that all students feel valued and included in
resemble cubes, cones, cylinders, and spheres, and ask
the learning process, regardless of their backgrounds or
students to identify and name the 2D shapes within
abilities.
them. This can be done through worksheets or digital
platforms where students can drag and drop labels to
match the shapes they see in the pictures.
Real-World Object Exploration:
203
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Provide opportunities for students to explore real-world
objects that resemble cubes, cones, cylinders, and
spheres, such as soccer balls, building blocks, or toy cars.
Encourage them to use their senses to examine the
objects, and ask open-ended questions to prompt their
observations and discussions about the 2D shapes they
can identify on these objects.
Personal Connections:
Help students make personal connections between the
2D shapes they are learning about and their own lives.
For example, ask them to identify and name the 2D
shapes in objects they use every day, such as their lunch
204
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
box (cube), a pencil (cylinder), or a toy car (cone). This
can make the learning more relevant and meaningful to
them and help them apply the knowledge to their own
experiences.
This scenario can be used to make real world
connections.
“Shawna is at home with her family, but her parents are busy
cooking dinner in the kitchen. She wants to practice identifying
2D shapes in 3D objects and starts looking around the house for
items she can use.
There is a ball on the floor and recognize it as a sphere, a cereal
box on the counter and notice that it has rectangles for sides.
Also, she sees a can of soup in the cupboard and realizes it is a
cylinder because it has circles on the top and bottom. Next, she
goes into the living room and sees a toy block set, picks up a cube
and observes that all its sides are squares. Shawna also sees a
cone-shaped lampshade on a table and notices that it has a
circular base. Finally, she goes into the bedroom and sees a
basketball hoop hanging on the wall. The backboard is a
rectangle, and the rim is a circle. She is proud of herself for
finding all these 3D objects in her house and identifying the 2D
shapes that make them up”.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Deconstruct shapes identifying 2D shapes that can be found in cubes, cones, cylinders, spheres through making footprints, making shadows,
or slicing
205
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Basic 2D shapes:
Students should be familiar with basic 2D shapes such as circles, squares, rectangles, and triangles. They should know their names, characteristics (e.g.,
number of sides, angles), and be able to recognize them in different orientations.
Understanding 2D shapes is an important foundation for geometry and can help students develop skills in problem-solving and spatial reasoning.
A 2D shape is a flat, two-dimensional figure that has only length and width.
Examples of 2D shapes include circles, squares, triangles, rectangles, and hexagons.
These shapes can be identified by their specific attributes, such as:
· the number of sides and corners they have
· or whether they have straight or curved sides.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=apAmQCzjmtE
Spatial awareness: Students should develop spatial awareness skills to understand the relationships between 2D shapes and 3D objects. They should
learn about concepts such as edges, vertices, and sides of 3D objects like cubes, cones, cylinders, and spheres, and how they relate to the 2D shapes that
can be found within them.
Observation skills: Students should develop observation skills to identify and recognize 2D shapes in real-world objects that resemble cubes, cones,
cylinders, and spheres. This can be done through activities such as making footprints or shadows on paper, or slicing objects to reveal the cross-sections
and identify the 2D shapes present.
206
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Hands-on activities: Students benefit from hands-on activities that allow them to manipulate and explore real-world objects to identify and name 2D
shapes within them. Activities such as using physical objects to create footprints or shadows on paper, or slicing objects to reveal cross-sections, can be
engaging and effective in helping them understand the concept of 2D shapes within 3D objects.
Visual aids: Students can benefit from visual aids such as diagrams, illustrations, or models that represent the 3D objects and the 2D shapes within them.
Visual aids can help them visualize and better understand the relationships between the 3D objects and the 2D shapes, and make connections between
real-world objects and geometric concepts.
Differentiated instruction: Inclusive learning strategies should also consider differentiating instruction to meet the diverse needs of grade 1 students.
This can include providing additional support, adaptations, or accommodations for students with different learning styles, abilities, or needs. For example,
using tactile or multisensory approaches for students with sensory impairments, providing visual supports for students with visual impairments, or using
simplified language or visual cues for students with language or cognitive challenges.
207
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists (texts, family &community knowledge and resources, contextually relevant professional web resources)
https://portal.educoas.org/en/courses/oas-profuturo-online-courses-innovation-and-mathematics-caribbean-teachers
Additional Resources and Materials
https://study.com/academy/lesson/identifying-2d-shapes-in-3d-figures-lesson-for-kids.html
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=apAmQCzjmtE
Useful vocabulary
Cube: a solid shape with six square faces of equal size
Cone: a solid shape with a circular base and a curved surface that narrows to a point
Cylinder: a solid shape with circular ends and straight sides
Sphere: a solid shape that is perfectly round like a ball
Face: a flat surface on a 3D shape
Edge: the line where two faces of a 3D shape meet
Vertex: the point where three or more edges of a 3D shape meet
Shadow: a dark shape that is made on a surface when something blocks light
Footprint: the outline of a 3D shape left behind when it touches a surface
Slice: to cut through a 3D shape to create a flat 2D surface
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the curriculum)
By integrating these different subjects into the lesson of deconstructing shapes and identifying 2D shapes that can be found in cubes, cones, cylinders, and
spheres, students can deepen their understanding of the concepts and build connections between different areas of learning.
Science: Students can learn about the characteristics of 3D shapes and their properties such as volume and surface area. They can understand the
difference between 2D and 3D shapes and explore how shadows are formed when light interacts with 3D objects. Students can also learn about the
different materials that can be used to create 3D shapes.
Art: Students can create footprints, make shadows, or slice 3D objects to make 2D shapes. They can explore the use of different materials to create 3D
shapes such as clay, paper mache, or play dough. Students can also create 2D shapes using different art techniques such as drawing, painting, or collage.
Literacy: Students can read books about shapes and 3D objects. They can also write and describe the shapes they see in 3D objects using descriptive
words and sentences.
Social Studies and HFLE
208
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Community Helpers: Students can explore how community helpers use shapes in their jobs. For example, doctors use cylinders and cones in medical
equipment such as syringes and stethoscopes.
Healthy Eating: Students can explore different shapes of healthy foods such as circular fruits like oranges and apples, or cylindrical vegetables like
carrots and cucumbers.
Exercise and Play: Students can explore the different shapes of equipment used for exercise and play such as balls, cones, and cylinders. They can also
investigate how playing with different shapes can help develop gross motor skills and coordination.
Home Safety: Students can explore how different shapes can be used for safety at home. For example, they can identify the shapes of safety equipment
such as smoke detectors and fire extinguishers.
Community Spaces: Students can explore how different shapes are used in community spaces such as parks, playgrounds, and buildings. They can also
investigate how the shapes of these spaces affect how people use them and interact with each other.
Technology:
Digital games and activities: Use digital games and activities such as online shape games, virtual shape builders, and shape sorting activities to help
students identify and understand 2D shapes in 3D objects.
Augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR): Use AR and VR technologies to create immersive experiences for students to explore 3D shapes and
their properties. For example, students can use AR apps to scan a 3D object and explore its shape and properties in a virtual environment.
3D modeling software: Use 3D modeling software such as Tinkercad or SketchUp to help students create and manipulate 3D shapes. Students can
design their own 3D shapes and explore how the 2D shapes are interconnected.
Interactive whiteboards and tablets: Use interactive whiteboards and tablets to display and manipulate 2D and 3D shapes. Students can use digital pens
or fingers to draw and identify shapes or drag and drop shapes into different categories.
By integrating technology into the lesson, students can develop digital literacy skills while deepening their understanding of 2D and 3D shapes.
Elements from Local Culture:
Here are some real environment examples for deconstructing shapes and identifying 2D shapes that can be found in cubes, cones, cylinders, and spheres
using making footprints, making shadows, or slicing:
Cubes: Students can explore cubes such as Maggi cubes, dice, ice cubes. They can make footprints of the cubes in playdough or clay to identify the shape
of the cube. Students can also create shadows of the cubes in sunlight to see the 2D shape of the shadow.
Cones: Students can explore cone shaped hats such as straw hats. They can make footprints of the hats in paper or cardstock to identify the shape of the
cone. Also, they can slice a cone-shaped fruit such as a pineapple to see the 2D shape of the slice.
Cylinders: Students can explore the cylinder shape of traditional drums such as steel pans. They can make footprints of the drums in sand or salt dough
to identify the shape of the cylinder. Students can create shadows of the drums in sunlight to see the 2D shape of the shadow.
209
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Spheres: Students can explore the sphere shape of traditional fruits such as sapodilla or breadfruit. They can make footprints of the fruit in clay or
playdough to identify the shape of the sphere. Alternatively, students can slice a sphere-shaped fruit such as a passionfruit to see the 2D shape of the slice.
By using real environment examples, students can connect their learning to their local culture and environment, which can enhance their engagement and
understanding of the concepts.
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
There are several resources available for grade 1 students who may be struggling with deconstructing shapes and identifying 2D shapes that can be found
in cubes, cones, cylinders, and spheres. Here are some suggestions:
Online shape games: There are many online games and activities available that can help students practice their shape recognition skills. Some examples
include ABCya's Shape Match, Education.com's Shape Sorter, and Funbrain's Shape Invasion.
Manipulatives: Using manipulatives such as blocks, pattern blocks, or tangrams can help students visualize and manipulate shapes to better understand
their properties. Students can create different 2D and 3D shapes using these manipulatives and practice identifying them.
Worksheets: There are many free printable worksheets available online that focus on shape recognition and identification. These worksheets can help
students practice identifying shapes and counting sides, vertices, and edges.
Interactive whiteboards: Interactive whiteboards can be a great tool for visual learners. Teachers can use the whiteboard to display and manipulate
shapes, and students can use digital pens or fingers to draw and identify shapes.
One-on-one instruction: For students who are struggling with the concept, one-on-one instruction with a teacher or tutor may be beneficial. This allows
the student to receive personalized instruction and practice.
It is important to note that every student learns differently, so it is important to identify the student's learning style and tailor instruction to meet their
needs. Patience, repetition, and positive reinforcement can also go a long way in helping struggling students.
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
To challenge students in deconstructing shapes and identifying 2D shapes that can be found in cubes, cones, cylinders, and spheres, here are some
resources that can be helpful:
Geometric construction sets: Construction sets such as Magformers, Tegu, or Geomag can provide a challenging hands-on activity for students to
create and explore different 2D and 3D shapes.
210
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Digital shape builders: Online shape builders such as GeoGebra or Shapespark allow students to create and manipulate 2D and 3D shapes using digital
tools. These tools can provide a more complex and interactive experience for students.
Real-life problem-solving activities: Real-life problem-solving activities can challenge students to apply their shape recognition skills in practical
scenarios. For example, students can design a 3D structure using 2D shapes or create a map of their classroom using different shapes.
Critical thinking puzzles: Puzzles such as tangrams, Sudoku, or logic puzzles can challenge students to think critically and apply their shape recognition
skills in a different way.
Enrichment activities: Enrichment activities such as creating art with geometric shapes or designing a 3D structure with toothpicks and marshmallows
can provide a fun and challenging activity for students to apply their skills.
211
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
It is important to provide students with challenging activities that match their abilities and interests to keep them engaged and motivated. Providing
opportunities for student-led exploration and creativity can also encourage them to think outside the box and develop problem-solving skills.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research)
212
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Introduction to the Subject:
Geometry is one of the oldest branches of mathematics and is concerned with the study of shapes, sizes, and positions of objects in space. Our world is
filled with shapes and objects of different designs; therefore, a deep understanding of geometric thinking is important. Geometric thinking is an essential
skill that involves visualizing, analyzing, and manipulating shapes, objects, and space. It is a critical skill that students need to develop to understand many
mathematical concepts and to solve real-world problems. To develop geometrical thinking students should observe pictures, diagrams and models,
participate in hands-on activities, provided with the opportunity to make real -life connections, collaborative learning and opportunities to engage in
technological activities.
Strand (Topic): Geometrical Thinking
Essential Learning Outcome 3.3: Composing, Decomposing and Transforming Shapes – Transforming Shapes
Grade Level Expectations: Transform 3D objects using concrete materials (playdough, sand, clay, etc.)
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
• Identify and name common Manipulatives: Hands-on activities:
3D shapes, such as cubes, Provide students with manipulatives such as blocks or toys to Provide hands-on activities that allow students
spheres, cones, and demonstrate the spatial concepts. For example, ask students to to manipulate objects and practice spatial
cylinders. place a toy behind a block or place a block beside another concepts. For example, students can build
• Use basic spatial concepts, block. towers with blocks or move objects around a
room to practice the concepts of in front of and
such as up, down, in front of,
Model the concepts: behind.
behind, and beside
Play games:
correctly.
Play games such as Simon Says or Red Light, Green Light that involve Songs and rhymes:
• Use concrete materials,
movement and spatial concepts. For example, give commands such Use songs and rhymes to help students
such as playdough, sand, or
as "Jump up and down" or "Walk behind the desk." remember the spatial concepts. For example,
clay, to create 3D shapes and
sing "The Hokey Pokey" to practice up and down,
objects.
Draw or colour: or recite a rhyme about a bunny hopping in front
• Transform 3D objects by
of and behind objects.
molding, shaping,
213
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
stretching, and flattening Ask students to draw or color pictures that show the spatial
the materials. concepts. For example, ask students to draw a picture of a tree in Movement and games:
• Identify similarities and front of a house or color a picture of a ball beside a box. Incorporate movement and games into learning
differences between to engage students and reinforce spatial
transformed and original concepts. For example, students can play "Follow
objects. the Leader" or "Red Light, Green Light" to practice
• Use mathematical language moving in different directions and using spatial
language.
to describe the
transformations, such as
Encourage exploration:
"flattened," "stretched," or
Encourage students to explore the materials and
"twisted."
• Explore different ways to
experiment with different techniques to see what
works and what doesn't when transforming
transform objects, such as
shapes.
rotating, flipping, or sliding.
• Use trial and error to solve
Observe and document:
problems related to
Observe students as they work with the materials and document
transforming objects.
their process and the transformations they make. You can take
• Work collaboratively with
notes, photos, or videos to capture their progress.
peers to create and
transform 3D objects.
Rubrics:
• Reflect on learning and
Develop a rubric that outlines specific criteria for the
identify areas for
transformations you are looking for, such as the use of different
improvement in their ability Prompts:
techniques or the creation of a specific shape.
to transform 3D objects. Use prompts to guide students in their
Sample Rubric for Transformations:
exploration and help them focus on specific
Criteria:
concepts. For example, you can ask students to
214
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
1. Use of different techniques: create a specific shape or to use a certain
technique to make a texture.
• Demonstrates the ability to use at least two different techniques to
create a transformation (e.g. flipping, sliding, rotating).
Encourage descriptive language:
• Uses appropriate terminology to describe the transformations (e.g.
Encourage students to use descriptive language
"flip", "slide", "turn").
to talk about the original and transformed 3D
2. Creation of specific shape: objects. This can include using words like "same,"
"different," "bigger," "smaller," "curvy," "straight," etc.
• Successfully creates a specified shape through the use of
transformations (e.g. creates a square by flipping a rectangle). Examples:
Provide students with concrete examples of
• Uses appropriate terminology to describe the shape (e.g. "square",
similarities and differences between the original
"rectangle").
and transformed 3D objects. For example, you can
3. Accuracy:
show them a block and a cylinder and ask them to identify
• Accurately completes the transformation with minimal errors. the similarities and differences.
• Demonstrates attention to detail in the transformation process.
Concrete examples:
Use concrete examples of transformations and
model how to use mathematical language to
4. Creativity:
describe them. For example, you can show students
• Shows creativity in the transformation process (e.g. creates a unique
how to describe the transformation of a flat piece of paper
design or pattern through the use of transformations).
into a paper airplane using words like "folded" and
• Demonstrates the ability to think outside of the box. "twisted."
5. Neatness:
Exploration:
• The final product is neat and well-presented. Encourage students to explore different
• Demonstrates care in the creation of the transformation. transformations and describe them using
mathematical language. This can be done
215
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Scoring: through open-ended activities that allow
4 - Exceeds expectations: students to be creative and use their imagination.
• Demonstrates mastery of all criteria and goes above and beyond in
creativity and accuracy.
Games:
3 - Meets expectations: Use interactive games such as matching games or
• Demonstrates a solid understanding of all criteria and completes the "spot the difference" games to help students
transformation with accuracy and creativity.
practice using mathematical language to
2 - Needs improvement: describe transformations. Encourage students
• Demonstrates some understanding of the criteria, but lacks accuracy to work in pairs or small groups to explore and
or creativity in the transformation process. describe transformations using mathematical
language.
1 - Not meeting expectations:
• Demonstrates limited understanding of the criteria and struggles with
accuracy and creativity in the transformation process. Hands-On Activities:
Provide students with manipulatives such as
blocks, shapes, and puzzles that they can
Ask open-ended questions:
physically manipulate to explore different
Ask students open-ended questions about the similarities and
transformations. This will help them understand
differences between the original and transformed objects. For
concepts like rotation, flipping, and sliding.
example, "What is the same between these two objects?" or "What is
different about the two objects?"
Multi-Sensory Learning:
Graphic organizers:
Incorporate different senses into the learning
Use graphic organizers such as Venn diagrams or T-charts to help
experience. For example, allow students to touch and
students compare and contrast the original and transformed
feel different objects as they explore transformations, or
objects. This can help students organize their thoughts and make
use music and movement to reinforce concepts.
connections between the two objects.
Provide opportunities for oral communication:
216
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Allow students to describe their transformations using
mathematical language through oral communication. You can use
a "math talk" approach where students share their thought process
with the class. Ask students open-ended questions such as "What
did you do to transform the object?" or "How did you change the shape of the
object?" to prompt them to use mathematical language to describe
their transformations.
Peer assessment:
Encourage students to assess each other's work and use
mathematical language to describe the transformations. This can
help promote collaboration and communication skills.
Hands-on exploration:
Provide students with different materials and objects to manipulate
and transform using different methods such as rotating, flipping, or
sliding. Observe their processes and ask questions to prompt their
thinking and describe their transformations. Ask open-ended
questions such as "What did you do to transform the object?" or "Can you
show me how you rotated the object?" to encourage students to explain
their thinking and use specific vocabulary.
Peer assessment:
Encourage students to assess each other's work and describe the
transformations they observe. This can help promote
collaboration and communication skills.
217
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Composing, Decomposing and Transforming Shapes - Transforming Shapes
Understanding 3D Shapes: Start by introducing students to the concept of 3D shapes. Show them examples of different 3D objects such as cubes,
cones, cylinders, spheres, etc. Help them identify the different parts of the shapes such as faces, edges, and vertices.
Composing Shapes: Next, introduce the concept of composing shapes. Demonstrate how to create new shapes by combining two or more 3D shapes.
Encourage students to experiment with different combinations and record their findings.
Decomposing Shapes: Once students are familiar with composing shapes, move on to decomposing shapes. This involves breaking down a 3D shape
into smaller parts. Demonstrate how to do this with concrete materials such as blocks or play dough.
Transforming Shapes: Finally, introduce the concept of transforming shapes. This involves changing the position, size, or shape of a 3D object. Show
students how to transform objects by rotating, flipping, or sliding them. Encourage them to use concrete materials to experiment with different
transformations.
Hands-On Activities: To reinforce these concepts, provide hands-on activities for students to explore. For example, have them build 3D shapes with
blocks or play dough, then transform them by rotating, flipping, or sliding them. You could also create a scavenger hunt where students search for
different 3D shapes in the classroom or school, then compose and decompose them using concrete materials.
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists (texts, family &community knowledge and resources, contextually relevant professional web resources)
https://portal.educoas.org/en/courses/oas-profuturo-online-courses-innovation-and-mathematics-caribbean-teachers
Additional Resources and Materials
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1xIT_D8sLpk
Useful vocabulary
Shape: An object that has two dimensions, such as length and width.
Compose: To create a larger shape by combining smaller shapes.
Decompose: To break down a larger shape into smaller shapes.
Transform: To change the size, position, or orientation of a shape.
Flip: To turn a shape over.
Slide: To move a shape in a straight line without changing its orientation.
Turn: To rotate a shape around a point.
218
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Pattern: A repeating sequence of shapes or colors.
Symmetry: A shape that can be divided into two equal parts that mirror each other.
Attribute: A characteristic of a shape, such as size, color, or shape itself.
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the curriculum)
Science: In science, students can learn about the properties of different materials used to make 3D objects. Discuss the difference between materials such
as plastic, wood, and metal. Students can also explore how forces such as pushing, pulling, and twisting can transform 3D objects.
Art: Art is a great subject to integrate into this lesson as it involves creativity and imagination. Have students create their own 3D objects using materials
such as clay, paper, or cardboard. They can then transform their objects by painting, drawing, or adding different materials.
Language Arts: In language arts, students can write about their experiences exploring 3D shapes and transforming them. Have them create a story or a
descriptive paragraph about a specific shape or object. You could also incorporate vocabulary words related to shapes and transformations, such as
"rotate," "flip," and "slide."
Social Studies: In social studies, students can learn about the different cultures and societies that use 3D objects in their daily lives. For example, you
could discuss how different cultures use pottery or sculptures as a form of art and expression.
HFLE
Self-Esteem: Use the lesson to promote self-esteem and confidence in students. Encourage them to be proud of their creations and efforts, regardless of
their abilities. Celebrate their successes and encourage them to support each other.
Communication: Communication is essential in the classroom and in life. Encourage students to communicate effectively and respectfully with their
classmates when working together. They can also share their ideas and thoughts on the shapes they create, allowing for further discussion and
understanding.
Positive Relationships: Encourage students to build positive relationships with their classmates. They can learn to appreciate each other's differences and
work together to create something unique and special.
Elements from Local Culture:
Folk Art: Introduce grade students to Caribbean folk art, which often features bright colors and bold shapes. Have them examine and recreate patterns
and shapes found in the art using concrete materials.
219
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Traditional Games: Many traditional Caribbean games involve manipulating objects or shapes. Teach students games such as "pick-up-sticks" or "jacks,"
which can help develop their fine motor skills and understanding of shapes.
Musical Instruments: Use Caribbean musical instruments such as the steelpan, ‘shack shack’ or drums to explore the concept of transforming shapes.
Have students examine the shapes of the instruments and create their own versions using concrete materials.
Animals: Many Caribbean animals, such as the parrot or the manatee, have unique shapes and features. Use these animals to teach students about
composing and decomposing shapes and have them create their own animal shapes using concrete materials.
Landmarks: Introduce students to iconic Caribbean landmarks such as the Pitons in St. Lucia. Have them examine the shapes and structures of these
landmarks and use them as inspiration to create their own 3D structures using concrete materials.
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
Visual Aids: Using visual aids such as pictures, diagrams, and posters can help struggling students understand the concepts better. You can create posters
with pictures of different shapes and their properties or use diagrams to show how a shape can be transformed.
Hands-on Activities: Struggling students often benefit from hands-on activities. You can use manipulatives such as blocks or playdough to help students
visualize and create different shapes. You can also use real-life objects such as cardboard boxes to teach students how to transform shapes.
Simple Worksheets: For struggling students, simple worksheets that focus on the basics can be helpful. Worksheets that have fewer problems and
provide clear instructions can help students build confidence and understanding.
Online Games and Activities: There are many online games and activities that can be used to help struggling students learn about Composing,
Decomposing, and Transforming Shapes. Websites such as PBS Kids and Math Game Time offer a variety of games and activities that are specifically
designed for grade 1 students.
Small Group Instruction: Struggling students often benefit from small group instruction. You can create small groups of students and work with them
on specific concepts. This will allow you to provide individualized instruction and support to each student.
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
Tangrams: Tangrams are a great resource for challenging grade 1 students. You can use these geometric puzzles to teach students how to compose and
decompose shapes, as well as how to transform them by flipping or rotating the pieces.
3D Shape Models: Using 3D shape models can help challenge grade 1 students who are ready for a greater challenge. You can use models such as cubes,
cones, and cylinders to help students understand the different parts of a 3D shape, and how they can be transformed.
Advanced Worksheets: For students who are ready for a greater challenge, you can use more advanced worksheets that focus on complex concepts such
as symmetry, angles, and shapes in space.
220
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Virtual Manipulatives: Virtual manipulatives such as Geoboard or Math Playground can be used to provide students with a greater challenge. These
tools allow students to create and manipulate shapes in a virtual space, giving them more opportunities to explore and experiment with different shapes
and transformations.
Problem-Solving Activities: Problem-solving activities can be used to challenge grade 1 students who need a greater challenge. You can provide
students with problems that require them to compose and decompose shapes or transform them in different ways.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
221
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Measurement
Introduction to the Subject:
The purpose of this unit is to help students obtain a broad view of measurement in any situation. Therefore, the focus is to enable learners to understand
that measurement involves producing a numerical description of an attribute. Learners will develop an awareness that the physical attributes of an object
can be measured. These attributes are length, area, mass and capacity. Subsequently, learners will be able to compare the measurable attributes of objects
through the use of non standard units.
Learning activities and materials are selected within culturally relevant contexts that provide the basis for forming generalisations and foundational
learning. Students will be provided with experiences that require them to manipulate concrete materials. These opportunities will allow students to
describe, explain, measure, estimate, make predictions and record their observations. Students will be assessed using an array of formative and summative
assessments.
Measurement is an important everyday activity that provides a useful link between Mathematics and real life experiences. It also provides a link between
Mathematics and other subject areas.
Strand (Topic): Measurement
Essential Learning Outcome 1.1: Understanding What and How We Measure - Developing an understanding of measurable attributes.
Grade Level Expectations: Develops an understanding of what can be measured - how long it is, how heavy it is, how much it holds
Key Skill/ Concept: Observe measurable attributes of length, capacity, mass and area; representing, classifying, comparing
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners will be expected to: Observation Vocabulary describing length:
Discussion
222
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Explore physical materials and Listen to learners as they describe the ● A height chart for kids is stuck on a wall at the
describe them using the vocabulary characteristics of the attribute, length, of given front of the classroom. Two students from the
associated with linear measure objects. Check to see if the learner is using correct class (who differ in height) are called to the
(short/long, high/low, near/far, vocabulary associated with measurable attributes front and are asked to stand next to the chart
thick/thin, narrow/wide, (length). so that their height could be compared.
deep/shallow). Checklist to identify the characteristics of the Learners will observe and verbally express
measuring attribute-length. what they noticed about the 2 students.
● Classify the measuring attribute of Guiding questions will be asked to elicit the
length based on the vocabulary vocabulary associated with height; tall and
Characteristics of Length Yes No
associated with it. short. (other scenarios can be presented with a
stimulus to depict tall and short objects)
long
● Explore physical materials and
describe them using the vocabulary short .
associated with capacity (full, empty,
same as). near
far
● Categorise the measuring attribute of
capacity based on the vocabulary
thick
associated with it.
thin ● Teacher presents two students, one wearing a
● Explore physical materials and
pair of short pants and one wearing long
describe them using the vocabulary narrow pants (uniform). Teacher will ask questions
associated with mass of an object
about the pants that the students are wearing.
(heavy/light). wide
Students will respond and give reasons why
one pants is short and one is long. (other
● Categorise the measuring attribute of deep
examples can be presented to understand the
mass based on the vocabulary
concept of long and short)
shallow
associated with it.
● Explore physical materials and Close sentences/Matching Picture:
describe them using the vocabulary
223
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
associated with area of a surface of an In pairs, students will discuss and match the ● Teacher reads the story of Pinocchio to the
object (large/small). picture to the sentence that best describes it and learners. A picture is presented as a stimulus to
fill in the blank space with the correct describing show his nose before and after he lied; learners
word.
will be questioned to bring out the vocabulary
● Categorise the measuring attribute of
associated with what his nose looked like
area based on the vocabulary
associated with it. Picture Characteristics before and after lying. His nose was short
before he lied and grew long after he lied.
The bus is
_____(close,far)
to/from the building.
The bird is
_____(high,low) up
on the tree.
● An item is placed on a shelf where a student
The boy
cannot reach and another item on a shelf
is_____(near/far)
where the item can be reached. A learner will
to/from the tree.
be asked to reach for both items. Learners
will be asked why the student could not reach
the item on the top shelf and why the student
was able to reach the item on the bottom
shelf: the item on the top shelf was too
high and the item on the bottom shelf was
low and could be reached.
224
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Babies should bathe
in pools that are
____(shallow,deep)
The mangoes can be
easily reached because
they are
_____(low,high) on
the tree.
Graphic organizer
To culminate the measuring attribute, length, a ● Teacher puts two pairs of students to sit next
graphic organizer will be created with learners with to each other on a bench as demonstrated in
all the describing words/vocabulary learnt about the picture. Questions will be asked about the
how long or short objects and distances are. A space in between them. Vocabulary such as far
discussion will bring out the measuring attribute of
apart and close or near each other will be
length.
elicited from them. Also a picture stimulus
with two animals and their distance to a
building will be presented to the learners. The
descriptors for the distance near, close and far
will result from the discussion.
225
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Mathematics Talks and Walks
Observation and Think, Pair, Share
● Take students outside on a walk where the
As the story, Goldilocks and the Three Bears is width of two roads reflect one wide and one
read, the teacher will take note of the responses narrow. The students will deduce from
from students about the vocabulary associated observations and subsequent discussion that
with the contents in the container (full and empty). one road is wide/broad and the other is
Situations classifying empty and full containers in narrow.
pictures will be done by students first using their
self check table in pairs then presented orally to
the class.
Empty Full
226
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Vocabulary describing capacity
Use of hands-on manipulatives and storytelling
● The Story of Goldilocks and The Three Bears
will be read to initiate the concept for learners.
A stimulus picture will be presented at the end
of the story to students as questions are asked
regarding the contents of each bear’s bowl.
Responses would reflect terms such as empty
and full.
Observing and classifying objects that can be
poured.
Teacher will observe students as they pour the
items into the containers and group the objects as
liquids that can be poured (takes up the space of
the container) and items that can be poured and
not liquid (not taking up all the space). Students
will formalise the measuring attribute capacity
from the activities.
Place an X on all the items that can be
poured and the container has a capacity.
227
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Discussion: A follow up activity discussing
pictures of liquids that can fill a container will
be done.
bottle of orange juice, cup of tea, glass of milk
glass of water
Think, Pair, Share
In pairs, think of objects that are heavy, objects
that are light to carry around them and group
them(pictures will be given as well for that
discussion). Students will share with the class after
classifying the objects as heavy or light.
228
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Barrel of water
Whole Group-Graphic Organizer
Tank of water
All the terms associated with mass will be
discussed with students and a graphic organizer
will be created to assess their understanding of
● Examples and Non Examples
mass.
229
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners will be provided with 2 empty clear
bottles. Have the learners fill up one with a liquid
(water, juice, oil or milk) and the other with beans,
stones, leaves or marbles. Allow learners to
explore the fluidity with which the items are being
poured and the space occupied in the container by
the items. Students will deduce that the space is
taken up by a liquid and not the other items.
Discussion with a stimulus: Learners will be
provided with an empty container and a jug of
water (it would hold more water than the
container). Allow a learner to pour the water into
the empty container until it overflows. Question
learners on what is taking place. Why did the
water overflow? (because it is full to capacity or
it is full)
Question students to bring out the measuring
attribute capacity, as the amount of liquid a
container holds when filled or full.
Observation
As students engage in the pizza making process,
teacher will note the vocabulary associated with
the area (small and large) as they discuss the
activity.
Observation
230
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Students will be presented with some objects to
feel and touch them. They will describe what they
feel (in terms of the surfaces). Teacher will listen
for vocabulary such as flat surface/face, curved
surface
Vocabulary associated with mass
● Learners will be asked the following question -
Is it easier to carry a cell phone or a T.V. set?
Why? Can Janie (student in class) carry a baby
or can she carry the teacher? Why? (vocabulary
associated with mass, heavy and light will be
introduced)
● Learners will be given the picture below.
Learners will be questioned on why the boy in
the first image is struggling and in the second
image he is not.
231
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Learners will be asked to lift/push/pull objects
such as paper, bags, books, chairs, desks.
Learners will be engaged in discussions about
which objects were easy or difficult to lift,
push, pull and why.
● The teacher will engage learners in a
discussion to find out why objects are heavy or
light, why objects are difficult or easy to
push/pull (the material it is made out of, mass
determines how heavy or light an object is).
The measuring attribute will be defined there
and a graphic organizer will be created.
Vocabulary associated with area
Use of a realistic experience - Pizza Making
● In groups, students will each be given pizza
dough in the shape of a circle, rectangle and
232
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
oval. Learners will spread pizza sauce on the
entire surface of the dough using a spoon or
their hand. Questions will be asked during the
process such as: what part of the dough did
you cover with the sauce? (the surface, the
entire space). Learners will then spread
toppings of their choice all over the surface of
the dough. Again questions will be asked, what
space was covered. The term area will be
elicited from students as they engage in the
process. Students will eat their pizza after it has
been baked and again questions will be asked
as to the size eaten (a slice, a piece, an area of
the pizza) in relation to what was left.
● Hand art: Learners and the teacher will be
engaged in creating a handprint painting wall.
Discussion will take place about the region
represented by the handprints (the area of
their hand). Learners will describe the space
233
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
covered by their handprints and the teacher's
handprint as the area (small and large areas).
● Real life manipulation of objects: Students will
engage in touching surfaces of various objects
and describe how they feel (flat and curved
surfaces). Students will recognize that objects
around us have flat and curved surfaces. They
will discuss how easy it is to feel/touch/see the
area of flat or curved surfaces.
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists
pencils
erasers
building blocks
book bags
plastic bags with items
cups
bowls
containers
water bottles
playdough
234
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
book
blocks
paper
handpaint
desk
tags
bottle caps
Additional Resources and Materials
Story Books - Goldilocks and the Three Bears; Jack and the Beanstalk; Pinocchio
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pe7nVxkqSmI
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JjKhSyUVFBI
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Science:
● Plants: Growth of seedlings
● Life cycle of animals
● States of Matter
Language:
● Using appropriate language for descriptions; antonyms and synonyms
● Developing communication skills
Physical Education:
● Track and field events; how long a distance is, how short a distance is. Cricket ball throw - throw far distance
● Swimming
● Fun sports
Art and Craft:
● Create objects with playdough
● Painting - painting or colouring within an area;
● Creating Hand prints
235
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Health and Family Life Education:
● Cooperative learning skills
● Valuing peers contributions
● Listening while other students speak
Social Studies:
● Communicating and working with peers
● Description of family members
● Identity - Unique hand prints
Music:
● Notes
● Musical sounds on containers (glasses) when they are empty, full, half full etc
Vocabulary: Measurement
light heavy thick thin shallow deep near far short tall long high low full empty surface area narrow wide length
mass capacity
Elements from Local Culture:
Germination of seeds/farming: seedlings - tall and short
Playground - use of seesaw
Sporting events
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
- Use of assistive devices such as computer with read to text speech when needed
- Use verbal prompting at every stage of the learning activity
- Stories being read aloud
- Varied manipulatives: manipulatives with raised surfaces
236
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
Use of images to state the difference among objects based on a specific attribute and give reason why it is different.
Objects in the environment you can find the length, capacity, mass and area of.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
237
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Introduction to the Subject:
The purpose of this unit is to help students obtain a broad view of measurement in any situation. Therefore, the focus is to enable learners to understand
that measurement involves producing a numerical description of an attribute. Learners will develop an awareness that the physical attributes of an object
can be measured. These attributes are length, area, mass and capacity. Subsequently, learners will be able to compare the measurable attributes of objects
through the use of non standard units.
Learning activities and materials are selected within culturally relevant contexts that provide the basis for forming generalisations and foundational
learning. Students will be provided with experiences that require them to manipulate concrete materials. These opportunities will allow students to
describe, explain, measure, estimate, make predictions and record their observations. Students will be assessed using an array of formative and summative
assessments.
Measurement is an important everyday activity that provides a useful link between Mathematics and real life experiences. It also provides a link between
Mathematics and other subject areas.
Strand (Topic): Measurement
Essential Learning Outcome 1.2: Understanding What and How We Measure - Comparing and ordering based on measurable attributes
Grade Level Expectations: Direct comparisons of two objects based on one attribute. Can predict which is longer/shorter or heavier/lighter or
larger/smaller or more/less given a set of objects and explains reasoning.
Key Skill/ Concept: Observing, predicting, comparing
238
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Assessment Strategies:
● Learners will be expected to: Observation Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Compare the length of two Listen to the discussions at various stations on which objects Create learning stations, with objects to measure
objects using direct comparison are shorter, longer and taller. Pay attention to the skills applied length and objects to measure height. Have
(i.e: place side by side and align and the reason for selection. Make use of observational learners observe two similar concrete objects of
one end) and explain reasoning checklists. different lengths and heights such as pencils,
using appropriate vocabulary; bottles, crayons, ribbons. Check to see if they
(shorter/longer, higher/lower, Checklist make use of a start line to compare objects.
deeper/shallower, Before they can compare objects to find out
nearer/farther, thinner/ thicker, which is longer, the end point of both objects
wider and narrower). must be arranged in a straight line. In comparing
which object is taller, ensure that both objects
are placed on the same flat surface. Then, allow
● Compare the mass of two objects students to make use of activity cards to record
Criteria for comparing Yes No Needs Practice
(lifting, pushing, pulling and observations. Label materials using letters or
two objects based on
balancing) and explain length or height names to facilitate independent learning.
reasoning using appropriate
vocabulary; Did the children? Sample of Activity Cards.
Place both objects on the
● Compare the capacity of two
same flat surface to
objects (filling and emptying) compare their height Longer Shorter
and explain reasoning using
appropriate vocabulary (such as
Identify taller or shorter
more or less, level is higher than
objects
or less than). .
Use the same start point
Taller Shorter
● Compare the area of two objects
to compare the length of
the two objects
using direct comparison(i.e
239
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Assessment Strategies:
which one occupies more space)
and explain reasoning using
Recognize the longer and
appropriate vocabulary (such as shorter object.
bigger and smaller).
Explain why objects must
be aligned before they can
be compared.
Which Mathematician is Right? Allow students to play a game of Scavenger
Hunt. Provide students with an object and have
Provide students with a task sheet with objects identified as them find objects hidden around the class which
longer than or shorter than other objects. Have students are shorter than, longer than or equal in length
determine which is correct and explain why. to the objects given.
Observation
Activity Card For Scavenger Hunt
Pay attention to which objects students are trying to send the
hoop around after instructions are given. eg. Send the hoop
around the object which is nearer to you.
Shorter than
With this instruction, focus on whether students are attempting
to send the hoop around the object which is nearer or farther.
Longer than
Observation: Think, Pair, Share
Equal in
Listen as students make statements of comparison. Question
length to
students to find out their reasoning for such statements. Watch
as students pick their cards to show that they have completed
Allow students to choose objects which are
their task. Provide opportunities for children to share their
nearer and farther than a particular object. Use
240
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Assessment Strategies:
findings. Pay careful attention to the use of the words higher questioning techniques to help them make
and lower in the explanations given. statements of comparison with reasoning. eg.
Task Cards: Ming models Can you tell me which object is nearer to the book? Why
would you say that this object is nearer to the book?
Observe as learners glue sticks to make models of a thicker,
thinner, narrower and wider shelves. Provide students with the Take students outdoors and allow them to play
opportunity to show their work and explain by making a game of hoopla, in small groups. Place objects
statements of comparison. nearer to line and further away. Have students
stand at the line and try to send the ring onto the
Think, Pair, Share object that is farther and nearer. The learner who
is able to send the ring around the correct object
Have every child to show their objects to their pairs, identify gets to keep that object. This activity can be
which is lighter or heavier. Question students to further explain done not only with a ring but with ball throwing.
why they made such a comparison statement. Have them work
in a small group to verify their answer using a hanger balance Have students sing the hymn song Higher,
scale. Allow students the opportunity to present and explain higher by Christafari. Allow students to make
the actions while singing higher, higher and
their findings. Observe learners as they complete their task.
lower, lower. Question students to bring out the
meaning of higher and lower. eg.
Observation - Group Formation Activity
How high are we lifting Jesus? How low are we to bring
satan?
Have students form three groups: lighter than, heavier than or
equal in weight. After students take turns on the seesaw with
their partner, they fit themselves in the right groups. After the In pairs, take students out to fly kites. Have them
activity, have each child state their position in comparison to to compare by stating which is higher or lower?
their partner. E.g. I am heavier than Joe. Allow students to choose a yellow card if their
kite is lower than their pairs and a red card if it
is higher.
Group Activity:
Read this short story to students.
241
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Assessment Strategies:
In groups, have them select two objects. One which can be
pushed or pulled and one which they can't. Provide learners The Birthday Prank
with the opportunity to present objects to the class giving
explanations with reasoning. Pay attention to the use of the Peter received a nice yellow bookshelf from his
terms heavier than and lighter than. uncle as his birthday present. He was extremely
happy and could not wait to stack all his story
Demonstration Station books on it. When he placed the first book on
the shelf, half of it could not fit. He was a little
Allow students to visit different demonstration stations. Have disappointed but decided to continue to stack
groups explain the process they followed to determine which his books. As he placed the second book on the
bottle holds more or less liquid or equal amounts of liquid. shelf it broke in two. Peter was so disappointed
Allow students to ask questions if they need to know anything his eyes got filled with tears. He decided not to
more about the process followed. cry but find his uncle to vent his anger instead.
As soon as he rushed out the door he saw
another bookshelf, just as small and painted in
the same bright yellow colour. His eyes lit up and
a smile formed on his lips, wiping away his anger
and disappointment. He hastily dragged it in and
Think, Pair , Share
started to stack his books once more. The first
book fit perfectly. After stacking all ten books
Pay attention to students as they compare the surface area of
on the shelf, Peter moved back and watched
the books chosen. Let them discuss in pairs, as they make
with joy and satisfaction.
statements of comparison. Provide students with the
opportunity to share with the class.
Ask students the following questions.
Why was the book unable to fit on the first bookshelf?
Why did the bookshelf break so easily after he placed
the second book?
242
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Assessment Strategies:
Why did the book fit perfectly on the second shelf and
not the first?
Why did the second shelf not break after placing all the
books?
Then in groups, have students use manipulatives
such as popsicle sticks to create shelves to show
the comparison between thinner and thicker,
narrower and wider.
Take students on a walk to collect two objects.
Have them determine which is heavier or lighter.
Ask questions such as:
Are you certain that this is heavier or lighter than this?
What can we do to check to see if we are right?
In groups, allow students to use a hanger balance
scale. Have them measure objects by putting one
in each pot, make observations and statements
of comparison with reasoning.
243
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Assessment Strategies:
Take students to the playground, allow them to
use the seesaw as a balance or create seesaws
using a plank of wood and a bag of sand to
determine which pair is lighter than, heavier
than or equal in.
Take learners on the outside to observe things in
their surroundings. While on the outside, direct
students' attention to various objects that can be
pulled or pushed. Ask questions to help them to
develop the understanding that lifting and
balancing are not the only attributes of weight.
Pushing and pulling can also help them to
determine heavier and lighter objects.
Questions?
Do you think it will be easier to push this car or this
bin? Why?
244
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Assessment Strategies:
What about this water tank and this lunch table?
Why?
Why do you think you can push these two items and not
these two?
Provide each group with a container filled with
water and two other containers or two bottles of
different shapes and sizes. Try to also include
containers of different shapes which hold the
same amount of liquid. Using a small ¼ cup,
have students fill two containers at a time. Create
opportunities for students to do the reverse.
Provide students with containers or bottles of
water and have them empty them by using a
third object. Question students to find out
which one holds more or less liquid. Which
holds more than, less than or equal amounts.
Have students listen as you read this scenario:
Tony wants to create a postcard for his mother.
He has a lot of things he wants to write to his
mother. He also wants to draw a few of his
mother’s favourite flowers. Which of these two
papers should he use to create his postcard? Why? How
245
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Assessment Strategies:
can we prove that this one has a bigger surface area than
this one?
Encourage students to demonstrate their
rationale by placing paper one on top of the
other to show the difference in their surface
area. Allow students to find books with smaller
and bigger surface area than their Mathematics
notebook.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Learning to measure will improve students’ ability to estimate, count, and record data. These are essential life skills that kids should learn. Giving students
the chance to measure through thoughtful and well-planned activities will aid in their development of measurement skills and strengthen their
understanding of number sense.
Points to remember when teaching students to Measure
246
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
When comparing the length of two objects, it is important that both ends of the objects are lined up.
It is not always possible to compare two things through observation. When it isn't, it can be helpful to use a third object that can be directly compared to
each of the other two and serve as a point of comparison.
Measuring Length
The attribute of length needs to be taught using practical situations in which they occur. For example, the length, width, depth, height, thickness or
closeness of objects. In making comparisons between two objects based on any of these attributes, the use of words such as longer, shorter, nearer,
farther, deeper, shallower, higher, lower, thicker and thinner should be used.
● The length of an object describes how long an object is from one horizontal point to the next. E.g., The blue pencil is longer than the red one.
247
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
● The height of the object states how tall it is from the surface moving upward. E.g., This girl is taller than her brother OR the second kite is
higher than the first one.
● The width indicates how broad an object is. E.g. The first footpath is wider than the second one or the second footpath is narrower than the first
one..
248
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
● The depth of an object is measured from the surface to how low it will go downwards. E.g. The second container is deeper than the first.
Therefore, the first container is shallower than the second.
● The distance is how far one thing is from another thing. E.g. The distance from the school to the road is farther than the distance from the school
to the church.
249
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
● Thickness is the measure of the distance between two sides of something. E.g. The first book is thicker than the second one.
Measuring Weight
Mass is a measure of how much matter is in an object. We can compare the mass of two objects by measuring the force of pushing or pulling the objects
or by lifting and balancing objects. To make a comparison between two objects we use words such as heavier or lighter.
● When comparing the mass of two objects by pushing or pulling, the heavier object resists change or movement more than the lighter object. E.g.
Pulling an empty cart and a cart full of stones.
● When comparing the mass of objects by lifting, have kids stretch out their arms like a balance scale to help them to determine which is heavier or
lighter.
250
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
● When balancing using the hanger balance model, the heavier object is pulled down while the lighter object is pushed upward. If they are of the
same mass, it remains the same.
Measuring Capacity
The term capacity is the measure of the amount of liquid a container can hold. To compare the capacity of two objects which are of the same shape, size
and height, we can use the term more or less liquid than the other.
● For bottles or containers which are not the same, have students use a third object to empty or fill the objects to compare the capacity.
251
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Measuring Area
The area is the measure of the total space taken up by a flat surface or shape of an object. To compare the area of two different surfaces, we can try to
measure the area by trying to figure out which surface is bigger or smaller.
● If it is not possible to see the difference in their area through observation, cover one surface area of the object with the other.
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists (texts, family & community knowledge and resources, contextually relevant professional web resources)
Mighty Maddie by Stuart Murphy
How Short. How tall, how far away by David Adler
Me and the measure of things by Joan Sweeney
https://www.weareteachers.com/teaching-measurement/
252
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
sticks
bottles
pencils
crayons
books
paper
square tiles
bottle caps
hangers
paper plates
building blocks
cups
container
balancing scales or self made devices
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts
● use adjectives to compare objects.
● making statements of comparison
● explaining using sequencing
● discuss and give reasonable explanations for decisions made
● making predictions
● listen to story situations, analyse and make decisions
● demonstrate good communication skills
Art and Craft
● Create objects to make comparison between quantities
● Trace shapes to create visual representation of surface area
● Draw shapes to compare attributes of length
● Hand prints or objects to demonstrate/compare difference in surface area
Social Studies
● cooperation within groups
253
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
● accepting roles and responsibilities
● respect for others and their opinions
● recycling materials found in the environment for comparing measurement attributes
Science and Technology
● Living things in the environment and how they grow.
● States of Matter and Materials
● Force : Understanding the concept of balanced and unbalanced forces,push or pull
● Simple Machines
Health and Family life
● stages of development
● exercise cooperative learning skills
● demonstrate good judgement and decision making skills
● show willingness to listen to the opinion of others
Music
● singing
● clapping to rhythm
Physical education
● developing games to stimulate the mind
● track and field rules and regulations( start point, length, distance ran)
Elements from Local Culture: (References that learners might know from their local environment
Use of the seesaw on the the playground to explain heavier and lighter mass
Tug of war
Pan balances
254
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Vocabulary
higher lower bigger smaller longer shorter taller deeper nearer farther shallower distance
thicker thinner surface area heavier lighter more less equal same
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
Comparing three objects based on the attributes of length, mass, capacity and area.
Use non standard units to compare areas of different shapes both regular and irregular.
Trace surface area of the six faces of cuboid and cube shaped objects and use square tiles to estimate the area of each side.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
255
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Introduction to the Subject:
The purpose of this unit is to help students obtain a broad view of measurement in any situation. Therefore, the focus is to enable learners to understand
that measurement involves producing a numerical description of an attribute. Learners will develop an awareness that the physical attributes of an object
can be measured. These attributes are length, area, mass and capacity. Subsequently, learners will be able to compare the measurable attributes of objects
through the use of non standard units.
Learning activities and materials are selected within culturally relevant contexts that provide the basis for forming generalisations and foundational
learning. Students will be provided with experiences that require them to manipulate concrete materials. These opportunities will allow students to
describe, explain, measure, estimate, make predictions and record their observations. Students will be assessed using an array of formative and summative
assessments.
Measurement is an important everyday activity that provides a useful link between Mathematics and real life experiences. It also provides a link between
Mathematics and other subject areas.
Strand (Topic): Measurement
Essential Learning Outcome 1.3: Understanding What and How We Measure - Developing and applying non-standard units of measure.
Grade Level Expectations: Can use non-standard units to measure attributes, e.g. uses blocks, hands span, toy cars, etc to measure length, uses square,
palms, etc. to measure area; uses blocks, sand, little stones, etc to see which container holds more.
Key Skill/ Concept: Estimating, measuring, reasoning, justifying
256
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners will be expected to: Observation Give students opportunities to identify objects
that can be measured? Ask students to make
Knowledge Observe pupils as they select non standard units to direct comparisons between two objects
measure the different attributes. according to length, mass, capacity.
• Measure length, mass and capacity
using non standard units Make notes of students' reasoning as they discuss Ask students, “What do we want to measure?”
among themselves the difference in their answers. Make a list of attributes that are measurable. Ask
• Select appropriate non standard units to
students to make predictions about attributes.
measure different attributes.
• Compare the capacity of two containers Give students opportunities to say which object
to determine which holds more. Games is heavy/light, lighter/heavier etc. Provide
opportunities for students to collect objects and
Students would use the appropriate non-standard sort them based on measurable attributes. Give
measurement to measure items. students opportunities to explore objects and
Skills make comparisons between and among them –
Hands Span, toy cars, foot span -length
length (which longer/shorter, shorter); mass –
● Use parts of their body to conduct non- heavier/lighter and capacity – (more/less).
Stone & sand - capacity
standard measurement. (Palms, hand
Give students opportunities to manipulate with
span, foot span) Hand span and squares - area
given objects and make predictions which is
● Use objects to conduct non-standard
longest/shortest or heaviest/lightest or
Estimate the non-standard measurement then measure
measurement. (little stones, blocks,
smallest/largest or most/least.
the object.
sand, toy cars, paper clips etc.)
● Estimate and measure the mass and Give students opportunities to look at situations
Students should justify their reasons for their
to arrive at some non-standard units - length,
length of objects using non-standard estimated non-standard measurement.
mass and capacity e.g. length – hand span, cubit,
measurement.
foot span, stride or step etc., Mass – estimating
● Apply the correct non-standard Compare the length of an object (pencil) to the length
with your hands, scale, balance etc. Capacity –
of two or three smaller objects. (eraser, sharpener)
measurement to measure various items.
use of containers, bottles etc.
257
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Example: You would not use a hand Using the following strategies, ask students to
span to measure capacity. use their senses to compare: What ‘looks’ bigger?
‘feels’ heavier, etc.
Provide opportunities for students to predict
Values which is longest/shortest or heaviest/lightest or
largest/smallest or most/least given a set of
● Show enthusiasm using non-standard objects and explain reasoning.
measurement to measure objects.
Give students opportunities to look and
● List examples when they estimate
determine their lengths e.g. the desk top is so
measurement in their everyday lives.
many pencils long etc.
● Appreciate the importance of using
estimations in everyday situations. Give students opportunities to say which object
is heavy/light, lighter/heavier and lighter.
Source:https://www.shutterstock.com/image-
photo/pencil-eraser-isolated-on-white-260nw- Give students opportunities to look at
77854333.jpg containers/vessels and state which holds
more/least, arranging those objects in
ascending/descending order.
Compare a surface space with two different size and Give students opportunities to explore objects
shape leaves. (how many banana leaves/other leaves and make comparisons on them – length (which
can cover the chalkboard etc?.) (How many table longer/shorter, shorter); mass – heavier/lighter
mats,coasters can cover a table surface?) and capacity – (more/less).
Use blocks or tiles to build something longer than, Give students opportunities to estimate,
same as shorter than half as long as a given object etc. measure and compare the numbers of paper
258
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
clips, pencils, etc., needed to measure the length
of the same object.
Allow students to estimate, measure and record
lengths, heights and distances. (e.g., a book is
about 10 paper clips wide; a pencil is about 3
toothpicks long).
Have students estimate, measure and describe
area using non-standard units (e.g., It took about
15 cards to cover my desk, with little space left
over).
Have them estimate, measure and describe the
capacity and/or mass of an object, through
investigation using non-standard units.
(e.g. My book has the same mass as 10 pencils.
The 3 juice cans have the same capacity as my
water bottle).
Source:https://i.pinimg.com/originals/26/ca/f4/26c
af47d02831c30daa486a915baefd0.jpg
259
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Source:https://i.ytimg.com/vi/4qmmsSCJ
UGw/maxresdefault.jpg
Experiment
Students work in groups or pairs to estimate
measurement using non-standard units using
objects above.
Source:https://images.squarespace-
cdn.com/content/v1/5980d56fb8a79b3cf086de1c/15
02398432465-
X7R8R2U1HYASN5L4KK55/nonstandard-
unifix.jpg?format=1000w
Students cover the surface of items using
different sized squares or palms.
260
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Students compare measurements using non-
standard measurement in groups or pairs.
Math Talk
Students then discuss their findings. (“Why is his
or her measurement more or less than yours?”
“Why is there a difference in the
measurements?”)
Students use different size containers to
determine which holds more.
261
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Source:https://i.pinimg.com/564x/a6/88/9f/a
6889f05b2d866de92eaa75e0874976c.jpg
Source:https://i.pinimg.com/originals/bb/f7/
4b/bbf74b21ca821d3d136ca84367e6a2e1.jpg
262
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Source:
https://i.pinimg.com/236x/0f/b5/13/0fb513d789
7ad4f6dc1ea4d7c7a1b133--measurement-for-kids-
measurement-st-grade.jpg
Provide students with three or more objects and
have them compare the three.
263
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
The term 'non-standard units of measurement' refer to 'measurement units that are not commonly accepted as standard but are applied uniformly when
measuring (e.g., paperclips, pencils, toy cars etc)
Non-standard units are not typically used for measurements. The units that are used have no fixed margins and may vary from person to person or depend
upon the shape and size of the object used for taking measurements.
Read more: http://teachmefinance.com/Scientific_Terms/non-standard%20units%20of%20measurement.html#ixzz7xqB4RwYI
Additional Resources and Materials: Blocks, pencils, sand, seeds, paperclips, etc.
Online sites: NonStandard Units of Measuring - YouTube
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics -
Science - Use non-standard measurement to measure the growth of plants over a certain period of time.
S.Studies - Estimate the distance using foot span, of different places in their school’s community.
L.Arts - Describe the length of objects using appropriate vocabulary
HFLE -
Creative Arts - Silent gallery walk displaying items measured with non-standard measurement.
264
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
Online Games:https://wordwall.net/resource/3047001
https://wordwall.net/resource/2897559
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
For this aspect, continued use of concrete and pictorial materials are necessary to enhance and aid in students' understanding of measurement.
265
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Introduction to the Subject:
The students, having understood that through the use of non-standard units of measure there are multiple answers, there is now a need to establish
standard units of measures. Students will then be introduced to time and money and the standard unit of measurement associated with them. Through the
use of the calendar and authentic activities students will be provided opportunities to demonstrate their knowledge of time. Additionally, they will
navigate the analog clock to identify its parts and become familiar with representing time on the digital clock. They will also be provided opportunities to
manipulate coins in circulation and know the value of each.
Strand (Topic): Measurement
Essential Learning Outcome 1.4: Understanding What and How We Measure - Developing and applying standard units of measure.
Grade Level Expectations: Read the date on a calendar, and use a calendar to identify days, weeks, months, holidays, and seasons. Tell and write in
hours and half hours using analog and digital clocks. Identify 25c, 10c, and 5c and relate their values to pennies.
Key Skill/ Concept: Comparing, sorting, representing, identifying, partitioning
266
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners will be expected to: Online Games Provide opportunities for students to read the
calendar to figure out what day and to familiarise
Knowledge Select the correct day to complete the sentences: students with the days of the week, months of
https://wordwall.net/resource/22419293 the year and the structure of written dates.
● State the days of the week, months of the
year and holidays. Put the months of the year in the correct order:
https://wordwall.net/resource/363117
● Explain the composition of days for
week, weeks for month and months for
Writing
year.
● Identify the months in which various With the aid of a calendar in small groups students
holidays occur. construct a story or poem utilising the days,
● Identify 5c, 10c and 25c and relate their
months or dates in a sequential order.
value to pennies (1c)
For example, where there are many students with
the same birth month they can identify each
Skills
birthdate in sequential order.
● Read the date on the calendar.
● Interpret details on a calendar.
● Represent and recognize time on the
hour and half past the hour on the
analog and digital clock.
Retrieved from:
https://www.education.com/lesson-
Values
plan/calendar-creation/
● State their birthdate with pride.
267
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Be willing to share the date every Use a calendar to mark special days celebrated in Ask students to create their own questions about
morning in class. their country. the calendar to swap with another student to
answer.
Sing Along
Have students and teachers sing songs and
recite nursery rhymes related to days of the week
and months of the year (For example; ‘There are
7 days in one week…’, ‘Months of the year are:
January, February, March,...’
Art:
Draw images to represent their favourite month
of the year.
Complete the days of the week or months of the
year starting from a given day or month.
(Complete by filling in the days of the week
from Thursday, —----, —-------,-----------)
Time on the Clock
Source:https://i.pinimg.com/originals/aa/b0/e
4/aab0e43be084243839fe351d626317bb.jpg
268
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Students complete a worksheet in which they
draw hands to show time on analog clocks.
Every morning, teachers and students sing the
morning song which states the current day.
Song: Months of the Year:
Months of the Year Song | Song for Kids |
The Singing Walrus - YouTube
Source:https://www.papertraildesign.com/wp-
content/uploads/2022/06/Telling-Time-half-
hour-3.jpg Student Observation
Get your students to work out how many days
they have been in school using the yearly
calendar. Get them to also work out how many
days to other significant events such as
Christmas, their birthday or the school holidays.
You could also have your students create their
own questions to swap with another student to
269
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Students work in pairs to tell the time using their answer. Students observe a calendar to identify
bodies. the months, days and dates.
Days of the month poem:
Source:http://lovepreschool.weebly.com/blog-
love-preschool/making-a-human-body-clock-
telling-time
Online Games:
Tell the time on the clock:
https://wordwall.net/resource/24859817
Source:https://i.pinimg.com/originals/69/db/
https://wordwall.net/resource/32922747
bb/69dbbb198149e980f5ff755e2ba87f15.jpg
https://wordwall.net/resource/54049357
https://wordwall.net/resource/363099
Students match a series of activities to the correct
Time on the clock
time of the day when each activity occurs.
270
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Sing and play the game ‘Mr. Wolf…’
‘When Does It Happen?’
Teacher shows students different pictures
displaying different things done during the day.
Students state what time of the day the activities
take place.
Source:https://himama.s3.amazonaws.com/upl
oads/learning/learning_media_file/image/file/
599/medium_hm_learning_activities_mini_ma
gick20210818-4-18jocb3.png
Have students manipulate model clocks to
show the position of the hour hand when it is
Source:https://fileserver.teachstarter.com/thum
half past the hour.
bnails/36309-14-terrific-time-resources-
thumbnail-0-1200x628.png
Students can justify their answers if they differ.
For example, a student may say he or she takes an
271
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
afternoon nap and another may say it only
happens in the evening.
Oral Questioning
Students identify the features of the different
coins in their country through comparing and
contrasting all the coins.
Sort and arrange the coins according to value.
Source:https://static.mamanpourlavie.com/upl
oads/images/articles.cache/2011/01/13/file_
main_image_5733_2_temps_enfants_01_5733_
1500X1000_cache_1200x630.jpg
Source:https://i.ytimg.com/vi/xp- Students free talk and tell the class what time
WVG0c1Co/maxresdefault.jpg they do various activities during the day.
Give combinations of coins that give a total
value of 10c and 25c.
272
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Source:https://i.pinimg.com/736x/37/17/6a/37176
a17649014f9cf1dbf012362fe1a--money-games-maths-
money.jpg
Source:
Sort given coins according to their values (5c,
https://media.istockphoto.com/id/923721584
10c, 25c)
/vector/daily-routine-activities-for-kids-with-
cute-
boy.jpg?s=612x612&w=0&k=20&c=uOhx1Tg
S5I6ITFSDatBgXBwcgm06WXBKZqUe6QJQ
_LI=
273
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Source:https://www.ebay.com/itm/2943442313 Have students simultaneously monitor the live
07 clocks (analog and digital) throughout the day to
observe and compare time on the hour and half
past the hour.
Source:https://www.valcom.com/products/pr
oductdetail/v-
d2440bSource:https://etc.usf.edu/clipart/3420
0/34224/nclock-10-30_34224.htm
Hands on learning
Have students trace the different coins using
paper and pencil to remind them of their
features.
274
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Source:https://files.liveworksheets.com/def_files/2021/
2/5/102052047201256494/10205204720125649
4001.jpg
Source:https://i.ytimg.com/vi/5jULu6VuH-
Q/maxresdefault.jpg
Have students count in 5’s using the 5 cent coins.
Have students count in 10’s using the 10 cent
coins up to 100 cents.
Have students guess the value or number of the
coins used to match a stated number of a given
coin; or a stated value (For example, I have three
coins that give a total value of 20 cents.What are the coins
that I have? I have three coins in my hand. What is the
value of the coins I have?)
275
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Days - There are 7 days in one week. A new week begins on Sunday. Students should be able to list the days of the week in the correct order.
Months - There are 12 months in a year. The first month of the year is January and the last month of the year is December. One holiday recognized in
almost every part of the world is Christmas Day. This is celebrated on the 25th of December. Students should be able to list the months of the year in the
correct order and state one holiday celebrated in their country.
Time - A clock is used to tell the time. There are two types of clocks: digital and analog clocks. The analog clock uses hands to show the time, while the
digital clock uses numbers to tell the time. The long hand on the analog clock tells the minutes and the short hand tells the hours. The long hand on 12
says o’clock as well as the two zeros on the digital clock. The long hand on the 6 says half past and the number 30 behind the colon says the same.
Students should be able to draw hands and write numbers to show different times and look at clocks and say the time shown.
Money - The Eastern Caribbean currency is used in some Caribbean countries. The coins used are 5 cents, 10 cents, 25 cents and 1 dollar. Students
should be able to identify the coins used in their country and combine coins to make a required value.
Additional Resources and Materials: Calendar, Clock, EC coins,
Online Games (days of the week): https://wordwall.net/resource/16999125
https://wordwall.net/resource/22674111
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics - Students answer questions on data handling from the story, ‘The Hungry Caterpillar’ saying what the caterpillar ate on each day.
Science - Distinguish between day and night based on pictures of different activities ( children looking at stars, a boy going to school , a family having
dinner etc)
Social Studies - Create a timeline to show important dates in their country ( New Year’s Day, National Heroes’ Day, Christmas Day etc)
Language Arts - Students compose stories or poems incorporating the days of the week and months of the year.
HFLE - Students identify the time when they take different medications. (Every 4 hours, 1 hour before meal, etc)
276
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Creative Arts - Create analog clocks using simple materials; create a chart depicting the activities in which they engage on a daily basis
Elements from Local Culture:
Pupils use 4 twenty-five cents to pay for transportation to and from school. They also use multiple twenty-five cent pieces to pay for their daily lunches at
school whether it be 75 cents or $1.00.
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
Students trace/shade the coins on paper with their pencils.
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
Identify the different money in your country: https://wordwall.net/resource/30570306
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
277
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Story Book - Chickens to the Rescue - John Himmelman
- Cookie’s Week - Cindy Ward and Tommie dePaola
278
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Data Handling and Probability
Introduction to the Subject:
This area in Mathematics helps students to realise that information is all around them and it can be gathered to learn more about their surroundings.
Students at this age are generally curious and should be provided with opportunities to navigate their environment to find similarities and differences,
draw conclusions and make vital decisions based on their findings. This course of work allows them to question things around them to ascribe a number
through counting for collected data.
Strand (Topic): Data Handling and Probability
Essential Learning Outcome 1.1: Collecting, Organising and Displaying Data - Formulating questions that can be answered with data
Grade Level Expectations: Asking simple survey questions with a couple of choices as a means of collecting data for counting situations
Key Skill/ Concept: meaningful counting, skip counting, constructing, connecting
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Key Skills/Concepts: Observation Give students opportunities to formulate and
ask questions to collect data. Students can do this
Learners will be expected to: Listen to students as they formulate questions during through playing of games, listening to stories etc.
the observation process based on the experiences
Knowledge provided by the teacher (for example: nature walk, Provide opportunities for students to brainstorm
concrete objects provided by teacher,etc.) Check to about what they are interested in exploring.
● Construct simple questions based on ensure that the questions generated are related to Invite students to ask questions about their
observation. what was observed. interests. What question would they like to
● State the information that can be answer?
collected by using a given question.
279
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Identify sources for collecting Oral Questioning Provide students with templates to create data
information for data. collection tool e.g. surveys or questionnaires.
Listen to students’ answers based on the questions What questions will they need to ask to help
● Formulate questions that can be
they construct. Check to make sure that answers answer their question?
addressed with data collected to
supplied are related or possible. follow-up questions
answer them
can be asked to check students’ understanding. Provide opportunities for students to collect and
record data by observing. Students can observe
Skills
peers based on the type of snack they like to eat
or games they like to play.
● Observe objects/ people in the Probing Questions
environment.
Have students use their devices to record videos
What would you like to know about this picture/
● Communicate with others and of scenes/items to be observed to stimulate
objects/people?
among peers regarding their them to ask their peers questions.
observations.
● Count the number of objects/ people
based on observation. Peer Evaluation
● Justify reasons for answers
Listen to students as they evaluate their peers as they
● Make connections with numbers
ask questions to be used to collect data.
Values
Jumbled Words
Present students with a variety of learning
experiences/situations to stimulate questions in
● Willingly participate in observation
Conference students concerning their efforts at
their minds.
activities. putting words together to form questions based on a
● Learn to appreciate that questions situation (shapes, coins, pictures, sports)
that are worded differently can obtain
Example:
the same answer.
(cents many are How coins jar the five in?)
280
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Accept that information can come
from multiple sources.
Fish for a Question
Observe as students select random questions from a
fish bowl; read each question, then state which data set
they would use to get the information to answer the
question. Non-examples should be provided to
monitor students' understanding. This is noted where
questions are asked about data sets that are missing. Counting the different colours of vehicles that
may pass around a certain time.
Example: A bowl with sample questions:
1. How many bananas are in the bowl?
2. Of all the shapes, which one has the most
squares?
3. Who has the least number of marbles?
4. What is the gender of the tallest child?
5. On which day were the most mangoes sold?
Counting the different colours/types of flowers
found in the school yard.
Teacher models the process of formulating
questions relating to selected objects/situations
(coins in a box, box of crayons, a garden filled
Data Set A
with colourful flowers). Students observe the
teacher as he/she models the process of asking
281
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Source:https://www.finewebstores.com/thumbnail.a questions. Teacher guides students as they
sp?file=assets/images/HFA/tropicalassortmentiniro practise formulating questions.
nbowl_1806_general.jpg&maxx=300&maxy=0
Data Set B
Source:https://media.gettyimages.com/id/12930189
7/photo/smiling-children-standing- Role Play - Teacher provides students with
together.jpg?s=612x612&w=gi&k=20&c=QpHWM opportunities for students to practise asking
TxSafUUnhftvZU7pv-AfltGUHi4ircqQ-FwdQc= their peers questions related to observable data
in different scenarios. (e.g. TV show, interview
on the street, etc.)
Have students work in small groups to construct
questions containing the vocabulary least, most,
more than, less than, that can be answered using
a given data set. Students from different groups
exchange questions and give feedback to each
other on the clarity of the questions
282
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Data Set C
Source:https://www.cgpplus.co.uk/getmedia/22e4c0
a8-dff9-4392-bc40-b95fb45c8e1b/a01wac7734-cover
Observe students match questions to possible sources
where data can be had to answer these questions; and
how they justify their responses.
Observe students as they work in small groups to
correct questions with errors to make them clearer and
or more specific.
Role Play
283
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Observe students as they interview each other based
on selected scenarios /learning experiences presented
to students. Students take turns to construct and ask
questions according to the scenario presented.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: (Links to professional sources that connect back to the Curriculum and Assessment
Principles of Learning and Principles of Assessment)
Data refers to a collection of facts (words, numbers, measurements etc) about the things around us. The process of collecting data involves observing,
asking questions(interviewing), experimenting and conducting surveys. Data that is collected can be used to make very important decisions in our daily
lives.
Data collection methods:
● Observation - This is a way of gathering data by looking at events, behaviour, or noting physical characteristics/features of a person or object in
its natural setting.
● Interviewing - This involves two or more people exchanging information through a series of questions about a phenomenon (event, person,
object).
● Experimenting - This is a method of conducting tests to collect data about properties of objects and to identify patterns in events in our
environment.
● Survey - This is a method which involves the use of a questionnaire administered to a sample (small group representing a larger group) in order to
collect data.
284
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials: 3D shapes or 2D shapes of different colours and sizes; toys, flowers, pictures
Videos showing a short interview: How to Conduct an Interview - YouTube
Video showing data collection: Data Collection Methods | Mathematics Grade 1 | Periwinkle - YouTube
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics - Skip counting from any number between one and twenty (forward and backward)
Science - Observing the properties of various objects/animals
S.Studies - Asking questions to collect data about objects/people in their community
L.Arts - Constructing oral questions using the ‘wh’ words ( What , Why , Who , When , Where)
HFLE -
Creative Arts -
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Story Books - The Best Vacation Ever by Stuart J. Murphy ; Charlie’s Checklist by Rory S. Lerman.
285
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Introduction to the Subject:
As students continue to work with data, they will learn how to collect data through the use of observations, experiments and interviews, and will record,
sort and organise data and use different modalities to represent them. The idea is to make the information students work with as real as possible to make
connections to the world around them, so they benefit from the usefulness of the data collected. They are provided with opportunities to verbalise their
understanding of the materials with which they interact.
Strand (Topic): Data Handling and Probability
Essential Learning Outcome 1.2: Collecting, Organising and Displaying Data - Collecting, organising, displaying and communicating data
Grade Level Expectations: Sort sets of data about people or things according to one attribute, and describe rules used for sorting. Collect data through
observations, experiments, and interviews to answer questions of interest that focus on a single piece of information; record the data using methods of
their choice; Using tallies, making simple bar graphs and pictographs to represent data collected.
Key Skill/ Concept: measuring, representing, counting, problem solving, constructing, experimenting, classifying, sorting, ordering
286
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners will be expected to: Observation Group Work
Knowledge Use a checklist to assess students as they engage in Have students work in small groups or pairs to
collecting and recording data. Assess their ability to discuss how to collect data to answer questions.
● Sort objects/ people according to one record data accurately using different methods.
attribute (shape, colour, size,
properties, ethnicity, occupation,
etc.)
● Represent the information collected
from observations /experiments/
interviews in multiple ways.
https://newsone.com/3896715/5-ways-for-schools-
Skills and-families-to-work-together-to-better-a-childs-
educational-success/
● Use a variety of different methods
(counting, matching, grouping, Environment Walk
rearranging, ordering, using
Have students explore their environment to
counters, etc.) to collect and sort
collect and display data from a small population
data.
(e.g., objects in a bin, animals/ plants found in
Oral Questioning
● Collect data in different ways to the school yard, students in Grade 1).
answer questions. Listen to students as they work in pairs and small
● Use symbols/tables/groupings to groups to provide justification for choice of strategies
sort and organise data collected. used in collecting and recording data.
Values
287
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Appreciate the fact that different Students answer questions to justify why they group
information can be derived from objects the way they did.
objects sorted.
● Show willingness to collect, organise
and display data Think Pair Share
Students work together to represent data collected.
Source:https://ceric.ca/2021/06/community-
connections-foster-k-12-career-exploration/
Item Display for observation and sorting
Provide a variety of data sets that can either be
qualitative (descriptive, e.g., colour, type of
pet/fruits/animals/seeds etc) or quantitative
(numerical, e.g., number of pets, height, weight).
Source:https://today.brockport.edu/live/news/2042-new-
(Have students sort items and organize data (eg.
program-childhood-inclusive-education-msed
an assortment of shapes, leaves, seeds, images,
people) based on various attributes (eg. shapes,
colours, sizes, masses, etc.). Have students
discuss with peers the attribute(s) used to sort
items with students.
Display information in various ways:
288
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Teachers make notes of students’ creativity as they
mount display boards depicting the same data in an
organised manner in different ways.
Tally
Observe students as they construct charts (such as tally
charts, drawings, matching diagrams, arrow diagrams,
etc.) to record the number of objects/people observed
Source:https://planningplaytime.com/wp-
in selected places at a given time (eg. people wearing
content/uploads/2017/10/Preschool-Sorting-
different colours, vehicle colours, vehicle brands, etc)
Activities-for-kids-Simple-and-Fun..jpg
Individual or pair work
Example: Sort cotton balls according to the
correct colour.
Bar graph
Students represent data collected relating to their birth
months, daily temperature (temperature is continuous
data is better represented in line graph), ages of their
classmates etc)
289
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Teacher interviews students as they use concrete Source:Sorting Game DIY | Generation
objects (such as square tiles, counters, grid papers, etc.) Genius
to construct bar charts for collected and or given data.
Example: Items found on the teacher’s table.
Have students compare and contrast different
sorting arrangements obtained from the same
data set. sort items to see how their results vary.
Have students sort a pack of skittles based on
their colour; they sort musical instruments based
on one attribute (wind instrument, vibration,
etc); they classify animals based on their body
Pictograph covering/ how they move (swim, fly)/ what they
eat; they sort items based on their tastes (sweet,
Students present data based on different data (topics) sour, bitter, etc)
(eg. birth months of students, occupations of parents,
ethnicity groupings in the class/schools, tourist (yacht)
sightings, preferred taste in foods, preferred festivals,
modes of transportation used to travel to school etc.
290
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Source:https://www.eslbuzz.com/learn-
english-vocabulary-through-pictures-musical-
instruments/
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/4652782052557630
88/
Source:https://www.studyladder.com/games/a
ctivity/sorting-shapes-according-to-colour-and-
shape-3245
291
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Data can be collected about people and things in different ways by students. These include observations, interviews and experiments. It is important that
only one attribute is dealt with at this level.
A tally chart is a type of table that is used to collect data in a quick way. It involves the use of strokes or tally marks grouped in groups of five. This makes
it easier to count the frequency for each value
A pictograph uses pictures or symbols to represent quantities, objects or people. It is used when the data are discrete (non-continuous). The picture or
symbols that are used must be of the same size and shape.
A bar graph is a graphical representation of information using bars that extend to different heights to depict values (vertically or horizontally).
The title shows you what you are interpreting. The vertical and horizontal lines are called axes. The horizontal line is called the x-axis. The vertical line
going up is the y-axis. Both are always labelled so you know what is being shown. To interpret the data, you read the very top of the bar to see which
number it reaches on the y-axis.
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists
Additional Resources and Materials: 3D shapes or 2D shapes of different colours, toys, flowers, pictures
Videos showing sorting objects for children: Sorting Objects and Counting for Kids | Sorting Games for Preschool & Kindergarten | Kids
Academy - YouTube
Sort the Same Group Two Different Ways | Preschool and Kindergarten | Kids Academy - YouTube
Games showing sorting objects for children: Sorting Objects by Colour - Group sort (wordwall.net)
Sorting objects - Group so rt (wordwall.net)
292
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Sorting - - Group sort (wordwall.net)
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics - Describing the properties of objects
Science - Classifying objects/people based on given attributes ; Measuring the temperature
S.Studies - Following oral instructions to collect data on race/ ethnic groups (height, weight) or cultural activities
L.Arts - (QAR) Asking and answering questions to get meaning from the data collected and represented.
HFLE - (Environmental Health) Collecting data on different plants, flowers, trees which can grow in a class/ school garden to make their environment
beautiful.
Creative Arts - Constructing a concrete graphing mat, ‘Silent Gallery Walk’
Elements from Local Culture: Nine mornings, carnival, La Rose Festival, Blues Festival, World Creole Music Festival
Resources for a learner who is struggling: Graphing activities for kindergarten - The Measured Mom
https://www.turtlediary.com/game/charts-and-graphing.html
293
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Introduction to the Subject:
In today's world students should not only be taught how to collect and sort data, therefore, the opportunity will be given to them here to order categories
of data from greatest to least and vice versa. This will help pupils in finding numbers that are greater or lesser than any given number, developing their
competence in number sense and counting forward and backward. The introduction of tally tables, concrete graphs and pictographs will be used here to
represent data so pupils can see the different sets as they analyse accordingly.
Strand (Topic): Data Handling and Probability
Essential Learning Outcome 1.3: Using Statistical Methods to Analyze Data - Describing data sets
Grade Level Expectations: Order categories of data from greatest to least frequency for various data sets displayed in tally tables, concrete graphs, and
pictographs.
Key Skill/ Concept: Representing, sequencing, counting, measuring, reasoning
294
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners will be expected to: Observation
Knowledge Use a checklist to assess students as they arrange
items from greatest to smallest in a graph
● Explain how and why a given data set (pictograph, concrete graph, etc)
can be arranged in different orders.
● State the highest and least value in
each data set.
● Compare the values of different
members of a given data set
● Arrange sets of data from greatest to
least
Skill
● Use a variety of strategies (tally charts,
matching, counters, array diagrams,
bar charts, etc.) to identify the count of
each member of given data set.
● State reason(s) why identified
members in a data set has a low or
high frequency.
● Identify and speak about trends in
data set presented in tables,
295
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
pictographs and or concrete bar Observe students working in pairs, as they reflect on
charts. the work of their peers against formulated criteria;
and students give suggestions for improvements.
● Represent given data on a tally or
graph.
Game
● Arrange data according to frequency.
● Order sets of data displayed from Students play a game in which they arrange
greatest to least using tallies, concrete themselves according to their heights (tallest to
shortest).
graph and pictographs.
Values
● Appreciate the fact that the same data
can be represented differently.
● Speak freely of how different strategies
used by students helps in making
learning interesting.
Source: https://familife.in/en/growth-chart-calculator-
indias-children/children-height-lineup/
Interviews and anecdotal records
296
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Make notes of and interview students concerning
the strategies they used to order members of a data
set.
Sample question: How did you know you arranged
yourselves correctly?
Possible students’ responses: We aligned ourselves in pairs
first and our classmates checked to ensure that we were lined
up properly/ We picked the tallest and shortest in the group
then the others fell in place in the line up.
Take notes of students as they use the feedback of
their peers to identify improvements and adjust the
quality of their work.
Oral Questioning
Listen to students as they justify the order for which
they placed the items on their graph. Ask questions
to ensure that they can distinguish between large and
small numbers in data sets.
297
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Data can be represented or organised according to its magnitude (from smallest to greatest and/or greatest to smallest).
Students should understand the terms: greatest, largest, smallest, and least.
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists
Additional Resources and Materials: Videos and pictures showing festivals
Videos showing arranging numbers from greatest to least: ARRANGING NUMBERS FROM GREATEST TO LEAST - YouTube
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics - Comparing numbers/ Arranging numbers in sequence; measuring and recording the distances different students jump
Science - Planting different seeds (peas, corn, peanut, peppers, tomatoes) and ordering them based on height over a period of time.
S.Studies - Show pictures of patrons at tending different festivals in their country and order the pictures from the greatest to the smallest crowd shown.
L.Arts - Demonstrate the understanding of the words ‘least’ or ‘greatest’ by representing the information on a graph, tally, etc. For example: if a student
represents their language score, another student can show a greater score.
HFLE - Discuss the food groups and place them in a frequency based on the amount brought by students.
Creative Arts - Silent Gallery Walk, Picture Wall
298
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Elements from Local Culture:
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
https://www.liveworksheets.com/au747515va
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
https://www.liveworksheets.com/zz1485278fg
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
299
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Introduction to the Subject:
Even though students are young, it is essential to help them understand the importance of making decisions for themselves. This section allows students
to gain a deeper understanding of what they are learning and how information can be further extracted from data presented. Students must realise that
they have a voice in the classroom to share their opinions and how they can listen to others to make informed decisions based on outcomes.
Strand (Topic): Data Handling and Probability
Essential Learning Outcome 1.4: Using Statistical Methods to Analyze Data - Developing and applying methods to analyse data sets
Grade Level Expectations: Analyze different sets of data presented in various ways, including in tally tables, concrete graphs, and pictographs, by asking
and answering questions about the data drawing conclusions, then make convincing arguments and informed decisions.
Key Skill/ Concept: differentiating, analyzing, interpreting, reasoning, representing, problem solving
300
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners will be expected to: Oral Questioning Making Connections
Knowledge Listen to students; take notes of and give feedback to Use previously collected data to construct
them as they use information from graphs, various types of graphs ( tally chart, bar graph,
● Identify that data can be represented pictographs, charts and tables to answer questions. pictograph ) Compare the different
in tally charts, tables, concrete representations to help students see that the data
graphs, and pictographs Students answer questions correctly based on the does not change.
information presented in bar graphs, pictographs etc.
● Read and interpret data represented
in tables, pictographs and bar charts
● Distinguish among the different
ways in which data can be
represented
● Read and interpret data presented in
various ways.
Skills
● Generate and answer questions
based on data presented in tally
Source: https://jr.brainpop.com/math/data/pictographs/
charts, concrete graphs, pictographs
● Use correctly vocabulary (most, least, Possible questions:
more than, less than, etc.) when
a. How many children prefer apples?
speaking about the occurrences of
b. Which fruit is least preferred?
members in a data set
301
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Draw conclusions based on the c. How many more children prefer pears than
analysis of information given. bananas?
Modelling/Think Aloud
● Analyze data to obtain essential
Group work
information.
Model questions that can be answered from
● Interpret information from data given authentic data.
Have students work in small groups to construct
presented in graphs, tally charts,
questions containing the vocabulary least, most, more
Model strategies used to answer questions about
tables, concrete charts. than, less than, that can be answered using a given data
information given in picture graphs, tables and
set. Students from different groups exchange
bar charts.
Values questions and give feedback to each other on the
clarity of the questions.
Math Talk
● Appreciate the importance of being
able to present sets of data in Have students work in small groups to answer
multiple ways questions based on given pictographs, tally charts, tally
charts etc.
● Begin to accept that different
students can interpret the same data
in different ways.
● Students make informed decisions Oral presentation
based on the information received.
Students demonstrate their understanding of the graph
through oral presentation.
Provide students with multiple opportunities to
Make notes of students’ reasoning as they match describe and discuss data given in picture graphs,
possible answers to questions based on data. tables and bar charts, using vocabulary such as
‘most’, ‘least’, ‘highest’, ‘lowest’, ‘smallest’, ‘same
Students ask each other questions about the graph as’, ‘as many as’
shown or made.
Developing a story as a class
Conferencing
302
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Observe, conference’ and point the way forward as Make a story using information from data from
students make use of information in tables, picture graphs, tables and bar charts.
pictographs, charts to answer questions based on a
given data set.
Observe students as they re-represent data given in Present real situations
one into another mode of representation. For eg.
Use data students collected and what is
pictograph to bar chart.
presented by the teacher (data charts) to ask and
answer questions.
Individual/pair Work Students look at the sale of food/ shoes/
favourite subject in a graph and discuss.
Students look at a graph provided by the teacher and
make a different graph displaying the same Students talk about the number of different
information. injuries/ accidents at school.
Class Discussion Group/peer discussion on whatever data is
presented.
Discuss reasons as to what might have caused the
changes in communication devices today. Students draw conclusions as to what could have
caused the changes in transportation.
Use all the authentic examples that students can
use to make informed decisions. Having this
data, ask, “What can we learn from this data?”
What can we do because of what you know now?
303
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Teachers need to know how to analyze data to help students draw conclusions.
Teachers should know how to guide students to make informed decisions. For example: Teacher leads students to the conclusion that they would need an
umbrella for a rainy day.
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists
Additional Resources and Materials
Games to interpret graphs:Bar Graphs and Picture Graphs - Gameshow quiz (wordwall.net)
Parts of a Picture Graph - Labelled diagram (wordwall.net)
Bar Graphs and Picture Graphs - Open the box (wordwall.net)
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics -
Science - Discuss the types of weather experienced in the Caribbean.
S.Studies - Discuss reasons why there is a change in transportation and communication devices as represented in graph. For example: Students may look
at a graph showing how many people have a cell phone and a house phone.
L.Arts - Compare and contrast the different festivals.
HFLE - Analyse the impact of exercise and rest on the body.
Creative Arts - Draw the response to their decision or argument.
304
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Elements from Local Culture: (References that learners might know from their local environment
Based on pictures or videos presented earlier, make a compelling argument to justify why a particular festival is the best. (Students state reasons why they would want to attend a
festival, etc)
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
https://www.liveworksheets.com/worksheets/en/Math/Data/Data_mm1448664vy
Resources for a learner who needs challenge: (Links to learning activities and resources in later grades)
https://www.iknowit.com/lessons/b-reading-bar-graphs.html
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Question students about how they think communication might change in the future.
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
305
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Introduction to the Subject:
Students need to be given opportunities to develop critical thinking skills which will allow them to function well in society. Understanding probability will
give students the ability to foretell or determine the outcome of events or things and make intelligent guesses about results. Teachers will present students
with scenarios that will teach the understanding of given terms, such as “possible”, “impossible” and “certain”, in a way that they can apply this
knowledge to their own daily lives to make informed decisions.
Strand (Topic): Data Handling and Probability
Essential Learning Outcome 1.5: Understanding and Applying Concepts of Probability - Predicting and describing the likelihood of an events.
Grade Level Expectations: Describe the likelihood that events will happen, and use that information to make predictions. Use mathematical language,
including the terms “impossible”, “possible”, and “certain”, to describe the likelihood of events happening, and use that likelihood to make predictions
and informed decisions.
Key Skill/ Concept: Predicting, reasoning, creating
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners will be expected to: Oral Questioning Direct instruction to understand the
meaning of these words.
Knowledge Students make informed decisions based on
outcome. Provide students with the opportunity to identify
● Use correctly words (vocabulary) events that are possible or not possible. For
associated with probability such as Students are presented with a shopping scenario. They example
are given a certain amount of money and asked to
“impossible” ‘will happen”, (will
answer particular questions: What are you certain you can Ask students to judge various events as certain,
never happen’, “possible”, and
buy? Is it likely for you to buy two things with the amount of impossible, or possible (“might happen”).
“certain to describe the likelihood of
money you have?
events occurring ❖ It will rain tomorrow.
❖ Drop a rock in water and it will sink.
❖ A mango seed planted today will bloom
tomorrow.
306
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Skills Every vehicle on the road has music. What is the ❖ The sun will rise tomorrow morning.
possibility of the next vehicle passing with music? ❖ A hurricane/tornado will hit our town.
● Predict possible outcomes of events
❖ If you ask someone who the Prime
given. Show students types of transportation and ask
Minister of SVG they will know.
questions…
● Make informed decisions based on ❖ You will have two birthdays this year.
predictions and outcomes of event. For example: ❖ You will be in bed by 9:00 p.m.
Which type of transportation is likely to be used in your Allow students to justify their choice of how
area/country? likely they think it is.
Values
Which type of transportation is unlikely in your area?
● Appreciate the importance of
learning about probability and how Ask students to make predictions about what
the knowledge of such can be applied they think might happen and then explore
through experiments.
to our daily lives and affect decisions
we make.
For example, use of random devices with which
students can count the outcomes, such as tossing
a coin. Coloured dots can be stuck on the sides
of a wooden cube to create different colour
probabilities. Colour tiles (e.g., eight red and two
blue) can be placed in opaque bags. Students
draw a tile from the bag and then return it after
each draw.). This will support students' emerging
https://creazilla.com/nodes/3151489-bicycle-clipart ideas about what is possible or not possible.
https://clipartpng.com/?1078,train-png-clipart
307
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
https://depositphotos.com/vector-images/horse- Use various pictures and calendar to depict the
clipart.html following:
https://www.istockphoto.com/vector/bus-with- Certain - days of the week, festivals (birthday,
passengers-gm1197096697-341663967 christmas day, etc) growth in height.
Possible - the weather. It will be a sunny day.
Games Impossible - pigs flying, cock laying an egg, a
man making a baby. A new born baby walking
Probability game on word wall:
Likely - the weather, the teacher doing a
Probability - Quiz (wordwall.net) cartwheel in class. Students pick a colour from
a jar.
Probability Gr 3 - Group sort (wordwall.net)
Predict - how many puppies a dog will have, a
gender of a child.
Probability ( Grade 1)
https://wordwall.net/resource/8106684
Students spin the wheel and give an example of the
word it lands on :maths spinner probability - Random
wheel (wordwall.net)
Students will spin the wheel and state whether the
sentence is “certain”, “impossible”, etc.:Probability -
Random wheel
308
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Group work Represent probability on a number line, where 0
(impossible) to 1 (certain) provides a visual
Students work in groups to create a chart depicting representation of how likely an event can be.
events with outcomes that are possible, impossible
and certain. They take turns to explain why the
selected outcomes are placed under the headings they
are placed.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Impossible - not able to happen, or be done; not possible (Impossible | Wordsmyth Word Explorer Children’s Dictionary; WILD Dictionary K-2 | Wordsmyth,
n.d.).
Possible - capable of being, happening, being done, or being used (Possible | Wordsmyth Word Explorer Children’s Dictionary; WILD Dictionary K-2 |
Wordsmyth, n.d.).
Certain - sure; positive; having no doubt (Certain | Wordsmyth Word Explorer Children’s Dictionary; WILD Dictionary K-2 | Wordsmyth, n.d.).
309
Grade1 Mathematics Curriculum
Students should be able to use the above terms in sentences correctly. Students should also be able to make predictions and informed decisions by
critically assessing information given to them.
Teachers should demonstrate critical thinking skills for students to develop and master the skill.
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists
Additional Resources and Materials
Video about chance - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TedbpetdzBE
Video teaching probability: Probability! | Mini Math Movies | Scratch Garden - YouTube
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Science - Create a weather chart for the Caribbean displaying weather patterns that can be: impossible, possible or certain.
Social Studies - Students state for certain what they would find at important places in their community. (church, police station, school)
Language Arts - Make predictions from given text.
HFLE - Use acquired life skills to respond appropriately to effective use of drugs, using words such as: certain, possible, impossible.
Creative Arts - Create posters displaying images showing things that are: possible, impossible and certain.
310
