February 2025
OHPC GRADE 6 SOCIAL STUDIES
THE CARIBBEAN IN THE WORLD
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Historical and Cultural Thinking
Introduction to Strand
This strand explores how the diversity of the world’s population is its strength. Particular attention will be placed on understanding the powerful role of
slavery in shaping Caribbean society and how slavery was and remains a global issue. Students will also examine the origins and contributions of East Indian
peoples to the Caribbean economy and society. They will also examine how regional and international in and out migration has shaped and continues to
shape Caribbean society. The rich cultural mosaic of the Eastern Caribbean contributes to a common sport, culture and music activities that foster regional
interactions.
Strand (Topic): Historical and Cultural Thinking: Slavery in the Caribbean
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand the diversity of the world’s population is its strength
Grade Level Expectations: Students would be able to:
1. Identify the different groups that worked to end slavery.
2. Understand the major milestones in the struggle for emancipation.
3. Appreciate the contributions of the different groups that worked to end slavery.
Focus Question:
1. How did slavery come to an end?
2
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Pre -Assessment: Research - Are students able Introduction: Picture/ Video inferencing & Guided
to define the following terms after discussion
6-HCT-K-1- Identify the groups that independent research? ● Students are shown pictures of newly freed Africans on
worked to end slavery. Emancipation Day.
1. Emancipation
2. Abolition
3. Abolitionists
Students then present findings with the aid of
concept maps.
Concept Mapping:
● Students match the descriptions with the
images below.
● Students discuss what they observe. Guided questions
may include:
○ What are the people in the picture doing?
○ How many groups of persons do you observe in
the picture?
○ Who are these people?
○ Why do they seem to be in different moods?
● Students engage in a whole class discussion on
Emancipation Day and its significance.
3
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product: Mapwork: Story mapping: How Emancipation Came About
Can students identify on a map the ● Teacher with the use of images explains that
location of the groups that worked to emancipation resulted from the efforts of different
abolish slavery? groups, namely, enslaved Africans and European
abolitionist groups. See the example below.
Image 1: European Abolitionists
Source: 10 Key Figures in the Abolition of Slavery in
the UK | History Hit
4
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Image 2: Enslaved Africans
● On a blank map, students identify the location of groups
that worked to abolish slavery. See example below.
Dramatization/ Panel Discussion / Talk Show:
● Students are placed into two teams:
○ Enslaved Africans
○ European Abolitionists
● Each team will research how their group contributed to
the end of slavery
5
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Using a talk show format, the groups will present
information about their actions to help end slavery.
6-HCT-S-1 – Build a timeline of major Gaming:
milestones in the struggle for Timeline: Can students sequence the ● Students are given cue cards of major milestones leading
selected major milestones in the struggle up to emancipation.
emancipation
for emancipation? ● Students view and discuss the information provided on
the back of the card.
The teacher should use an appropriate ● Students play https://wordwall.net/resource/77106070
rubric to assess students’ timelines. ● Students then use the information to create a timeline of
the major milestones in the struggle for emancipation.
Enrichment Activity: Real Time Reactions
● Students read short news article on ‘Modern Day
Slavery”. (This is to heighten students’ awareness that
unfortunately slavery still exist but in different forms.)
See example below:
Source: Modern slavery victim wins payout 'as others die
waiting' (bbc.com)
6
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6-HCT-V-1 -Value the contribution of Brainstorming/Discussion:
the enslaved people in resisting slavery Creative Expression: Are students able to create ● Students imagine they were an enslaved African forced to
items that reflect their appreciation of the work on a sugar plantation in the West Indies.
and achieving emancipation.
contributions of enslaved Africans in resisting ● Then give examples of ways in which they would have
slavery and emancipation? resisted enslavement.
● Students discuss the different actions.
Teachers use appropriate rubrics to assess ● Teacher documents students’ responses on the board,
students' items. then identifies those actions that were applicable.
7
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Scenario/Discussion:
● Students listen to /read the following scenario:
It is 1st August in the Caribbean. Azah and her parents
are on their way to Freedom Town for the annual
Emancipation Day celebrations. Azah, who is not
interested in going, questions her parents about why they
are attending the activities. Her parents explained that
celebrating Emancipation Day is very important because
it reminds us that our ancestors fought to gain freedom
and to ensure that future generations would not be
enslaved again.
● Students and teacher discuss:
1. Should Azah be going to the celebrations with
her parents? Why/Why not?
2. Have you ever been to Emancipation Day
celebrations in your country?
3. How is Emancipation Day celebrated in your
country?
8
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Teacher emphasizes the importance of how the enslaved
people contributed to their own freedom.
Creative Expression: Emancipation Day
Celebrations
● Students pretend it is 1st August, Emancipation Day.
● Students then create any of the following to highlight the
contributions of the enslaved Africans in achieving their
own emancipation:
○ Song
○ Dance
○ Drama
○ Art/Drawing
● Based on students’ presentations, the teacher reinforces
the contributions of the enslaved Africans in gaining their
freedom.
● See examples below:
9
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
10
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Strand (Topic): Historical and Cultural Thinking: East Indian Caribbean Cultures
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand the diversity of the world’s population is its strength
Grade Level Expectations: Students would be able to:
1. Identify the reasons for the migration of East Indians to the Caribbean.
2. Understand the journey taken by East Indian Indentured Servants to the Caribbean.
3. Discuss the impact of East Indian culture on Caribbean society.
Focus Questions:
1. Why were East Indians brought to the Caribbean?
2. How have East Indians influenced Caribbean culture?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Product: Using information provided, can Introduction- Guided Discussion:
students identify the reasons why East Indians ● As a class, students read aloud or listen to a passage
6-HCT-K-2- Explain why East were brought to the Caribbean? See activity below. (fictional, primary or secondary source) about the reasons
Indians were brought to the behind the recruitment of East Indian indentured servants.
Raise Your Card - True/False:
Caribbean. For example:
● Students read aloud or listen to the
passage ‘Mr. John’s Journal Entry’.
● Students respond to the questions by
raising their cards based on their view.
Students give reasons for their answers.
1. The new group of workers that arrived at Mr.
John's plantation were Indentured Servants from
India. True/False
11
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. Africans who had been working on the plantation
all went back to Africa? True/False
3. Mr. John was worried about the new workers
coming to his plantation to solve his problems.
4. Mr John had good reason to be worried about his
new workers. True/False
● The teacher records students’ performance. ● Students respond to questions orally based on the text. For
example:
1. Who were the new group of workers that arrived at Mr.
Product- Journal Entry - Do students' journal
John's plantation?
entries demonstrate an understanding of the
2. What did they come to the plantation to do?
reasons why East Indians were brought to the
3. What happened to the Africans who had been working on the
Caribbean? See activity below.
plantation?
4. Mr. John is worried about his decision to bring in the new
Journal:
group of workers and wonders if they will truly solve the
● Students explain at least two reasons why
plantation's problems. Do you think he should be worried?
East Indians were brought to the
Why or why not?
Caribbean using a mode of their choice
5. What are your thoughts about the new workers?
12
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
(text, audio recording, video, art drawing ● The teacher records on the board correct students’
etc.) responses on the reasons why East Indians were brought to
● Teacher uses a rubric to assess how well the Caribbean using a spider web or other form of
students understand the topic. mapping/brainstorming tool.
Product: Peer Assessment - Flashcards and
Quizzes:
● Students create digital flashcards or quizzes on
platforms like Quizlet or hardcopies. Students will
review and test their knowledge.
● Do students' questions and responses accurately
reflect an understanding of the reasons why
indentured workers were brought to the
Caribbean?
● The teacher provides a summary of the most important
points that were discussed.
● Students record the graphic organiser in their notebooks.
Research Challenge/Guided Discussion:
● Students work in pairs to research the term ‘indentured
servants' using an online search engine, textbook, or other
resource provided.
● Students then share their findings with the class.
● The teacher explains that:
○ Indentured servants were individuals who agreed to
work for a specified period of time in exchange for
13
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
benefits such as: passage to a new country, food,
shelter, and wages.
○ The East Indians who were brought to the
Caribbean came as indentured servants.
OR
Introduction: Scripted Press Conference/Dialogue
● Dressed in a scarf, jewellery, or other accessories to
represent Indian attire, the teacher appears as an old Indian
Indentured servant.
● Students take on the role of reporters/interviewers and
engage with the teacher by asking questions from numbered
index cards distributed beforehand. The teacher responds in
character. See the example script below.
Student 1: Who are you?
Teacher: I am an indentured servant.
Student 2: Huh? Indentured, what now?
Teacher: Indentured servant.
Student 3: Can you explain who or what an indentured servant is?
Teacher: Indentured servants were people who agreed to work for a set
time in exchange for benefits like passage to a new country, food, shelter,
and wages.
Student 4: Which country are you from then?
Teacher: Can you guess where I am from?
Student 5: Is it India?
Teacher: Yes, I am from India.
● Teacher explains that the East Indians were brought to the
Caribbean to work as indentured servants.
14
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6-HCT-S-2- Chart the route taken by Product: Can students accurately chart the route Mapwork:
East Indian Indentured Servants from taken by East Indian Indentured Servants from ● Students are presented with a world map with labels marking
their homeland to the Caribbean. their homeland to the Caribbean? See activities the starting point in India and the final destination in the
below. Caribbean. For example:
Map Work-
● Students work in pairs to chart the sea route taken
by East Indian Indentured Servants from their
homeland to the Caribbean on a physical or digital
map (See Scribble Maps).
● Arrows can be used to indicate the direction of
travel, and key locations at the start and end of the
route. For example:
● Using arrows to show the direction of travel, students map
out one potential route that indentured servants might have
taken to travel from India to the Caribbean. See example
below.
● Students volunteer to share their map showing the possible
route and the reason behind their choice with the class.
● The teacher points out the correct route taken by East
Indian indentured servants.
15
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6-HCT-V-2- Appreciate the Product: Do students' presentations identify at Guided Research/ Visual Presentation:
influences that East Indians have on least three significant contributions of East Indian ● Students (individually or in groups) use a search engine by
Caribbean culture. culture in the Caribbean? inputting phrases, such as "East Indian Culture in the
Caribbean" to find 3 - 4 pictures that depict the cultural
Are students able to explain how East Indians
influences of East Indians. Students who do not have a
have positively influenced the culture of the
device may bring pictures.
region?
● Students are guided by the teacher to select the relevant
images.
● Students then create a collage or slideshow to share with the
The teacher uses an appropriate rubric to assess
class the images they have found. Images should depict
the students' understanding and creativity in their
traditional Indian clothing, food, musical styles and religious
presentations.
practices. For example:
16
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Enrichment Activity
● Interview a Community Member: Students
interview someone from the local community who
practices Hinduism or Islam. They can ask
questions about traditions, festivals, and beliefs.
Students can then share their findings in a written
report or a short video presentation.
● Storytelling:
Imagine that you are an East Indian who practices
Hinduism. Write a story about a religious
celebration or ritual that you take part in.
The images in this set were sourced from the icon feature in Microsoft
Word.
● Students discuss the ways in which each image depicts East
Indian culture that influences Caribbean culture.
● Students compile a list of the ways in which East Indian
culture influences the Caribbean.
Creating I like Statements
● Students state three things they like about Indian culture
practiced in the Caribbean.
For example:
- I like Diwali because of the lights
17
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
- I like chutney music because I love to dance.
- I like the sari because of the colourful fabric.
- I like roti because it is spicy.
OR
Group Investigation/Class Discussion:
● Students are divided into small groups.
● Each group spins a w
● heel to select a specific aspect of East Indian culture in the
Caribbean. (See Picker Wheel - Spin the Wheel to Decide a
Random Choice or Wheel Spinner)
● Groups find pictures (and/or videos) and information
related to their chosen topic. Groups may use a search
engine by inputting phrases, such as "Indian cultural festivals
18
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
in the Caribbean" or " Indian clothing in the Caribbean" to
find specific images and facts.
● Groups present their findings to the class in the form of a
collage, slideshow, or any other visual medium of their
choice.
● The teacher facilitates a whole class discussion on East
Indian culture and its impact on the region's culture.
Additional Resources and Materials:
Videos: (Display excerpts or snippets of videos, rather than the whole films where possible, to save time and engage students visually.)
1. (13) The History Of Indian Arrival Day - YouTube
2. Indentured The Journey from India to Trinidad (youtube.com)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
● East Indians were brought to the Caribbean from India as indentured servants to work on sugar plantations after the enslavement of Blacks ended.
● These East Indians were called indentured servants because they worked on contract for a set time before being freed.
● The route was a long sea voyage across the Indian Ocean, around the coast of Africa, and finally to various Caribbean islands such as Trinidad, Guyana,
Jamaica, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and Grenada.
● The East Indians brought their own traditions that are still present and have been copied by other ethnic groups in the Caribbean.
● Today, Indian cultural influences can be seen in various aspects of Caribbean life:
1. Religion - Hinduism, Islam
2. Festivals - Diwali/Divali, Eid-ul-Fitr
3. Foods - Roti, doubles, rice
4. Music - Chutney
5. Language - channa,
19
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
● Language Arts:
○ Writing - Journaling, narrative writing
○ Vocabulary - indentured servant, contract, channa, cultural influence
○ Communication - oral presentations.
● Science and Technology: Students use digital tools to research and create collages and journals.
● Arts and Crafts: Students create collages.
20
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Strand (Topic): Historical and Cultural Thinking: Arts and Sports in the Caribbean
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand the diversity of the world’s population is its strength
Grade Level Expectations:
Learners would be able to:
1. Describe the common sport, culture and music activities that foster regional interactions
2. Investigate how local sport, culture or music figures have influence beyond their home state
3. Appreciate the value of arts and sports for shaping regional identity and pride
Focus Questions:
1. How do common sports, culture and music activities foster regional interactions?
2. Why is regional interaction important?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Conversation: Based on the focus question, are students Introduction
able to give reasons why it is important for Caribbean
6-HCT-K-3-Describe common ● Students listen to the song “One Caribbean Nation” by
people to work together?
sport, culture and music activities that Grantley Ipa Constance OR "Caribbean Man” by Black Stalin
foster regional interactions. ● .https://youtu.be/5FsRNw2E3sk?si=49o-RdVwZ5tauasj
● https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ItA4vTaLMk0 One
Caribbean - Chozenn
● https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4xRXfVw86T0 One
Caribbean Family - Macke Conscious
21
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Students respond to the focus question: “Why is it important
for Caribbean countries to work together?” This should create
interest for the topic.
● They then share their responses orally to the class.
Conversation: After conducting research, can students Graphic Organizer - Describe Activities that Foster
describe the common sport, culture and music activities Regional Interactions
that foster regional interactions?
● Students work in small groups to complete the graphic
organizer to show different areas of regional interaction. For
example, Cricket. (See sample graphic organizer below).
Product: Annual Calendar of Activities ● Students answer the questions to guide the completion of the
graphic organizer.
5 W’s 1 H Questions Suggested Responses
WHO Identify Cricketers in the Caribbean
Caribbean
Are students able to create a flip annual calendar with the
islands that
activities that foster regional interactions?
work
together?
WHY Why do they unity, to win competitions, fun
work
together?
WHEN When do T20 games, world cup, ICC, One Day International
they work
together?
WHAT What are Practice, travel, compete
some ways
they work
22
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
together?
WHERE Where do Various parts of the world where competitions are held
they work
together?
HOW How do Good communication/interaction, being fair to each
they work other, developing bonds
together?
OR
23
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Presentation:
● Each group will present their findings on the common sport,
culture and music activities that foster regional integrations in
a mode of their choice E.g. PowerPoint, infographics, song
etc.
Discussion:
● Students and teacher discuss the various activities that foster
regional interactions.
● Teacher gives students information about those activities that
were not mentioned during the discussion.
24
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Enhancement Activity: Research
● In groups/individuals, students research the following
common activities that foster regional interactions:
- Sport
- Culture
- Music
● Each group researches ONE activity. For example, group one
will research common sport activities.
Create A Calendar:
● Students create an annual calendar with the activities that
foster regional interactions by conducting appropriate
research.
6-HCT-S-3- Investigate local sport, Product: Research In Class Research:
culture or music figures that have Small groups select one influential figure of their choice to ● Students select one local figure from a list of names given by
influence beyond their home state conduct a research. This can be an internet search or an the teacher.
interview. ● Students conduct research to gather information about the
influential figure they selected.
Sample Interview Prompt/Research Guide ● Students use the graphic organizer below to prepare a short
report highlighting the following; a short autobiography and
1. Name two ways the person they selected has represented their
2. Birthdate country.
3. Address ● Students are selected randomly to share their reports orally
4. Family background (parents’ name etc.) with the class.
5. Schooling
6. Why did you choose this field
7. Accomplishments
25
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Students present information to the teacher for review.
Any mode of presentation is acceptable. E.g. PowerPoint
presentation, song, poem
Students edit their research based on feedback from
teacher
Students publish information on the school's
website/Facebook, poster etc.
https://www.edrawmax.com/article/biography-graphic-
organizer-examples.html
26
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.edrawmax.com/article/biography-graphic-
organizer-examples.html
Influential people in the Caribbean: Robert Nesta Marley, Buju
Banton, Rihanna, Kevin Lyttle, Brian Lara, Skinny Fabulous, Adonal
Foyle, Sir Arthur Lewis, Kirani James, Sir Dwight Venner, Julian
Alfred, Alston Becket Cyrus, Calypsonian Sparrow,
27
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6-HCT-V-3- Appreciate the value of Culminating Activity Community Engagement Activity:
arts and sports for shaping regional Students present a token to influential community ● Students with the help of the teacher prepare an afternoon of
identity and pride. members and explain how they impacted their community. activities (Arts e.g. dance, music: Sports e.g. cricket, football,
basketball)
After the Community Engagement Activity, students
● Students create invitations and distribute them to members of
complete an exit form.
the community including influential persons.
● Students present their icon through song, dance or sports. E.g.
Skinny Fabulous- Soca (students perform a song by this
artiste).
● The influential figures are given the opportunity to perform or
share aspects of their lives.
● Students create
Additional Resources and Materials:
Videos: (Display excerpts or snippets of videos, rather than the whole films where possible, to save time and engage students visually.)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Common sports, culture and music activities that foster regional integration include:
Sport: West Indies Cricket, ICC Tournament, CARIFTA Games, CONCACAF
Culture: Carnival, Carifesta, Regional Beauty Pageant, Easter Regatta
Music: Soca Monarch, Jazz Festivals
28
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Strand (Topic): Historical and Cultural Thinking: Migration
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand the diversity of the world’s population is its strength
Grade Level Expectations: Students would be able to:
1. Outline countries where people from the Eastern Caribbean have migrated.
2. Identify the countries where the people of the Caribbean migrate to.
3. Develop an appreciation for reasons why people migrate from their country and its impact on them and their home country.
Focus Questions:
1. Why did Caribbean people migrate to different countries?
2. How did migration impact the lives of the people of the Caribbean?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Observation: Are students able to analyse images depicting Introduction: Image Analysis
migration in the Caribbean, and provide oral descriptions?
6-HCT-K-4- Identify places where
people from the Eastern Caribbean
have migrated to. Conversation: Can students express (orally or written) where
people from the Eastern Caribbean have migrated, and why
they have migrated?
29
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from https://www.alamy.com/stock-
photo/caribbean-airlines.html?sortBy=relevant
● Students will examine a photo of persons boarding an
aeroplane or ship.
● They will then describe briefly what they think is
happening in the picture.
Retrieved from: https://www.amazon.com/Interactive-
Childrens-Educational-Nursery-Nature/dp/B073RCQCTV
Retrieved from:
Product: Making generalizations and drawing https://quizizz.com/admin/quiz/5d7807abaf17a0001c6ab549/
conclusions immigration
Can students use the bar graph to draw conclusions and write Guided Discussion:
statements on the following:
● Students discuss:
I. The three most popular places that Caribbean people 1. Do you know anyone who has left your country and travelled
migrated to. within and outside of the Caribbean to live?
2. To which countries did the people of the Caribbean travel?
II. The two least common places that Caribbean people
3. Why do you think Caribbean people travelled to different
migrated to.
countries in the Caribbean, and outside of the Caribbean?
30
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Conversation: Can students explain the concept of migration Six Corners Game
and related concepts? ● Students may move to different parts of the classroom
labelled as popular countries to which Caribbean people
migrated. Some countries may be Barbados, Trinidad
and Tobago, British Virgin Islands, USA, Canada and
the United Kingdom.
Survey and Bar Graph
● Students carry out a survey of different places where
their family and friends have migrated to.
● Students represent the information on a bar graph or
tally chart.
Retrieved from
https://www.migrationdataportal.org/infographic/total-
number-immigrants-and-emigrants-caribbean-2020
Retrieved from https://www.shutterstock.com/image-
vector/stickman-illustration-featuring-family-working-on-
566638300
6-HCT-S-4 – Locate where people of Product/Observation: With the use of handmade or digital Map work: Locating Places
the Caribbean migrate. stickers, can students identify the places where the people of ● Using the Atlas, students locate the places where
the Caribbean migrate, on a blank map of the Caribbean people migrated to.
Caribbean/world map?
31
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from https://www.amazon.com/Interactive-
Removable-Educational-Children-
Continents/dp/B011IWHDC6
Map work (Floor Map):
● As students name the places to which Caribbean people
migrated, they would move to the country (on the floor
map)
Game: Riddle
● Students will use handmade or digital stickers created
by the teacher to identify the countries where
Caribbean people migrate on a blank map of the
Caribbean/world.
● Clues may include: “Riddle me this! Riddle me that!”
1. I am a huge and powerful country located on a
continent north of the Caribbean. Many Caribbean
people have migrated to me. Which country am I?
2. I am known for many famous monarchs. My most
famous queen is on the EC dollar. Which country am I?
3. My classmate migrated to the Spice Isle located south
of SVG. Which country am I?
32
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4. I have the Caribbean’s only drive-in volcano. I am
famous for my two Piton Mountains. Which country
am I?
5. I am the only country that celebrates Nine Mornings
and have a chain of islands called the Grenadines.
Which country am I?
Students will be awarded points for placing the stickers
in the correct location.
Retrieved from https://medium.com/@rishhsoni/crm-data-
migration-definition-and-process-35f6500a9c16
● Students are encouraged to visit the immigration
department in their country to obtain information.
OR
● Students may visit the immigration website for their
country.
OR
33
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● The teacher can invite personnel from the local
Immigration Department to conduct a presentation on
immigration in the Caribbean/their country.
● Students prepare questions to ask the
personnel/representatives from the immigration
department.
Creating Mock Passports
Students create mock passports to be used in role play.
6-HCT-V-4 – Appreciate reasons why Product: By using a table indicated by the teacher, can Guided Discussion:
people migrate from their country and students differentiate between push factors and pull factors? ● To focus on the reasons why people migrate, students
its impact on them and their home then view a related video for example
country. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8OfmRQIi4BE
● Students then discuss questions presented by the
teacher for example.
1. What is migration?
2. Why do people migrate?
3. Who are immigrants?
4. Explain two advantages and two disadvantages of
migration.
● Students are given relevant feedback.
Written exercise:
● Students will be introduced to the following concepts:
i. Pull factors of migration
ii. Push factors of migration
34
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product
Can students accurately answer questions from a case study on
migration?
Retrieved from
https://melbourneurbanisation.weebly.com/push-and-pull-
factors.html
Students will then view a video for example,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J7yXCQS6lfY, and
complete the table with push or pull factors in the Caribbean.
Push factors of Pull factors of
migration migration
1.
2.
3.
35
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Story/Scenario/Case Study
● Students are presented with a case study, for example,
Case Study: Migration of a Caribbean Family
Jerry Anderson, a post master at the Global Village Post Office in St.
Vincent and the Grenadines, lived happily with his wife Jenny, a nurse,
and their two young children, Joey and Joanne. As the postal service started
to decline, Mr Anderson started to think of how he and his family might be
affected.
“What if I lose my job?” he thought.
Jenny, he said to her as they were relaxing, we have to think about our
future. Things are changing.
One day, his friend Freddie called. “Hey man! You should come to the
US man. I have a job for you”.
36
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The entire family was excited. He thought of his mother and friends, but he
made the tough decision to take his family for a chance at a brighter future.
When they arrived they found that adapting to a new culture, finding a
Product/Conversation
comfortable home, finding a job with a good salary and being homesick were
Are students able to create and express gratitude to those not so easy.
overseas who have, and is still making contributions to them,
and their country? Eventually, a year later, Mr. Anderson got a permanent job that allowed
the family to access better healthcare, education, and living conditions. The
children benefited from a better school environment. As time went by, the
children developed an understanding of different views in a new country and
different cultures. The family made new friends and engaged in community
activities, enhancing their social life.
Retrieved from Perfect Thank You Notes: Heartfelt And Fortunately, they keep in touch almost every day with relatives back home
Handwritten : NPR and send barrels and money. During the holidays they return home to see
friends and relatives.
Product: Journaling 1. Why did the Anderson family migrate? Is this reason a push or
pull factor for migration?
Do students’ note / journal reflect
2. What are two challenges the family faced after migrating?
Product: Interview 3. What are two good things that migration brought to this family?
4. What advice will you give to one of your classmates who may be
Students will create an interview schedule of 5-7 questions and
migrating, and why?
then conduct an interview with someone who migrated to find
out
Oral questioning/Discussion: Impact of Migration
- Two reasons why they migrated
- Two ways in which their life changed
Students discuss the following which will be placed on the
- One thing you missed about their home country
board by the teacher.
37
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
- What will you say to persons who intend to migrate, ● How is our country affected when people migrate to
or have migrated? other countries?
● How are other countries affected when people migrate
to them?
Journaling/ Note Taking:
● Students list ways (3 positive and 3 negative) in which
home countries are affected when people leave and
ways in which the receiving countries are affected. (3
positive and 3 negative)
Effects of Migration
On country that On country that
persons leave receives the migrants
Positive Negative Positive Negative
Students complete a crossword puzzle with clues to highlight
the impact of migration on countries
38
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Impact of Migration
39
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Across Down
3 Changes in the 1 children who
. daily activities . often disobey
rules
5 countries can
. become 2 when families
overcrowded . end in divorce
4 educated or
. skilled people
move away
Additional Resources and Materials:
Videos: (Display excerpts or snippets of videos, rather than the whole film where possible, to save time and engage students visually.)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LC2Egw1Yfjc
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Migration is the movement of people from one place of residence to another place to live.
40
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
People from the Caribbean have migrated to:
- Other parts of the Caribbean region
- Europe (e.g. Britain, Spain, France, Italy, Germany, Netherlands, Ireland, Portugal)
- New Zealand
- Asia (China, India, Japan, Taiwan, Thailand, Russia)
- Canada
- North America and South America
- Africa (Nigeria, South Africa, West Africa)
Reasons for Migration
People in the Caribbean migrate for many reasons. The reasons for people migrating can be placed in two categories:
1. Push factors- these are factors that may occur in your country that push or force you to migrate.
2. Pull factors- these factors pull or attract you to migrate to another country.
Push factors
- conflicts/wars/disasters (environmental migration)
- Poverty/famine
- Loss of jobs (economic migration)
- Lack of educational opportunities
- Unstable political situation
- Discrimination
- Poor living conditions
Pull factors
- More resources
- Better job opportunities (economic migration)
- Better educational opportunities
- Better weather conditions
- Better standard of living
- Better health care conditions
The Impact of migration
People migrating to other countries can result in the following:
41
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
- Brain Drain- this is when educated or skilled people in a country move away
- Broken up families- separated families may end in divorce
- Delinquent children- children left in care of others may disobey rules or get involved in illegal activities
- Overcrowded in countries- larger countries may become overpopulated
- Changes in culture- the culture of countries may change over time.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
● Language Arts: writing poems, songs, and comprehension passage, complete a mock immigration form
● Science and Technology:
● Mathematics: calculating the number of immigrants who have migrated, calculating the number of countries where Caribbean people have migrated, graphs
● Arts and Crafts: creating labels and stickers, create a mock passport
42
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Spatial Thinking
Introduction to the Strand:
In this strand students will appreciate that the Caribbean has a diverse geography that poses challenges and opportunities. This includes an examination of the
continents and major water bodies of the world and the climatic regions of the world and how other regions are alike or different from our region and the
increasing significance of the extreme climatic conditions of these regions, Student will examine how this has led to significant adaptations in the use of
technology for securing food, shelter, clothing, and transportation.
Strand (Topic): Spatial Thinking: Human Adaptation and Lifestyle in Diverse Climatic Regions
Essential Learning Outcome: To appreciate that the Caribbean has a diverse geography that poses challenges and opportunities
Grade Level Expectations:
1. Name the continents and major water bodies of the world
2. Using a map or globe, locate the continents and major water bodies of the world in relation to the Caribbean region.
3. Recognize that continents are made up of different countries.
Focus Questions:
1. What features are seen on Earth from space?
2. Why is the Earth called the Blue Planet?
3. Why are continents divided into countries?
43
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to : Activity 1: Introduction:
Conversation: Put students in groups of 4s. Provide students with blank
6- ST-K-1-Name the continents and Can students describe the features of Earth? paper. Give instructions: If you are floating in space, looking
major water bodies of the world down on Earth, draw what you think you will see. After 5
Observation: minutes asks students to present their picture. Do not give
6-ST-S-1- Locate the continents and Have students discovered that Earth is covered with feedback about the illustration.
major water bodies of the world on a more water than land? Students view a video https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d-
map or globe VqMGfmUMQ
Product: Asks: How does your illustration compare to the video you just
Have students presented a better representation of watched?
the Earth? Is the description accurate? What are the features of your illustration that are
similar/different from the information presented in the video?
(Earth is spherical, there are water bodies and large landmasses)
Activity 2: Activity 1: Use an inflatable globe. Ask: What two main
Conversation: features do we see on the globe? (Water and land). Send the
Can students name the continents? globe to a student. Student identifies where her fingers are
Can students describe the different continents? touching (water and water, water and land) This activity shows
that more often students will touch water as Earth is made up
Observation: of more water than land. Students discover that Earth is made
Can students correctly label the world map with the of 70% water and 30% land.
names of the continents? Revisit the illustration presented in the introduction and make
the necessary changes to reflect the best representation of the
Product: planet. Write a short description of the illustration.
Have students paste the landmasses correctly to
create a map? Activity 2: Calling All Continents: Teacher directs the class to
the landmasses and asks, “Do you know what these large
landmasses are called?” (continents) Establish a definition for
the term continent. Students watch a second video:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZPYVCyC5m2U (stop
the video after continents)
44
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Activity 3: On an unlabelled map, students write in the names of the
Conversation: continents. Discussion continues on a description of the
Can students name the five oceans? continents as well as their location on the map. Students
Can students describe the location of the different should conclude that North and South America are joint
ocean? together and located in the western hemisphere whilst Asia,
Africa and Europe are joint together in the eastern hemisphere.
Observation: Students recognize that Australia is an island continent found in
Can students correctly label the world map with the the southern continent with Antarctica which is a frozen
names of the ocean? continent.
TASK: Cut out the outlines of the continents and paste them
correctly to create a map. Label the continents.
45
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Activity 4: Activity Three: Calling All Ocean: Now that we have
Conversation: learnt about the continents, what other feature on Earth do you
Can students describe the location of the Caribbean think we need to learn about? (water bodies, specifically the
in relation to neighbouring oceans and continents? oceans) Students continue watching the video
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZPYVCyC5m2U
Observation: Students establish a definition for the term: Ocean. Students
Are students able to identify the location of the name the oceans. On the map above, students identify the
Caribbean Region on a world map? location of the oceans.
Students describe the location of the five oceans.
To remember the names of the ocean from smallest to largest
use the mnemonics:
Aunt - Arctic
Sally - Southern
Is - Indian
A - Atlantic
Princess - Pacific
Review: Students learn the song
Song: Continents and Oceans
Tune: London Bridge
There are seven continents
Continents, continents
There are seven continents,
On the earth.
46
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
North and South American,
Africa, Asia
Europe and Antarctica
Don’t forget Australia!
There are also five oceans,
Five oceans, five oceans
There are also five oceans
On the earth.
Indian, Atlantic,
Arctic, Pacific.
Then there is the Southern
Ocean. That makes five!
Activity 4: Students will refer to the map above again and
identify the location of the Caribbean Region. Students will
circle the group of islands. Students will describe the location
of the Caribbean in relation to the neighbouring continents and
oceans.
TASK: Students will play "Continents and Oceans" game.
Game cards include names of either "continent" (North
America, South America, Asia, Africa, Australia, Antarctica, and
Europe) or "ocean" (Indian, Atlantic, Pacific, and Arctic,
Southern) as well as the Caribbean Region. Students will have
the opportunity to choose a card and locate either feature on a
blank map, as well as tell the class whether the name is a
continent or ocean, The virtual blank map will be projected on
the board. Students will take turns picking cards. Teacher will
observe and make notes for student understanding.
47
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
OR
Create a 3D model to represent the Earth, continents and
oceans. Label each continent and ocean. Use a push pin to
identify the location of the Caribbean Region.
6-ST-V-1 - Recognize that continents Activity 1: Introduction:
are made up of different countries. Teacher reads out a riddle: 1. I am a superpower with the Eiffel
Conversation: Tower. Some people refer to me as the fashion capital of the
Are students able to identify countries in each world. Bonjour et bienvenue. Who am I?
continent? (France)
Have students understood the importance of 2. I am home to the world’s highest waterfall, the Angels Falls.
dividing the continents into countries? My people speak Spanish. (Venezuela)
Observation: Ask: What are France and Venezuela? (countries) Use probing
Is the information presented in the table correct? questions to generate the answer.
Product:
Can students match countries to the correct In which continents are these countries found?
continent?
Activity 1: Teacher projects this map
48
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Students will study the map and identify countries e.g. Canada is
located in North America.
Ask: What other countries make up North America? (US, Alaska,
Mexico)
Ask: How can you recognise these countries? (boundaries, imaginary
lines that separate regions)
Let us define the term country (A country is a distinct territory with
defined borders, boundaries, people and government).
Students will work in groups of fours.
Students draw a table in their notebook. Each group will be given a
copy of the map above. Students will write in the names of countries
found in each continent.
N. AmerSic. aA meriAcaf rica Europe Asia Australia Antarctica
After ten minutes, students share their findings. Discussion of
Australia and Antarctica (no countries)
Students discuss why they think continents are divided into countries.
(easier to locate places, experience
diversity)
TASK:
Use the in Activity 1. Teacher calls out the names of various
countries e.g. Spain and students write in the
Word Spain on the appropriate continent. Repeat this exercise.
Teacher observes students’ responses.
49
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
OR
Present a worksheet activity where students match continents to
corresponding countries.
50
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Strand (Topic): Spatial Thinking: Climatic Regions
Essential Learning Outcome: To appreciate that the Caribbean has a diverse geography that poses challenges and opportunities
Grade Level Expectations:
1. Identify the climatic regions of the world (tropical/torrid, temperate and polar/frigid) and describe their physical characteristics (e.g. deserts,
tundra, forests, mountains, plains)
2. Illustrate how other regions are alike or different from our region
3. Appreciate that all regions of the world have unique natural features
Focus Questions:
1. What are the global climatic zones?
2. How are climatic zones unique
3. What physical features are unique to the various climatic zones?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Introduction
6-ST-K-2 – Identify the climatic Conversation
regions of the world (tropical/torrid, Are students able to state what are climatic Students will watch the video on the climatic zones.
temperate and polar/frigid) and zones and the number of global climatic https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5tC8OOxOFEk
describe their physical characteristics zones which exist? OR
(e.g. deserts, tundra, forests, Are students able to name the climatic zone? https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n6vxHea1Epk&t=8s
mountains, plains ) Are students able to distinguish one climatic
zone from another? Students will have a discussion on the climatic zones.
Ask probing questions such as:
Map It 1. What is a climatic zone?
Observation 2. How many climatic zones are there?
51
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Are students able to accurately label the 3. What separates one climatic zone from another
various climatic zones? 4. What are the names of the climatic zones?
Research
Observation Map It
Are students working cooperatively in Students will on the map provided in google slides or
groups? powerpoint complete an activity where they are to identify the
Are students able to grade their peers’ various climatic zones. (drag and drop activity) (See additional
presentation using the grading rubric? resources). Alternatively, students will be given a blank map
Are students able to do self and peer and they are to, using different colours, colour and label the
assessment using the group participation different climatic zones.
grading rubric?
Product
Are students able to produce a visual aid for
their oral presentation?
Are students’ visual aid creative? (utilize the
presentation grading rubric)
Are students able to give an oral presentation
to their class on their climatic zone?
Research
In mixed ability groups the students will dip for a climatic
zone. In their groups using the guide given students are to
prepare a presentation on the climatic zone that they got.
Guidelines for Presentation
1. Must have a visual aid
2. Visual aid must be creative.
3. Must include two countries in that climatic region.
52
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4. Description of the physical characteristics of the
climatic zone e.g. plains, mountains, tundra,
rainforest and deciduous forest.
5. Must have a mime that demonstrates the temperature
in their climatic region/zone
Students will present to their class on their climatic region.
The other groups will grade the presenting group’s
presentation using an oral grading rubric.
Students will grade their group members’ participation using a
group participation rubric.
6-ST-S-2- Illustrate how other regions Same or Different Same or Different?
are alike or different from our region Observation Students will on the map from the Map It activity locate their
Are students able to accurately identify their region in the world.
region on their map? Students will examine their map and discuss the location of
Conversation their region in the world and they are to describe the
Are students able to state the climatic zone characteristics of the climate of their region. Probing questions
that their region is located? such as:
Are students able to state that countries 1. In what climatic zone is your region located?
within the same climatic zone may be 2. Who are your county’s neighbours?
different (hot/wet v hot/dry in the tropics?) 3. How are the countries in your climatic zone similar or
Are students able to identify similarities and different (hot/wet v hot/dry in the tropics?
differences between their climatic zone and 4. How are the countries outside of your climatic zone
countries outside their climatic zones? similar or different (warm/cool temperate and polar
Are students able to describe the climate of regions).
their country?
Have students create a table with the main climatic regions (see
Observation example).
Are students able to create a table with the
three main climatic regions/zones?
Tropical/To Temperate Polar/
Are students able to identify their country
rrid Frigid
and other countries on an atlas and google
earth and classify it in the correct climatic
zone?
53
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product Using an atlas or google earth have the students identify their
Are students able to create a Venn diagram country and insert the name of their country under the correct
to illustrate the similarities and differences heading in the table.
between their country and a country from a Students will be given balloons with the names of countries in
temperate or polar region? them.
Are students creative in their production Students will pop the balloons and classify the countries given
(use a creativity grading rubric)? in the table based on the climatic zone/ region that they fall in
(atlas or google earth to be used to classify countries)
Students will create a Venn diagram/ presentation
board/video/PowerPoint illustrating the similarities and
differences between their country and a country from either the
temperate or polar region. Students are to be as creative as
possible with their creation (pictures could be used to illustrate
the climates in the Venn diagram).
6-ST-V-2 –Appreciate that all regions Uniqueness Uniqueness
of the world have unique natural Conversation The students will look at a series of flash cards with physical
features Are students able to indicate that they are features such as rain forests, tundra, deserts, snow-capped
looking at natural physical features? mountains, Great barrier reef, Aurora Borealis.
Are students able to note that the images are Students will discuss what images they are observing. Probing
from different climatic regions and the questions such as :
ecosystems (rainforest, deserts, tundra, and 1. What is illustrated in the images?
coral reef) in each of these will be different? 2. Are all the images from the same climatic
region/zones?
Observation 3. Why do you believe they are or are not?
Are students able to accurately classify the 4. Do you think that there are differences in the type of
images? ecosystems (rainforest, deserts, tundra, and coral
Are students working cooperatively in groups reefs) that exist in the various climatic zones?
(use group participation rubric)/ checklist? 5. Why do you think so or do not think so?
Are students able to self and peer assess? +
Students will classify the natural feature images in the climatic
zone they are most likely to be found. This will be done by a
drag and drop activity / cut and paste activity.
54
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product
Are students able to create a piece that Students will, in mixed ability groups, create a poem/ song
highlights that each climatic zone is different illustrating that there are varying natural features that can be
and has unique physical features? found in certain regions of the world.
Students will peer assess their group members.
Additional Resources and Materials
Tips for effective group work in the classroom: https://youtu.be/pzr5x2cLljg?si=GpyzJs7Pf81IEM7X
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Adaptation means anticipating the adverse effects of climate change and taking appropriate action to prevent or minimize the damage they can cause, or
taking advantage of opportunities that may arise. Mitigation means making the impacts of climate change less severe by preventing or reducing the
emission of greenhouse gases (GHG) into the atmosphere.
55
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Strand (Topic): Spatial Thinking: Adaptation and Lifestyle in Diverse Climatic Regions
Essential Learning Outcome: To appreciate that the Caribbean has a diverse geography that poses challenges and opportunities
Grade Level Expectations:
1. Describe how people in the various regions live (housing, clothing, agriculture, social life, transportation)
2. Analyse the advantages and disadvantages of living in the various regions of the world
3. Appreciate that the major regions each have unique features that help determine how people live there
Focus Questions:
1. How do people adapt their housing, clothing, agriculture, social life and transportation to suit the specific climatic conditions of the regions in which
they live?
2. What are the advantages and disadvantages of living in different climatic regions and how do the unique features of these regions influence the lifestyles
and cultural practices of their inhabitants?
56
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
6- ST-K-3-Describe how people in the Activity 1: Virtual Exploration and Activity 1: Virtual Exploration and Presentation of
various regions live (housing, clothing, Presentation of Climatic Zones Climatic Zones
agriculture, social life, transportation) Conversation:
How do the types of houses in the Arctic differ Students will describe how people in various climatic
from those in the Rainforest, and what are the regions live, focusing on housing, clothing, agriculture,
reasons for these differences? social life, and transportation.
Why do people in desert regions wear loose and Introduction (Whole Class Activity)
light-coloured clothing, and how does this differ 1. Virtual Field Trip:
from the clothing choices in temperate zones? Begin with a virtual field trip using YouTube videos to
explore different climatic regions (e.g., Arctic, Desert,
What type of housing do people typically live in Rainforest, and Temperate zones). Show videos that
in the Arctic region, and how does it help them highlight how people live, their housing, clothing,
adapt to the climate? agriculture, social life, and transportation in each region.
2. Discussion: Engage students in a discussion about their
How do people in the Rainforest region use observations from the videos. Use questions like, "What
their clothing to protect themselves from the kind of houses do people live in?" and "What type of
environment? clothing do they wear and why?"
What are some common agricultural practices in Development (Small Group Activity)
the Desert region, and how do they help people 1. Research and Presentation: Divide the class into small
survive in such a harsh environment? groups, each assigned a different climatic region. Using
How do people in the Temperate region use Edpuzzle, Neopod, and Quizizz, groups will research their
transportation, and what are some benefits of assigned region.
this mode of transportation? 2. Presentation Creation: Groups will create a digital
presentation (Google Slides or PowerPoint) describing
how people live in their assigned climatic region.
Observation: Encourage inclusion of images, facts, and short video
Are students able to identify and describe the clips. (Students may also use a Bristol board to create presentation
main differences in housing, clothing, and charts.)
57
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
agriculture between the different climatic Materials:
regions? - Computers/tablets with internet access
- YouTube
Are students able to explain how people in each - Edpuzzle
region adapt to their environment and how these - Neopod
adaptations impact their daily lives? - Quizizz
- Google Slides/PowerPoint
Product:
Are the digital presentations (Google Slides or Conclusion (Individual Activity)
PowerPoint) well-organized and visually 1. Reflection Essay: Each student writes a short essay
appealing, effectively communicating how reflecting on what they learned about the various climatic
people live in the assigned climatic region? regions and how people adapt to live in those
environments.
Do the presentations include relevant images,
facts, and short video clips that support the
students' descriptions of housing, clothing,
agriculture, social life, and transportation in the
region?
Conversation:
What specific climatic features of their assigned Activity 2: STEM House Design Challenge
region are the students discussing, and how do
these features influence their design decisions? Students will design and test a model house suitable for a
specific climatic region.
How are the students articulating the
effectiveness of their model during the Introduction (Whole Class Activity)
presentation? Are they using relevant 1. Lesson on Climatic Zones: Briefly teach/ review with
terminology and concepts related to the climatic students, the different climatic zones and how they affect
conditions they researched? human life. Use interactive tools like Factile Jeopardy to
review key concepts.
Observation:
Are the students actively collaborating and Development (Small Group Activity)
dividing tasks among group members while 1. STEM Challenge: In small groups, students will design
constructing their model house? and build a model house that can withstand the conditions
58
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
of a specific climatic zone. Provide materials such as
How are the students interacting with the testing cardboard, plastic, fabric, and other craft supplies.
materials (fan, spray bottle) during the model 2. Testing and Presentation: Groups will test their models
testing phase? Are they methodically testing their (e.g., using a fan for wind, water spray for rain) and
models and adjusting based on observations? present their designs to the class, explaining how their
house is suited to the climatic conditions of their assigned
Product: region.
How well does the final model house
demonstrate an understanding of the climatic Materials:
zone it was designed for, considering the - Cardboard, plastic, fabric, craft supplies
materials and construction techniques used? - Fan, spray bottle (for testing)
- Computers/tablets for research
Does the design report each student produces
clearly explain the design process, choice of Conclusion (Individual Activity)
materials, and how the model addresses the 1. Design Report: Each student writes a report on their
environmental challenges of the assigned group's model, detailing the design process, materials used,
climatic region? and how their model addresses the challenges of living in
their assigned climatic region.
6-ST-S-3-Analyze the advantages and
disadvantages of living in the various
regions of the world Activity 1: Sustainable City Design Challenge
Activity 1: Landmark Mapping Project
Introduction
Conversation:
In this activity, students will design a sustainable city that is
tailored to the unique characteristics of a specific climatic
Can you explain how your sustainable city design
region.
addresses the specific environmental challenges
of your assigned climatic region?
Development (Whole Class Activity): Begin by showing
What renewable energy sources did you
students a video or presentation
incorporate into your city design, and why are
(https://www.canva.com/design/DAGJ7uXITWE/na693
they suitable for the climatic region you were
IWY1dMiUyxzJyaUMw/view?utm_content=DAGJ7uXIT
assigned?
WE&utm_campaign=designshare&utm_medium=link&ut
m_source=editor) on sustainable city design principles,
59
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Observation: such as renewable energy, water management, and green
Are the students actively collaborating and spaces.
discussing the climatic challenges and sustainable
solutions within their groups? Small Group Activity: Divide the class into small groups
Do the students use the online research tools and assign each group a different climatic region (e.g.,
effectively to gather relevant information about tropical, temperate, polar). Using online resources and
their assigned region? educational platforms like Quizlet or Boom Cards, have
the groups research the specific climate, natural resources,
Product: and environmental challenges of their assigned region.
Did the students create a detailed and visually Individual Task: Provide students with a design challenge
appealing design of their sustainable city that to create a sustainable city that is tailored to the unique
includes key elements such as renewable energy, characteristics of their assigned region. Encourage them to
water management, and green spaces? use their research and the sustainable design principles
Are the students' presentations comprehensive, they learned about earlier. Students can use online tools
well-organized, and do they clearly explain how like Peardeck or Facile Jeopardy to present their designs.
their design addresses the unique characteristics
of their assigned climatic region? Conclusion
Have each group present their sustainable city design to
the class, explaining how it addresses the advantages and
disadvantages of living in their assigned region. Facilitate a
discussion on the similarities and differences between the
various designs and how they can be applied in the real
world.
Materials
Video or presentation on sustainable city design principles
Quizlet or Boom Cards for group research
Online design tools (e.g., Peardeck, Facile Jeopardy)
Design materials (e.g., paper, pencils, craft supplies)
6-ST-V-3-Appreciate that the major region s
each have unique features that help determAincet ivity 1: Economic Impact Analysis
how people live there Activity 1: Economic Impact Analysis
Observation:
60
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
How does the landmark your group researched Students will analyse the economic impact of familiar
contribute to the local economy in terms of landmarks in the Caribbean region using data analysis and
tourism revenue and job creation? critical thinking skills.
What are the key differences in economic impact
between the landmark your group researched Preparation:
and another landmark presented by a different - Gather information and statistics about the economic
group? contributions of familiar landmarks in the Caribbean, such
as tourism revenue, job creation, and infrastructure
Conversation: development.
Are the students effectively collaborating and - Create worksheets or digital presentations with graphs,
discussing the economic data related to their charts, and tables to visualize the economic data.
assigned landmark within their groups? - Provide access to online learning apps like Quizlet or
Do the students utilize the provided data and Kahoot for interactive quizzes.
resources to analyse and draw conclusions about
the economic impact of their landmark?
Activity Steps:
Product: a. Begin with a read-aloud of an article or case study
Did the students create a comprehensive analysis about the economic importance of landmarks in the
of the economic impact of their assigned Caribbean region, highlighting their role in driving
landmark, including well-organized graphs, tourism, supporting local businesses, and creating
charts, and tables? employment opportunities.
Are the students' presentations clear and b. Divide students into small groups and assign each
detailed, effectively communicating their group a different landmark to research its economic
findings and demonstrating a strong impact.
understanding of the economic importance of c. Instruct students to analyse the data provided and
their landmark? answer questions related to the landmark's contribution to
the local economy.
d. Facilitate a class discussion where groups present their
findings and discuss the similarities and differences in the
economic impact of different landmarks.
e. Use online learning apps like Kahoot or Quizlet to
review key concepts and reinforce learning outcomes
through an interactive quiz.
61
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Strand (Topic): Spatial Thinking: Extreme Climatic Conditions
Essential Learning Outcomes: To appreciate that the Caribbean has a diverse geography that poses challenges and opportunities
Grade Level Expectations:
1. Describe the extreme climatic conditions of these regions and explain how they are managed- (e.g. snow, windstorms, tsunamis)
2. Analyse the impact of extreme climatic conditions on people and their environment
3. Appreciate that extreme climatic conditions have led to significant adaptations in the use of technology for securing food, shelter, clothing,
and transportation.
Focus Question:
1. How do severe climatic conditions impact the lives of people?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Weather News Report Weather News Report
Conversation: The lesson will begin with students listening to a weather news
6-ST-K-4-Describe the extreme Are students able to identify answer questions report to introduce the concept of extreme climatic conditions.
climatic conditions of these regions based on the information provided in the https://youtu.be/bZexrDWDWu4?si=F1DCsf1CA_RkMuL
and explain how they are managed- o
(e.g. snow, windstorms, tsunamis). After listening to the news report, students will be asked the
following questions:
1. What two extreme weather conditions were mentioned in the
news report?
2. What countries would be experiencing these extreme
weather conditions?
3. What climatic regions are these extreme weather conditions
expected to occur.
62
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Climatic Regions and Extreme Weather Climatic Regions and Extreme Climatic Conditions
Conditions Students will then engage in a discussion to understand that
Conversation: based on the climatic region, different extreme climatic
Are students able to identify the extreme conditions can be experienced. The teacher will ask students
weather conditions? the following questions:
Are students able to describe the extreme 1. Do you believe we will experience a snowstorm in the
climatic conditions? Caribbean? Why or why not?
Are students able to identify the extreme 2. Do you think that people from Antarctica can experience a
weather conditions based on the climatic heatwave? Why or why not?
region? Students will then view a series of short videos describing
each of the extreme climatic condition. After viewing the
video, students will be questioned to describe the climatic
condition and to state which climatic region would most likely
Creating a Table experience these severe climatic conditions. Students will be
Product encouraged to justify and provide reasoning for their
Are students able to correctly complete a table responses.
highlighting the extreme climatic conditions
for each climatic region? Hurricanes:
https://youtu.be/wSXvcveNSTQ?si=jaPnTKvNsx67ttAK
Tsunamis:
https://youtu.be/foxww-tMoNg?si=1zuLcAuyhyUAX5xW
Blizzard:
https://youtu.be/BpBtRmTmbqQ?si=Wf-pULoZx0Z0sgVy
Heatwave:
https://youtu.be/OT_og-OCdXw?si=E5Ay-tf3BhHFPRqq
Flooding:
https://youtu.be/EeVu-6dAF-
o?si=yL5CRRHPTzAhBMOM
63
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Drought:
Creating a Table
Students will then create a table highlighting the climatic
region and the extreme climatic condition associated with
each.
Tropical Temperate Polar
Region Region Region
Writing a Weather News Report Writing a Weather News Report
Product: Having learnt about the extreme climatic conditions, students
Are students able to write a weather report will select one of them and write a weather report. In the report,
correctly describing the climatic condition and students must include the following:
the climatic region in which it was 1. Description of the climatic condition
experienced? 2. The climatic region in which it is experienced.
3. The continent and country it was experienced.
Managing Extreme Climatic Conditions Managing Extreme Climatic Conditions (Group Work)
(Group Work) Place students in mixed ability groups. Each group will be
Observation: assigned an extreme climatic condition. Students will be given
Are students able to collaboratively work in a scenario to which they must discuss how this climatic
their respective groups? condition can be managed.
Conversation: Research
Are students able to discuss ways climatic
conditions can be managed? In the same groups, students will engage in the jig saw method
Research to research how the different climatic conditions can be
managed. Students will use the jigsaw method to complete this
Observation: activity. Each student in a group becomes an expert on a
different part of the topic and then teaches it to their group
members. Assign each student a specific extreme climatic
64
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Are students able to carry out research to condition (e.g., hurricanes, tsunamis, snowstorms, and
retrieve relevant information in relation to heatwaves). They will research their topic and then share their
managing extreme climatic conditions? knowledge with their group, so everyone learns about all the
conditions.
Developing Survival Guide/ Kit
Developing Survival Guide/ Kit Based on the information obtained from the research, students
Product will create a survival guide for managing one of the extreme
Are students able to create a survival guide climatic conditions. Students can create their survival guide in
which highlights important ways one can the following suggested ways:
manage the selected severe climatic condition? - A brochure
- A video informational
- A comic book
- A poster
- A song
Depending on the selected activity, students work can be
shared on the school’s social media platforms or distributed to
students and community members.
Students can also be given the opportunity to put together a
survival kit for their selected climatic condition.
6-ST-S-4- Analyse the impact of Analysing Case Studies
extreme climatic conditions on Observation: Analysing Case Studies
people and their environment Are students able to work collaboratively in Students in their same groups will engage in analysing case
groups to analyse the case study on the impact studies to identify the impact of extreme climatic condition
of severe climatic conditions? people and the environment. Each group will be given a
different case study. After they have analysed, students will
Are students able to identify the impact of write a short report on the impact of extreme climatic
severe weather conditions on people and the conditions which will be presented to the class.
environment based on the information
provided in the case study? Examples of Case Studies
Are students able to report to the class their Heatwaves
analysis of the case studies? In the summer of 2023, the town of Castries, St. Lucia along
with much of the Caribbean islands experienced an extreme
65
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
heatwave with temperatures soaring above 40°C (104°F). This
intense heat caused a range of problems for both people and
the environment. Many residents, like Mr. Thompson,
suffered from heat exhaustion and needed to rest in cool
places and stay hydrated. Vulnerable populations, including
the elderly, faced significant health risks, prompting extra care
and monitoring. The heatwave also led to power outages due
to the high demand for air conditioning, and schools adjusted
their schedules or closed early to protect students and staff.
Water shortages from WASCO became a concern as many
communities leading to restrictions on water usage. The
environment also suffered; nearby forests experienced
wildfires, and local farmers saw their crops wilt and die,
affecting food supplies and livelihoods. Rivers had reduced
water levels, impacting fish and other aquatic life, while plants
in parks and gardens turned brown and died. In response,
laws were enforced for the usage of water for different
activities. Families took measures to stay cool, such as closing
curtains and using fans, and everyone made sure to stay
hydrated.
Blizzard/Snowstorm
In the winter of 2023, the town of Frostville experienced an
intense blizzard, bringing heavy snowfall, icy winds, and
plummeting temperatures. This severe snowstorm caused
significant disruptions and challenges for both residents and
the environment. Many people struggled with the cold, and
incidents of frostbite and hypothermia increased, especially
among those without adequate heating. The elderly and those
with pre-existing health conditions were particularly at risk,
requiring extra care and attention. Daily life was severely
disrupted as schools and businesses closed, and transportation
came to a halt due to snow-covered roads and railways. Power
outages occurred frequently as heavy snow and ice weighed
66
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
down power lines and trees, leaving many homes without
electricity and heating. The blizzard also led to water supply
issues as frozen pipes burst, causing water shortages and
damage to property.
The environment in Frostville was also heavily impacted.
Wildlife faced food and shelter shortages, and many animals
struggled to survive the extreme cold. Local farmers had to
take special measures to protect their livestock from the harsh
conditions, often moving animals indoors and providing extra
feed and bedding. The blizzard also caused damage to forests
and landscapes as the weight of the snow broke branches and
uprooted trees.
Tsunamis
In 2023, the coastal town of Seaview experienced a
devastating tsunami triggered by a powerful underwater
earthquake. This massive wave struck with little warning,
causing widespread destruction and significant challenges for
both the residents and the environment. Many homes and
buildings were swept away by the force of the water, leaving
countless people homeless and in need of urgent assistance.
The immediate impact included injuries and fatalities, with
many people suffering from trauma and shock. The local
hospital was overwhelmed with patients needing medical
attention for cuts, fractures, and other injuries sustained
during the tsunami. Daily life was severely disrupted as
infrastructure was destroyed. Roads, bridges, and public
utilities like electricity and water supply systems were heavily
damaged, making it difficult for emergency services to reach
affected areas. Schools and businesses were forced to close,
and communication networks were down, isolating
communities and complicating rescue efforts. The tsunami
also led to severe contamination of freshwater supplies, as
saltwater and debris polluted rivers and groundwater sources,
67
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
creating a dire need for clean drinking water. The
environment in Seaview was profoundly affected. Coastal
ecosystems, including coral reefs and mangroves, were
damaged or destroyed, affecting marine life and local fisheries.
Agricultural land was inundated with saltwater, making it
difficult to grow crops and affecting food supply for the
region. Wildlife habitats were also disrupted, displacing
animals and leading to an imbalance in the ecosystem.
Discussing the Impact of Severe Climatic Discussing the Impact of Severe Climatic Conditions
Conditions Students will engage in a whole class discussion with probes
Conversation: from the teacher. Example:
Are students able to identify and discuss the Are the impacts of the climactic conditions reversible?
impact of severe climatic conditions? Can they be prevented?
Can they be minimized?
Are they practices that can be followed to minimize the
impact of these severe climatic conditions?
Students will share their viewpoints with the class.
Interactive Simulation Game Interactive Simulation Game
Observation: Extreme Weather (nationalgeographic.org)
Are students able to correctly navigate through Students will use this digital tool which allows them to
the simulation game? navigate through severe weather and make decisions based on
a given scenario.
Are students able to apply their knowledge on
extreme weather conditions to complete the
game?
6-ST-V-4-Appreciate that extreme Problem Solving Approach Problem Solving Approach
climatic conditions have led to Observation Using the information learnt on severe climatic conditions
significant adaptations in the use of Are students able to work collaboratively to and its impact, students will work in groups to brainstorm,
technology for securing food, identify possible solutions to severe climatic design, and build a model of a solution to mitigate or adapt to
shelter, clothing, and transportation conditions? this condition.
68
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product Steps:
Are students able to create a model or 1. Introduction and Research
solutions which can adapt to or mitigate the ● Begin with a discussion to review the
impact of severe climatic conditions? different severe climatic conditions (e.g.,
heatwaves, blizzards, tsunamis, hurricanes).
● Assign each group a different climatic
condition to research. Groups should focus
on understanding the problems caused by
their assigned condition.
2. Problem Identification
Each group will present the problems caused by their climatic
condition. For example:
● Heatwaves: Health risks, water
shortages, power outages.
● Blizzards: Transportation issues,
power outages, frostbite.
● Tsunamis: Flooding, destruction of
buildings, loss of life.
● Hurricanes: Wind damage,
flooding, power outages.
● Discuss and list potential solutions for these
problems.
3. Brainstorming Solutions
● Each group will brainstorm potential
solutions to mitigate or adapt to their
assigned climatic condition. Encourage
creative thinking and multiple ideas.
● Have each group select one solution to focus
on. For instance:
● Designing a cooling shelter for
heatwaves.
● Creating an emergency kit for
blizzards.
● Building a tsunami evacuation route.
69
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Reinforcing buildings to withstand
hurricanes.
4. Design and Planning
● Groups will sketch their solution on graph
paper, including measurements and materials
needed.
● They will create a step-by-step plan to build
their model.
5. Building the Model
● Students will use the materials provided to
build a model of their solution.
● Encourage them to test and modify their
designs as they build.
6. Presentation and Evaluation
● Each group will present their model to the
class, explaining how it addresses the
problems caused by the climatic condition.
● The class can ask questions and provide
feedback.
● Optionally, models can be tested in a
simulated environment (e.g., using fans for
wind, water for flooding).
7. Reflection and Discussion
● Discuss what students learned from the
activity.
● Encourage students to think about how they
can use these skills in future projects.
70
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Civic Participation
Introduction to the Strand: In this strand students will explore the ways that the Eastern Caribbean is connected to and participates in many international
organizations. Students will also develop their capacity to interpret, understand, analyze and use social media as part of their connections with the wider
world. They will examine the benefits and challenges of international participation especially as it relates to addressing the social issues facing the region..
They will see the importance of these organizations for creating a safe and prosperous society and recognize that global interdependence for the Eastern
Caribbean is important.
Strand (Topic): Civic Participation: Our National Identities
Essential Learning Outcome: To appreciate that complex global problems require international cooperation to make choices for the future
Grade Level Expectations:
1. Demonstrate understanding of factors which influence our national identity
2. Research an aspect of our national identity to show how it is influenced
3. Appreciate the diverse ways that citizens demonstrate pride for their national identity
Focus Questions:
1. What is the national identity?
2. What key elements contribute to the national identity of a country?
3. How can citizens demonstrate pride for their national identity?
71
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Conversation: are students able to identify the Introduction:
national symbols that form our national identity
6 CP -K-1- Demonstrate understanding Students stand and sing the first stanza of the National
from the video?
of factors which influence our national Anthem. Afterwards ask:
identity
• How do you feel singing the anthem?
Observation: Can students identify the national
symbols that form our national identity?
• Why do you think we have a national anthem?
6 CP -S-1- Research an aspect of our
national identity to show how it is Observation: Are students able to give
• Why do people stand at attention when signing
influenced appropriate answers for each task?
the national anthem?
write on the board important concepts from the
6- CP -V-1- Appreciate the diverse ways
discussion e.g. national pride, national identity, respect,
that citizens demonstrate pride for their Product: Are students able to make oral
identity, unity
national identity presentations?
The teacher tells students the lesson will focus on National
Identity. The class brainstorms the meaning of national
Observation: Were students able to get
identity. The definition is written on the board or a
appropriate pictures for their collage?
sentence strip.
Class discussion-think pair share:
In pairs, students discuss: What other things make up our
national identity?
Observation: Are students able to research the
aspects of their national identity As pairs share their ideas, record on the board. Using a
table guide students to group their responses under the
following hearing: national symbols, culture, language,
72
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Observation: Can students create the poster history, anthem, geography. (assist students with any
individually to show correct information? element that was missed)
Discovery learning: Group students then give the group
a heading:
Conversation: Are students able to interact with
Symbol
the resource person and ask questions about
national pride? History
Culture
Observation: Are students able to discuss what Geography
makes them proud to be a part of their country?
Language
Religion
Product: Are students able to provide the
necessary information for sharing? political systems
Observation: Are students able to write Each group will be given a task to research. Students will
paragraphs, and create a jingle or poem PowerPoint, poster, brochure and role-play
expressing themselves about national pride?
:
Culture: Name the festivals of their country that reflect
our cultural diversity.
National Symbols: name the national symbol and explain
what aspect of our national identity they represent.
Language: What is the origin of the language(s) of the
country and how do they form your national identity?
73
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
History: Share stories of freedom fighters and their
impact on our national identity
Geography: Discuss how the diverse landscapes influence
identities.
Current Events: Name sportsmen and women who
showcase national unity.
Globalization: Does globalization impact our national
identity?
Political Systems: What is the role of the Prime Minister
in shaping our identity?
Oral Presentation: The group will present their work.
Each student shared one new thing they learned about
national identity and how it relates to their life.
Game: Truth or Lie. Statements are read about national
identity and students say whether it is a truth or a lie.
E.g. National identity is about one aspect of culture.
Heroes who fought for the freedom of a country
helped to form a country’s national identity.
Exit ticket: students write down one new thing they
learned about national identity and one question they still
have.
74
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Creative Writing: Students write an essay on The
Importance of National Identity
Individual project: Students will create a poster or a
digital presentation about their assigned national symbol.
They must include:
A visual representation of the symbol.
A brief history of the symbol.
Explanation of how it influences national identity.
Resource person and discussion: The teacher invites a
prominent person from the community to discuss how
he/she contributed to the island, and what it is to be a
proud citizen of the country. How as citizens we can show
our national pride. Students are encouraged to ask
questions.
Class Discussion-think pair share
Question: "What makes you proud to be a citizen of your
country?"
Students turn and talk with a partner for 2-3 minutes to
share their thoughts.
Discuss the concept of national identity and its
importance in connecting individuals to their country.
75
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Introduce various expressions of national pride, providing
examples such as:
Celebrating national holidays (e.g., Independence Day)
Displaying national flags or symbols
Participation in cultural festivals or community events.
Each group will share one example with the class, and we
will create a collective list on the board.
Creative Writing: Write a short paragraph about a
national pride event they would like to attend and explain
why.
Create a jingle or a poem about expressing national pride.
Gallery Walk: Showcase work on social media, or during
Black History Month or any school activity that relates to
the national identity.
Conclusion:
The teacher summarises the lesson by reviewing the key
elements of national identity.
The teacher reinforces that national identity is a shared
sense of pride and belonging that unites the people of a
country.
76
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The teacher encourages students to respect and uphold
the values of their national identity
Additional Resources and Materials
Lab top, construction paper, markers, hard copy/electronic pictures of national bird, tree and flower, real national symbols.
PowerPoint tutorial for children: https://youtu.be/cfhnW3bd064?si=gmcqk993Yge3k01Q
Poster of national symbols
National Identity (youtube.com)
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
National identity is shaped by various factors, including:
1. Cultural Heritage: Shared history, language, traditions, and customs bind individuals and create a sense of belonging. Common historical
experiences or myths play a key role in solidifying national identity.
2. Geography: A country's physical location and landscape can influence how people view themselves, especially in terms of resources, climate, and
relationships with neighbouring nations.
3. Political Systems and Governance: National identity is reinforced through political structures, such as democratic participation, legal systems,
and national symbols like flags, anthems, and monuments, which embody collective values and ideals.
4. Globalization: Increasing interconnectedness and the influence of foreign cultures can sometimes challenge national identity, making people
reassess their cultural values.
5. Historical Context: The impact of historical events (e.g., colonization, independence) on national identity.
These elements form the fabric of national identity, influencing how individuals and groups see their place within their nation.
77
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language arts: Writing poem, song
Science: Natural features,
Art and craft: collage
78
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Strand (Topic): Civic Participation: International Organizations
Essential Learning Outcome: To appreciate that complex global problems require international cooperation to make choices for the future
Grade Level Expectations:
1. Recognize that their country belongs to different international organisations
2. Examine the different international organizations to which their country belongs
3. Appreciate that cooperation is necessary for a country’s Development
Focus Questions:
1. What is an international organisation?
2. How is the country connected to the different international organizations?
3. How can students appreciate the importance of international relations to their country’s development?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Conversation: Are students able to identify Introduction: Students use the world map displayed in the Social
regional and international countries on the Studies corner to identify countries that are regional and
6 CP-K-2 Recognize that their
world map? international.
country belongs to different
international organisations.
Class discussion: Students will engage in a tiered lesson which
Product: Are students through research and
would aid in the identification of the different international
use of previous knowledge derive a definition
organisations that their country is connected to while developing
of the term International Organisation?
an understanding of the term international organization.
79
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The teacher will create a common experience for all students using
a PowerPoint presentation (created by the teacher) or an AI or
6- CP- S-2 - Examine the different Conversation: Are students able to identify
platform (Magic School) that will aid students in gathering
international organizations to the different international organizations that
information to meet the objective.
which their country belongs their country is affiliated with?
6- CP- V-2 - Appreciate that Observation: Are students able to recognize The teacher will then group students based on skill level. Next,
cooperation is necessary for a international organisations aligned to the have students begin working on each tier.
country’s development country after tiered activity.
Tier 1: Research the definition and structure of international
Product: Are students able to make an oral
organisations using articles, videos, and a member of an
presentation based on the information
international organisation if possible.
researched about the international
organisations linked to the country?
(International organization structure has over 30 members from all
over the world, share a common goal)
Conversation: Are students able to
differentiate between the different international
organizations and how they support their
country? Tier 2: Sort the international organisations using cards with the
international organization names and logo linked to the country
from the PowerPoint Presentation. or AI or platform.
Product: Are groups able to complete the
choice board displaying the activities to
differentiate between the international
Tier 3: Students create a song or poem which can be used to
organizations and their contributions to the
recognize international organisations associated with the country.
country?
Game: The teacher plays a game of tic-tac-toe to assess if students
can identify the international organisations coupled with the
80
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Observation: Are students able to complete country. Students will have to orally name the international
the different tasks chosen by them using the organisation selected by the teacher. The teacher uses cards with
choice board? the international organisation logo and name, if the students
correctly identify the international organization students make a
mark on the tic-tac-toe board, if they incorrectly identify the
Observation: Are students able to discuss the international organisation they miss a turn.
importance of cooperation after completing
the choice board?
The teacher can have students use the products they created in tier
3.
Conversation: are students able to discuss the
link between passing the bucket of water and
Internet Research and Group discussion and Oral
cooperation and working together to achieve a
Presentation
common goal?
Find out how the international organizations differ and how they
support the country.
Observation: are students able successfully
a. Similar
complete and fit the puzzle together.
b. Different
Product: Are students able to use knowledge
How are they similar?
acquired to create a brochure on one of the
international organizations that support the How are they different?
country?
What support is given to the country by the international organization?
81
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Teacher creates a choice board for groups to comprehend and
critically assess the difference between the distinct international
organizations and how they support the country.
Choice Board: International Organizations Supporting St.
Kitts and Nevis
Assignment Description
Title
Create a Piece of Draw or paint a picture that represents how PAHO and
Art the World Bank help St. Kitts and Nevis.
Write a Short Write a short essay explaining the roles of PAHO and
Essay the World Bank in your own words.
Matching Game Create a matching game with terms and definitions
related to PAHO and the World Bank.
Article Summary Read a short article about these organizations and write a
summary of what you learned.
Video Make a short video explaining how PAHO and the
Presentation World Bank support St. Kitts and Nevis.
82
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Crossword Puzzle Design a crossword puzzle using key terms related to
PAHO and the World Bank.
Group Discussion Organize a discussion with classmates about the impact
of these organizations on your country.
Infographic Create an infographic that shows the benefits of PAHO
Creation and the World Bank for St. Kitts and Nevis.
Role-Play Activity Act out a scenario where you explain the work of PAHO
and the World Bank to a friend.
The teacher can use exit tickets or think -pair-share to assess
students' understanding of the expectations.
Working together game: passing water to out a fire
Teacher presents a scenario that there is fire at one end of the
room.
Students stand in circle around a class and pass a bucket of water.
The goal is to successfully pass the water to out the fire. the
teacher ask the students the following questions:
83
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
What will happen if the bucket drops and all the water spills?
What will happen if each person successfully passes the bucket?
What will happen if someone is unable to pass the bucket?
What would you do if someone is unable to carry the bucket?
After the game teacher explains that every time the bucket is
passed represents people or countries working together towards
achieving its goals e.g. countries working together through the
WHO to improve health and UNICEF to improve the lives of
children across the world.
If the bucket drops or someone refuses to pass it on represents
what happens when there is no togetherness or cooperation.
Puzzle activity: Students are placed in groups and presented with
a large puzzle piece of their country. Each group selects an
international organisation from a bag. Through discussion and
internet research, the group will write about how the organisation
helps the country. When groups are finished the pieces are fitted
together to show the island and how the international
organisations work together with it towards its development.
Mini-project: The students research and create brochures that
showcase international organizations and how they cooperate to
84
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
contribute to the development of the country. The presentation
should be creative, and colourful and include the national flag of
the island and logos of the organisation.
Conclusion: the teacher emphasises that international cooperation
is important to a country’s development, just like putting together
a puzzle and passing the bucket to out the fire.
Emphasised that international organisations work together with
other countries to make sure they develop and succeed
Additional Resources and Materials
Laptop, construction paper, markers, hard copy/electronic pictures of national bird, tree and flower, real national symbols.
PowerPoints Presentation Here are some resources you can use to help students with their assignments related to international organizations, specifically
PAHO (Pan American Health Organization) and the World Bank:
Online Resources
1. PAHO Official Website
o Link: PAHO Website
o Description: Provides comprehensive information about PAHO’s mission, initiatives, and resources related to health in the Americas.
2. World Bank Official Website
o Link: World Bank Website
85
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
o Description: Offers insights into the World Bank’s projects, research, and resources that support development in various countries,
including St. Kitts and Nevis.
3. UNESCO - International Organizations Overview
Link: UNESCO
o Description: Provides information on various international organizations and their role in global development and education.
4. Article Database (e.g., JSTOR, Google Scholar)
o Link: Google Scholar
o Description: Access scholarly articles related to the impact of international organizations on health and development.
5. UNICEF
6. IMF
7. Books and Articles
Books on International Organizations
o Look for books in your school library that cover international organizations, global health, or economic development topics. Titles may include
"The Role of the World Bank in Health" or "International Health Organizations."
News Articles
o Use reputable news websites (e.g., BBC, CNN, The Guardian) to find recent articles discussing PAHO and the World Bank's work in the
Caribbean.
8. Multimedia Resources
o YouTube
Search for videos that explain PAHO and the World Bank’s functions and their impact on countries. Some educational channels may have concise
content suitable for 6th graders.
86
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
o Podcasts
Look for podcasts that discuss health and development topics, featuring episodes on PAHO and the World Bank.
9. Creative Tools
o Canva
Link: Canva
Description: A user-friendly design tool that students can use to create infographics, posters, and other visual presentations.
o Quizlet
Link: Quizlet
Description: Students can create flashcards and games to help reinforce their understanding of key terms and concepts related to PAHO and the
World Bank.
Discussion and Collaboration
10. Classroom Forums (Google Classroom, Edmodo)
Create a space where students can ask questions, share resources, and discuss their findings with their classmates.
11. Group Work Guidelines
Provide students with guidelines on how to effectively collaborate in groups for their discussion or role-play activities.
By integrating these resources, you can support students' understanding and help them complete their assignments effectively.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language arts: Writing poem, song
Science: Natural features, special features of bird, tree and flower
Art and craft: collage
87
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Strand (Topic): Civic Participation: Social Issues
Essential Learning Outcome: To appreciate that complex global problems require international cooperation to make choices for the future
Grade Level Expectations:
1. Identify the major social issues in the Eastern Caribbean and the nearby world.
2. Examine why these issues occur, how they can be solved, how they affect us in the Eastern Caribbean
3. Appreciate that people have differing views on how to address social issues
Focus questions:
1. What are the major social issues currently affecting the Eastern Caribbean, and how do they impact our daily lives?
2. Why do these social issues occur, and what can be done to address them both locally and globally?
3. How can different perspectives on social issues lead to a deeper understanding of the best ways to solve them?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Observation: Can students recognize and list Pair Work: Arrange students in small groups to observe
major social issues? different media (pictures, newspaper clipping, and news video
6-CP-K-3-Identify the major social issues
Conversation: Can students explain which issue clipping) that depict social issues present on a social issue (e.g.,
in the Eastern Caribbean and the nearby
they think is most important and why? climate change, poverty, migration).
world.
Product: Students create a poster on one social OR
6-CP-S-3-Examine why these issues
issue.
occur, how they can be solved, how they Social Issues Gallery Walk: Create stations around the
affect us in the Eastern Caribbean Observation: Are students able to make classroom, each representing a different social issue (e.g.,
connections between causes and effects of social climate change, inequality). Students rotate and discuss each
issues? issue in small groups, recording their observations.
88
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Conversation: Can students articulate the root
causes of these issues and propose solutions?
6-CP-V-3- Appreciate that people have Product: Are students able to write and perform Whole Class: Initiate a discussion by having the groups share
differing views on how to address social a short drama that illustrates the cause, effects, their observations on the social issues that confront the Eastern
issues. and solutions to a chosen issue. Caribbean. Provide more information for discussion using a
PowerPoint presentation on social issues in the Eastern
Caribbean.
Observation: Do students acknowledge that
there are different viewpoints on solutions?
Conversation: Are students able to facilitate Individual Project: Interactive Infographics: Students create
debates or panel discussions where students infographics illustrating key statistics and information about
share their opinions on how to address various social issues in the Caribbean.
social issues?
Product: Can students create a blog post or
video expressing their personal views on a social Role-play: News Report Simulation: Students work in pairs
issue and responding to differing perspectives. or small groups to research a current social issue and then
simulate a live news report, role-playing as journalists and field
reporters.
Group Work (Socio drama): Role-play: Place students in
small groups to write short skits to dramatize scenarios of social
issues and their solutions. Each group presents a different issue
and possible resolution to the class.
Whole Class: Problem-Solution Mapping: Guide the class to
create a large mind map on chart paper, starting with a social
issue in the center and branching out into causes, effects, and
possible solutions.
89
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Group Case Study Analysis: Present real-world case studies of
social issues (e.g., natural disasters, economic inequality) in the
Eastern Caribbean. Students work in groups to analyze the
causes and brainstorm solutions, then present their findings to
the class.
Opinion Poll Project: Students design a survey or opinion poll
about a social issue and conduct interviews with classmates,
teachers, or community members to gather differing
perspectives. Afterward, they analyze and present the results to
the class.
Class Debate: Host a classroom debate on a specific social
issue, with students divided into teams representing different
viewpoints.
Alternatively, students can create blogs or video diaries
discussing the issues and possible solutions, while addressing
opposing views.
90
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Strand (Topic): Civic Participation: International Cooperation
Essential Learning Outcome: To appreciate that complex global problems require international cooperation to make choices for the future
Grade Level Expectations:
1. Discuss how different international organizations work to address social issues (WHO,FAO,IOM,UNICEF)
2. Categorize the advantages and disadvantages of being a member of an international organization
3. Appreciate the ways in which citizens of the Eastern Caribbean cooperate to do things for the country
Focus questions:
1. How can different organizations work to address social issues (WHO, FAO,IOM, UNICEF)
2. What are the advantages and disadvantages of being a member of an international organization?
3. How can citizens of the Eastern Caribbean cooperate to do things for the country?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to : Product Introduction: Review, Discussion & Group
work/Presentation
Are students able to write what meaning of the
6-CP-K-4-Discuss how different acronym for (WHO, FAO, IOM & UNICEF)? Review Game
international organizations work to
address social issues
Write the acronyms WHO, FAO, IOM & UNICEF on
(WHO,FAO,IOM,UNICEF) Conversation flashcards. Give students the opportunity to write what each of
the acronym means on their books. Allow students to check the
Are students able to discuss how different answers. Give prizes to the students who completed the activity
organizations work to address social issues? first with the most correct answers.
6-CP-S-4 S-Categorize the
advantages and disadvantages of
91
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
being a member of an international
organization
Group work/Discussion/Oral Presentation
6-CP-V-4 -Appreciate the ways in
Conversation In a box place the various acronyms and allow students to select
which citizens of the Eastern
one. Then allow students to join the groups based on the
Caribbean cooperate to do things for Are students able to analyze real-world examples
international organization they selected. Each group will then
the country. to understand how international organizations
use their tablets, handouts or resource books to research on the
function?
international organization they selected. The groups will hold
discussion on how the various organizations work to address
Product social issues based on their research.
Are students able to create a T chart to identify
and write the advantages and disadvantages of
Oral Presentation
being a members of an international
organization? After the research the groups will select one member who will
then present the information on how the organizations address
social issues.
Product
At the end of each group presentation other members of the
Are students able to debate the various groups can pose questions about the organizations presented.
perspectives on the advantages and
disadvantages of being a member of an
international organization? Case study/Group work/Discussion
Place students into small groups and assign students case
studies of real events, such as: WHO’s role during the COVID-
Product
19 pandemic or FAO’s work in addressing world hunger.
Are students’ able work in groups to Students will analyze ,discuss and present how being a member
demonstrate ways in which citizens of the of an international organization helped or hindered a country's
Eastern Caribbean can cooperate to do things response to the issue, focusing on both the pros and cons
for the country?
92
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Chart Creation/Individual Seat Work
Product Provide students with a worksheet that has a T-chart labeled
“Advantages” on one side and “Disadvantages” on the other.
Are students able to write a piece to show
Have students research to fill out both sides with examples
appreciation to the ways in which citizens of the
from different international organizations. Then, each student
Eastern Caribbean work together to do things
can present one advantage and one disadvantage of their
for the various countries?
findings to the class.
Debate
Split the class into two groups. One group will argue for the
benefits of joining international organizations (e.g., access to
resources, Collaboration &partnership cooperation), while the
other will argue the downsides (e.g., loss of sovereignty,
financial obligations). Students can use real-world examples to
support their arguments.
Journal Writing
Have students write their thoughts about the debate and what
they have learnt.
Group Project
Divide students into small groups, each representing a different
country in the Eastern Caribbean (e.g., Grenada, St. Lucia, St.
Vincent, Barbados, etc.).
Assign each group a key area that will need cooperation (e.g.,
disaster preparedness, education, regional sports, trade, culture,
and tourism).
93
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Students will research how their assigned country cooperates
with other Eastern Caribbean nations in that area.
Each group creates a presentation (using posters, slides, or a
short skit) to show how their country contributes to regional
cooperation, emphasizing the benefits.
Example: Students could focus on how Caribbean countries
help each other after hurricanes or how they participate in
regional events like CARICOM or the OECS (Organization of
Eastern Caribbean States).
Creative Writing
Have students write a letter of gratitude to a fictional or real
citizen from another Eastern Caribbean country, thanking them
for their contributions to regional efforts.
Topics could include providing aid after a natural disaster,
participating, in cultural exchanges, or competing in regional
sporting events like the Windward Islands Cricket Tournament.
Students must express how the actions of these citizens help
strengthen relationships between Caribbean nations.
Example: A letter from a Grenadian student to a St. Lucian
farmer who helped supply food after a hurricane, or a letter to a
Vincentian athlete who inspired unity during a regional sporting
event.
94
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Laptop, Bluetooth speaker, tablets, chart paper, easel, musical instruments, local poems, patriotic songs, copy paper, construction paper, crayons, acrylic
paint, markers, glue, scissors
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language - students will get the opportunity to view, speak, listen, read and write
Mathematics and Science - Students will get the opportunity to investigate, record information and report findings
Art work - Students will get the opportunity to express themselves creatively through music/movement, poetry and art/craft
95
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Strand (Topic): Civic Participation: The Electoral Process and Democratic Rights
Essential Learning Outcomes: To appreciate that complex global problems require international cooperation to make choices for the future
Grade Level Expectations:
1. Examine the role of citizens in the electoral process.
2. Discuss the importance of participating in the electoral process as part of peoples’ democratic rights.
3. Value the importance of respecting persons democratic rights
Focus questions:
1. Why is it important for citizens to vote in an election?
2. Why is it important for citizens to educate themselves before participating in the electoral process?
3. How does voting protect people’s democratic rights?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Conversation Introduction
6-CP-K-5- Examine the role of citizens in Are students able to highlight how their vote Begin the lesson by asking students, "What if you had the
the electoral process. influenced the outcome of the class vote? power to choose what happens in our classroom? Would you
participate?" Engage them in a quick class vote on a fun
topic, such as which reward they can have for meeting
6-CP-S-5- Discuss the importance of
Observation expectations for the week. Once the vote is completed,
participating in the electoral process as
discuss how their decisions influenced the outcome.
part of peoples’ democratic rights. Can students listen attentively and demonstrate an
awareness of the term citizen participation?
6-CP-V-5-Value the importance of Discussion
respecting person’s democratic rights.
Introduce the topic of citizen participation in the electoral
process, explaining that just like their vote shaped what
96
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Conversation happens in the classroom, citizens' votes shape what
happens in the country. Highlight that voting is a key role of
Are students able to identify different ways in which
citizens in a democracy.
citizens participate in the electoral process?
Can they articulate the importance of each role?
Brainstorming and Discussion
Ask students to brainstorm different ways citizens participate
Product in the electoral process (registering to vote, voting,
campaigning, discussing issues, attending rallies). Then, lead
Can students create a visual presentation depicting a class discussion on the importance of each role.
the role of citizens in the electoral process?
Ask, "How does each action help make sure the election is
fair and reflects what people want?"
Observation
Are students able to attend carefully as the Visual Presentations
registration officer explains and demonstrates some
of the activities involved in the electoral process? Encourage students to create slideshows, videos or
infographics that illustrate the role of citizens in the electoral
process.
Product
Field Trip
After demonstration and explanation, are students
able to participate in a mock election where they Visit a nearby constituency office, where students will learn
may play various roles that citizens play during the about its role of serving the citizens in the electoral process.
electoral process? The registration officer can explain and demonstrate the
process of registering as a voter, finding one’s name on the
voters’ list, ensuring which polling division an individual
Conversation
belongs to, etc.
Can students explain the results of only a few people
being permitted to vote?
97
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Observation Mock Election
Are students able to listen carefully as the teacher Organize a mock election in class where students assume
explains the concept of democratic rights? various roles such as candidates, voters, election officials,
and campaigners, etc. Allow students to go through the
process of registering to vote, attending rallies and listening
Conversation to campaigns, and finally, voting for their preferred
candidates.
Can students justify who should be allowed to vote
and who should not?
Discussion
Ask students to think about how they were able to vote for a
Product particular option during the introduction. Have them share
their thoughts on what would happen if only a few people
Are students able to create a poster depicting the were allowed to share their opinions.
importance of participating in the electoral process?
Then, introduce the topic of democratic rights, emphasizing
that in a democracy, everyone has the right to participate,
Product especially through voting in elections. Explain how voting is
the primary way citizens express their opinions in a
Can students reflect in writing on the importance of
democracy.
voting as part of their democratic rights?
(Briefly present picture below to highlight other democratic
rights and responsibilities.)
Conversation
After looking at the video or slideshow, are students
able to share their opinions respecting others’
democratic rights?
Observation
98
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Are students able to engage with the guest speaker
as he or she shares on respecting others’ democratic
rights?
Product
Can students produce a creative presentation to
express their understanding of the importance of
respecting people’s democratic rights?
Who Should Vote?
Present students with scenarios where different groups of
people are allowed or not allowed to vote (e.g., adults vs.
children, rich vs. poor, men vs. women, prisoners vs. free
citizens). Ask them if everyone should have the right to vote,
and why or why not.
Explain that in a democracy, voting is a right for all adult
citizens, regardless of who they are. It is not a privilege for
only a few but a fundamental right of all.
Poster Making
Divide the class into pairs or small groups. Ask each group
to come up with reasons why participating in the electoral
process (through voting or other means) is important. Have
each group share their reasons, by creating a poster.
99
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Reflection
Ask students to write a short reflection on why they believe
voting is an important part of democratic rights. Encourage
them to think about how their voice can make a difference in
future elections.
Video/Slideshow and Discussion
Present a video or slideshow of various citizens from
different backgrounds exercising their democratic rights
(voting, campaigning, running for elections etc.).
Lead a class discussion on what might happen if people did
not respect each other’s democratic rights. Use prompts
such as:
"What if only certain people were allowed to vote?"
"What if people didn’t accept the results of an election?"
Guest Speaker
Invite a local politician, community leader, or election officer
to speak about how respecting others' democratic rights
ensures fair and peaceful elections.
Creative Presentations
In small groups, students will create artwork, songs
(extempo), poems, or skits that express their understanding
100
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
of the importance of respecting other people's democratic
rights. These can be displayed in the classroom or performed
for the school.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
• The Voting Process - https://education.nationalgeographic.org/resource/resource-library-voting-process/
• Voting for Kids – Why Voting is Important - https://youtu.be/GrG7zBUDiqQ?si=JXNl6D8agjI9UG2d
• Antigua and Barbuda Voting Process - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XNQFkyZFH7o
• The Voting Process- Grenada - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c7m1hPJgys0
• Electoral Process – St. Vincent - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2Xa2zleBdVY
• St. Lucia Elections - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kWyy6UICMlI
Additional Resources and Materials
• Wordwall game on Voting - https://wordwall.net/resource/11012634/social/voting
• Wordwall game on The Democratic Process - https://wordwall.net/resource/21169305/the-democratic-process
101
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Strand (Topic): Civic Participation: Media and Society
Essential Learning Outcome: To appreciate that complex global problems require international cooperation to make choices for the future.
Grade Level Expectations:
1. Explain the role of the media in shaping our views of local and international events
2. Compare and analyze media sources from various countries to determine differing points of view about important events and issues
3. Appreciate that as global citizens we have a responsibility to verify the accuracy of media we consume and to engage responsibly in its use
Focus Questions
1. What are the different types of media organisations?
2. What is the role of the media?
3. Do all media organisations cover news in the same way?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Observation Introduction- Class Discussion
6-CP-K-6- Explain the role of the media Can students look at video and identify media and Students observe on Media
in shaping our views of local and sources of media?
https://youtu.be/t0gSdcUHoMk?si=oFbXpoG7gtbD8Yur
international events
Students discuss the video and identify what is media,
Conversation: Are students able to discuss the different media sources, and the roles or functions of the
different roles of the media? media.
Students are placed into small groups to discuss the role of
media and give examples of each and how each type of
102
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
media will influence our views on what is taking place in the
world.
Product: Are students able to articulate how the • Information: Tells us what’s happening.
media influence our views on what is taking place in
• Education: Helps us learn.
the world
• Entertainment: Makes us have fun.
• Persuasion: Tries to convince us of something.
• Connecting People: Keeps us connected with
others.
Each group will share their class on their discussion.
6-CP-S-6- Compare and analyze media Observation: Are students able to observe and Students observe video on an event from 2 different media
sources from various countries to identify differences in the reporting sources and discuss how each media source portrays the
determine differing points of view about issue, focusing on differences in tone, language, and
important events and issues emphasis.
Conversation: Are students able to discuss the
Students discuss why they think there are differences in the
reasons for media bias and how it affects our point
reporting and the term “Media Bias”
of view?
Students are grouped to discuss these reasons for media bias
• Different Opinions
Product: Are students able to articulate to the
whole class how media bias affects our point of • Who Owns the Media
view?
• Target Audience
• What Sells
103
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Mistakes or Lack of Information
• Cultural Perspectives
Groups share with the class what was discussed in their
groups.
6-CP-V-6- Appreciate that as global Observation: Students look at examples of fake news or misleading media
citizens we have a responsibility to verify stories and discuss how they can be identified as fake or
Are students able to view videos and point out what
the accuracy of the media we consume misleading
makes them fake?
and to engage responsibly in its use
Students discuss and list ways or things that can be done to
Conversation:
verify the accuracy of the news. Such as fact-checking,
Are students able to discuss and come up with ways recognizing reliable sources, and avoiding misinformation.
they can verify a news article?
Students will create a checklist that can be used by others to
Product: become responsible media consumers
Are the students able to create the checklist and the
video?
Students can create a video to encourage others to be
responsible media consumers.
104
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Economic Decision Making
Introduction to the Strand:
This strand explores the regional and international movement of goods, people, and services and how this shapes Caribbean society. Students will examine
their consumer rights and how knowing these rights empowers individuals to handle challenges effectively. Students will also compare some major industries
of the world with those in their country with special attention to the central role and benefits of tourism for their country and region, and evaluate the
opportunities and challenges that tourism presents. Students will also learn the importance of making responsible decisions as consumers for shaping our
economic and social well-being. They will assess the importance of maintaining good relations with the wider world
Strand (Topic): Economic Decision Making: Consumer Rights and Responsibilities
Essential Learning Outcome: Recognize that regional and international movement of goods, people, and services shapes Caribbean society
Grade Level Expectations:
1. Know that as consumers we have rights and responsibilities
2. Plan and develop budgets to guide our consumption
3. Appreciate the value of making responsible decisions as consumers for shaping our economic and social well-being
Focus Questions:
1. What are the basic rights of consumers?
2. What is the difference between consumer rights and responsibilities?
3. How can governments and organisations protect consumer rights?
105
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Product Conversation and Discussion
6-EDM-K- 1- Know that as Can students define consumer rights? Have students share stories about issues they or a family
consumers we have rights and member may have encountered with a product they have
Can students define consumer responsibility?
responsibilities bought.
Can students use their knowledge and experiences to
The general progression of this activity will be based on
define key terms and phrases relating to consumer
students’ experience.
rights and protection?
For example, the discussion may lead to the following:
Can students list, discuss and give practical examples
of consumer rights 1. What was done with the defective product?
2. Impact the defective product or unsatisfactory service
had on the effective running of the household.
3. How they or their parents resolved the issues.
The teacher takes the opportunity during this discussion to
review key terms. (see key terms list)
• The teacher uses the students' stories to introduce
consumer rights and responsibilities.
• Or the teacher uses students’ stories, thoughts and ideas
to compile a list of consumer rights rules.
Anticipation Guides Do You Know Your Consumer Rights?
1. Provide students with scenarios to test their knowledge
and correct misconceptions about consumer rights and
responsibilities.
106
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. Provide students with 4 slips of different coloured
paper.
3. Assign a colour to each word. Students will write the
word in bold print on the appropriate paper. For
Example
4. The teacher tells the students to listen and read the
statement and to decide if they agree or not/ if they are
true or false. Hold up the appropriate card to show
your choice. Then turn to your partner and discuss your
reasoning. (Or the teacher may call a few students per
prompt to discuss their reasoning.)
5. The teacher corrects misconceptions and praises correct
reasons.
6. Suggested prompts for Do You Know Your Consumer
Rights?
a. Do you know there are rules and laws that protect
consumers? Do you know some rules that protect
consumers?
b. My family have a right to choose goods and
services
107
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
c. You must be able to read and understand the label,
especially the ingredients.
d. You can return faulty items.
e. You can return items if you change your mind.
f. You must bring the receipt if you want to return an
item.
g. Customers must have value for their money.
h. You should receive the good or service that is
described in the advertisement and the labelling
i. You must only buy items at the sale price listed.
j. Customers must find out about the product they
are buying.
k. Your family has a right to complain when they get
faulty goods and bad service.
l. The seller must replace faulty goods or refund your
money.
Case scenarios Critical Thinking
For example: Sativa New Pencil Case at
https://www.oppia.org/explore/-XptUZSHPKAV
Videos Consumer Rights and Protection
Small group work/ partner work
108
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Provide with scenarios. Have them analyse the event and
determine the consumer rights highlighted.
Presentation Know Your Consumer Rights
Have students work in mixed-ability small groups. They are to
list four things people should know about their consumer rights.
They should include a practical example for each right. Groups
present their list and examples.
Critical Thinking Prompts
1. Why should customers read the labels and ingredients
of goods?
2. Why is it important for consumers to return expired
food items?
3. Why should consumers complain about faulty goods or
bad service?
4. Why is it important to know the warranty on products
purchased?
Traditional or online Worksheets/ Online games such as Quiziz
The teacher creates worksheets or online games to check
students' understanding.
109
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Can students list, discuss and give practical examples The teacher may choose from these activities.
of consumer responsibilities?
Discussions and Critical Thinking
What are the responsibilities of consumers?
The suggested activity for this question can be modified in many
ways.
1. Classroom Centres
The teacher creates classroom centres each with a consumer
right. She/he prepares cards with consumer responsibility for
each right.
Students stick the consumer responsibility cards on the correct
chart.
The teacher allows students to switch cards if they don't agree
with the placement. The student is to provide the reasoning for
the correction.
The teacher corrects any misconceptions.
Example:
2. Mixed Ability Groups Game
For this activity, the groups and the consumer responsibility
cards are colour-coded.
a. There should be 4 students per group.
110
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
b. The teacher can have the students choose colours. All
the students who got green will form a group. Or the
teacher may assign colours to the children to ensure the
formation of the mixed ability groups.
c. The students who chose the colour green will only get
green cards or cards written in green.
d. They will discuss under which Consumer RIGHT
cards should be placed and quickly stick them in the
correct area or chart. The group that finishes first and
gets 80 per cent plus correct, wins something. The
group that took the time to discuss and gets 80 per cent
plus correct, wins something more valuable. Every
group that gets 80 per cent plus correct, gets a reward.
All groups must be given time to complete the activity.
Other Activities
3. Around the World
4. Online Drag and Drop Worksheets
5. Match These Worksheets
111
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Can students identify the role of government and Research: Using Primary and Secondary Sources of
other affiliated organisations in ensuring the Information
protection of consumer rights?
The teacher can guide students to research the following
Can students identify the resources that are available questions. This may be done as an assignment or as classwork
to consumers to ensure their rights are respected? where the teacher directs and guides students to go online to
find the information. ( See Subject Integration)
Questions:
Does [insert country here] have Consumer Rights legislation?
Is there a Consumer Rights organisation?
Are consumers educated about their rights and responsibilities?
Resource Person
The teacher may bring in a resource person from an affiliated
organisation to talk to the class about consumer rights and
responsibilities.
The teacher may bring in a resource person from a business
place to talk to the class about the measures in place to solve
consumer issues with a product or service.
After the talk students are to complete exit tickets. There are a
variety of creative exit tickets the teacher can use to assess what
students learnt and if the objectives of the lessons were met.
(See Additional Resources and Materials below)
112
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6-EDM-S-1-Plan and develop budgets Can students explain the kinds of information found Flipped Lesson
to guide our consumption on receipts and utility bills?
Since Budgeting was encountered in Grades 3 or 4 teachers
should provide students with a Module on the unit. Students
should be encouraged to read through the unit and complete
Can students explain what a budget is?
activities outlined in the module before active teaching.
Activities may be viewing a video (see Additional Materials) or
an interactive worksheet.
Can students explain what a budget is used for?
Review Viewing and Discussion
Budgeting for Kids
Budgeting for Kids!
The teacher reviews what a budget is and the key terms that go
along with that.
Key terms: needs, wants budget, income, expenses, salary,
savings, debt, interests, debit cards, credit cards Bank accounts:
Saving and checking account, financial statement
Discovery Learning
Students bring a receipt and a utility bill for the lesson. The class
explores the receipt and utility bill.
113
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Worksheets or Exit Tickets.
Use worksheets or exit tickets to ascertain how much students
learned.
Can students plan and create a budget? Synthesis
Synthesising: Provide students with a case scenario (linked to comprehension)
of a family's income and expenditure. Guide students to create a
After learning how to create a budget and making a
budget for the family.
savings plan are students able to put this into
practice? Project: Money Sense
Can students execute a budget? This project involves the parents' complete involvement.
Can pupils explain how budgeting can help people Send a letter home describing the role parents are to play in
avoid getting into debt? such a project.
General points of the project:
Students are to keep a portfolio of expenses and savings for a
particular family outing.
Students are to find out how much money their parent intends
to spend on the outing. Students are to creatively section their
portfolios into the following main sections. More can be added
if the students see fit. Students are to add realia such as ticket
stubs, bands, receipts and pictures to the sections.
Students will answer about three questions to complete the
portfolio.
Example Sections:
Budget: Amount of Money to be spent ___________
114
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Mode of payment: Cash ________ Debit/ credit cards:
_____ Mixed _______
Savings: Amount of Money saved/ We returned
with___________
Travel: My Estimated Cost ________ My Parent’s Estimated
Cost:__________
Actual Cost: ____________
Food: My Estimated Cost ________ My Parent’s Estimated
Cost:__________
Actual Cost: ____________
Entertainment: My Estimated Cost ________ My Parent’s
Estimated Cost:__________
Actual Cost: ____________
Sample Questions:
1. Was your family able to use only the money budgeted
for? If not by how much did they overspend?
2. How did budgeting that particular sum of cash help
your family?
3. If money was saved/left over from the outing what will
it be used for?
115
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6-EDM-V-1-Appreciate the value of Can students identify practices that demonstrate What is the difference between consumer rights and
making responsible decisions as consumers applying their rights? consumer responsibility?
consumers for shaping our economic
Can students differentiate between consumer rights Discussion
and social well-being
and consumer responsibilities?
The teacher may use prior case scenarios such as Sativa’s New
Pencil Case at
https://www.oppia.org/explore/-XptUZSHPKAV
Identify the rights Sativa utilised and the way she went about
doing so.
The teacher expressly notes that Sativa was entitled to
complain* to seek redress. She went about it in a particular way.
The way she did it is an example of consumer responsibility.
The class lists the steps in which she sought redress for her
issue.
1. She identified the issue
2. She informed herself of her rights and the measures in
place to redress.
3. She and her mom came up with a potential solution
4. She clearly explained her issue.
5. She negotiated with the clerk to solve her issue.
Role Play
Students can piggyback on the scenarios given by their
teacher in Strand EDM-K1 or create their own.
116
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1. Students role-play a scenario where they complain
about a product.
2. Students role-play a scenario where they make good
shopping choices.
3. Students can create a scenario based on prompts given
by the teacher. For e.g.
a. The app you paid for is not working or requires a
code which you did not get.
b. You bought a game mod or skin and realise you
have one like it already
c. Your mom paid for Amazon Prime, or Netflix but you
get limited movies and TV show choices.
d. Amazon keeps charging your mom’s/ dad’s card for a
subscription which was cancelled.
e. You tell the hairdresser/barber which hairstyle/ haircut
you want but get something completely different.
f. You do not like the hairstyle/haircut you get? Or the
hairdresser/barber is rough or combs your hair too
tight.
117
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
WHAT ILS IS THIS?
This could be an in-class activity or an assignment.
Create Did You Know cards or brochures to inform people
about their rights as consumers.
Or
Create Shorts in Flip-grid to educate people about their rights
and responsibilities.
Field Trip
Take the class to an area in town where they hand out their
information cards or brochures to passersby. Encourage the
students to explain the point of the activity to anyone willing to
listen.
Summative: Worksheets/ Quiz and Tests
118
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
For example:
119
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Can students identify the cause and effect of Discussion
practices that impact consumer rights and
The class discusses some practices that potentially affect
responsibilities?
consumers. Students are encouraged to give practical examples
where possible of such practices as well as the effects they could
have.
Unfair sales practices
• Make a false or misleading claim about products,
services, and prices.
• Use false or misleading descriptions.
• Use aggressive tactics to influence you.
• Present reviews as genuine without checking they are
not fake.
Use of inferior materials
Exit Tickets
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
CONSUMER RIGHTS:
THE RIGHT TO SAFETY: Be protected against products, manufacturing processes, and services that are a threat to consumer health, life or property.
THE RIGHT TO BE INFORMED: Be able to obtain the information needed to make an informed choice and be protected against dishonest or
misleading advertising, labelling or marketing practices.
120
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
THE RIGHT TO BE HEARD: Be represented in decision-making to ensure that consumer interests are considered. Be able to tell business and
consumer protection organisations of unsatisfactory products and services.
THE RIGHT TO CHOOSE: Be able to choose from a range of good quality products and services that meet consumer needs at fair and competitive
prices.
THE RIGHT TO SATISFACTION OF ESSENTIAL NEEDS AND SERVICES: Have access to essential goods and services: appropriate food,
clothing, housing, health care, education, public utilities, water, and hygiene. To be treated respectfully and courteously.
THE RIGHT TO REDRESS: Be able to have problems resolved; seek justice against exploitation or unfair practices. Receive fair settlement for
substantiated complaints involving compensation for misrepresentation, defective goods, or unsatisfactory services.
THE RIGHT TO CONSUMER EDUCATION: Have access to the knowledge and skills necessary to be informed and to confidently choose goods and
services, while being aware of consumer rights and responsibilities.
THE RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT: To live and work in an environment that does not threaten the well-being of current and future
generations.
CONSUMER RESPONSIBILITIES
CRITICAL AWARENESS: Be informed to better understand the products and services the consumer is using and to question their quality.
ACTION: Defend himself or herself when the consumer's cause is honest and just. The consumer must assert himself or herself and take action to ensure
that he or she obtains a fair deal.
SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY: Be aware of how his or her behaviour can affect others, especially the disadvantaged, at the local, national, or international
level.
ENVIRONMENTAL RESPONSIBILITY: Be sensitive to the potential effects of his or her consumption on the environment by limiting, in particular,
the waste of natural resources and pollution.
SOLIDARITY: Join forces with other consumers to generate enough strength and influence to promote the interests of all.
(https://www.opc.gouv.qc.ca/en/teacher-zone/list-activities/activities/consumer-rights-responsibilities/)
Consumer Rights were developed and instituted to ensure consumers' fair treatment and that they had the information they needed to make informed
decisions about the products and services which they buy.
121
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Consumer awareness is the process of making an individual or consumers aware of their rights and responsibilities when purchasing goods and services.
Awareness is essential for all customers so that they make the right decision and the right choice about the products and services being sold.
Review Key Vocabulary introduced in Grade 3:
Definitions
Consumer: Consumers are people who buy or use goods and services to satisfy their wants.
Traditionally we physically purchase goods and services.
E-commerce is becoming mainstream. More consumers purchase goods and services online. Example On-line tutor and On-line doctors. We can pay bills,
do banking and buy and sell products online via Amazon, Dominica Online, and We Buy Black.
Producer: A producer is a person, company or country that makes, grows or supplies goods and provides services for sale.
Producers work in various sectors of the economy. They make or grow goods.
For example: A farmer grows ground provisions and vegetables. A seamstress makes clothes.
A good is something that is tangible. It is grown or made for our use. For example, food, vehicles, toys, clothes, books, furniture.
Some producers own the land, tools, machinery and the building. They employ other people to work for them. They are called employers. The people who
work in the business are called employees.
Some producers are self-employed. They may own a business or work for themselves.
Other producers provide a service. For example A doctor diagnoses our ailments and may prescribe medication.
A calypsonian creates songs to entertain us.
A service is intangible. It is something someone does for you. For example, a haircut or hairstyle, a bus/plane ride, a dental check-up, or garbage collection.
Income: Earnings (money) from work or investment.
Salary: The money paid for employee services.
122
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Expenditure: the amount of money spent for goods and services.
Budget: A plan for making and spending money
Saving: Not spending your money straight away, but putting it away so you can spend it later.
New definitions:
Consumer rights are a set of laws that entitle consumers to be protected from fraud, unsafe products and harmful practices.
A consumer is anyone who buys and uses goods, services, or products to satisfy their personal needs, wants, or preferences.
Consumers are important in the economic system as they drive demand for goods and services. They influence the production, distribution, and pricing of
goods and services.
Scams:
Manufacturer:
Warranty:
Additional Resources and Materials
Budgeting for Kids!
30 Exit Ticket Ideas and Examples That Give Immediate Feedback
123
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Strand (Topic): Economic Decision Making: Tourism
Essential Learning Outcome: Recognize that regional and international movement of goods, people, and services shapes Caribbean society
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
1. State the benefits derived from tourism for our country
2. Critically assess the opportunities and challenges that tourism faces in our country
3. Appreciate that there are positive and negative effects of tourism on our country
Focus Questions:
1. What are some ways that tourism helps economic growth?
2. How can tourism bring both positive and negative changes to our community?
3. How can communities benefit from tourism without losing their identity or traditions?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Can students define the term tourism? • Field Trips
6-EDM-K-2- state the benefits derived Visit the tourism office or a cruise ship and meet with crew
from tourism for our country Are students able to differentiation among the and learn about the benefits of tourist visits to a country.
different types of tourists
• Concept Map
Does tourism lead to increased revenue and Create a visual map that links the economic, social, and
employment in various sectors of the economy environmental benefits of tourism in their country.
such as tourism?
124
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Can students understand the relationship • Role-playing
between tourism and economic developments -role-play scenarios where tourism affects different
such as infrastructure development and stakeholders, such as hotel owners, local farmers, or taxi
taxations? drivers.
Can students make a distinction of how tourism Students can depict different tourists and act out scenes
can influence their culture?? and have classmates guess the tourist they represent.
Are students able to differentiate among the
different currencies used internationally?
6-EDM-S-2- Critically assess the What are some positive benefits of tourism for • Differentiated Instruction
opportunities and challenges that tourism a country?
Use videos to showcase tourism benefits and challenges in
faces in our country
Are there disadvantages associated with regional your country.
and international tourism?
• Think-Research-Share
Can students identify some environmental
Students research individually on tourism challenges and
impacts of tourism on a country?
opportunities, then discuss their ideas with a partner the pair
How do countries maintain their cultural then present a PowerPoint or a discussion on the
identity with the movement of tourists to and information gathered.
from a country?
Questions:
1. What do you think is the biggest challenge facing
tourism in our country?
2. Do you believe tourists have a negative or positive
impact on your culture?
3. What are some benefits to tourism?
• Collaborative Group Work
125
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Students analyse different aspects of tourism. Each group
could explore a specific challenge or opportunity and share
findings with the class.
Examples: 1. Sustainable tourism
2. The impact of tourism on employment
3. Environmental challenges of tourism.
• Student Interviews
Students develop questions to guide them learn about
tourism and its challenges and country opportunities.
6-EDM-V-2- Appreciate that there are What are the economic benefits of tourism for • Debate
positive and negative effects of tourism the Caribbean region
Organise a debate where students argue for or against the
on our country
Do some islands benefit more than through positive or negative impact of tourism
tourism?
• Student Interviews
Can students highlight the measures taken by
Students interview different tourism stakeholders, such as
the Government to protect natural and cultural
local residents, business owners, tourists, and discuss how
sites visited by tourists?
tourism may impact them both positively and negatively.
In what ways does global competition affect
• Concept Mapping or Mind Maps
the Caribbean tourism industry?
Students organise flow charts or diagrams to show the
positive and negative impacts of tourism on a country and
its environment.
• Poster creation
126
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
In groups of 3-4 students create a poster, brochure or
cartoon to showcase the positive and negative impacts of
tourism on their individual country.
Interactive Games:
( Quizzes & Kahoot)Use online platforms or in-class games
to quiz students on key concepts. Include questions on
tourism's advantages and disadvantages.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Games or Quizzes
Tools like Kahoot, Quizizz, or board games to test students’ knowledge in a fun, low-pressure who may struggle with traditional written assessments and
makes learning enjoyable for all.
127
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Strand (Topic): Economic Decision Making: Sustainable Community Development
Essential Learning Outcome: Recognize that regional and international movement of goods, people, and services shapes Caribbean society
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
1. Recognize the importance of good relations with the wider world
2. Investigate the negative consequences of poor international relations with other countries
3. Appreciate the importance of maintaining positive relations with others in the world
Focus Questions:
1. How do positive international relations benefit countries and individuals?
2. What are the consequences of poor relations between countries?
3. How can countries work together to solve global issues?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Observation: World Cultures Day
6-EDM-K-3-Recognize the Can students understand global relationships Objective: To expose students to global traditions and foster an
importance of good relations with by simulating diplomatic scenarios? appreciation for diverse perspectives.
the wider world
Steps:
(Have the following videos playing on repeat during the exhibition set
up or played before the presentation)
1. What is cultural diversity? | Language Insight
2. Cultural diversity in communication
128
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3. International Culture
1. Arrange a "World Cultures Day" where students bring or prepare
artifacts, food samples, or attire from different cultures.
2. Allow each student or group to share their item with the class,
explaining its significance and cultural background.
3. Facilitate discussions to help students connect similarities and
differences among cultures.
4. Encourage students to ask questions and explore how they relate to
these cultures.
Materials: Culturally diverse items, video content, guest speakers (if
available).
Product: Cultural Storytelling Circle
Can students demonstrate teamwork,
research skills and share stories reflecting
Objective: To encourage students to connect to global perspectives
different cultural perspectives
by sharing stories that reflect cultural values.
129
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Steps: 1. Arrange students in a circle to create a supportive
environment.
2. Provide each student with a prompt related to global perspectives
(e.g., "Share a story about a family tradition" or "Describe a time when
you learned something from another culture").
Or Teacher provide stories of global perspectives.
3. Allow students to take turns telling their stories, encouraging active
listening and respectful feedback from classmates.
4. Discuss the commonalities and differences in the stories shared,
emphasizing cultural appreciation.
Observation: Guest Speakers from Different Cultures
Can students engage respectfully in Objective: To expose students to firsthand perspectives from
discussions about global relationships, individuals of different backgrounds.
showing appreciation for diverse
perspectives?
Steps:
1. Arrange for a guest speaker from a different culture to connect with
students virtually or face to Face.
2. Prepare students with background knowledge and questions in
advance.
130
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3. Facilitate the session, encouraging students to ask questions and
interact respectfully with the speaker.
4. After the session, have students discuss their key takeaways and
reflect on how this new perspective broadens their understanding of
global relations.
Guiding Questions:
Pre-Session Preparation:
1. What do you already know about this culture, and what would
you like to learn more about?
2. What are some aspects of life (e.g., family, school,
celebrations) that you think might be different in the guest
speaker’s culture?
3. Why is it important to learn about and respect different
cultures?
During the Session:
1. Can you describe a typical day in your country or culture?
2. What are some of the traditions, holidays, or festivals
celebrated in your culture? What do they mean to you?
3. How does your culture view things like family, education, or
community?
4. What do you think are some common misconceptions people
have about your culture?
131
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5. How do you think learning about other cultures can help us
in our own lives?
6. What are some similarities you’ve noticed between your
culture and ours?
Post-Session Reflection:
1. What is one new thing you learned about the guest speaker’s
culture that surprised or interested you?
2. How did this session change or expand your understanding of
global relations?
3. What similarities and differences did you notice between the
guest’s culture and your own?
4. Why do you think it’s important to learn about and appreciate
different cultural perspectives?
5. How can this new understanding influence the way you
interact with people from different backgrounds?
Product: Group Portfolio on International News
How to effectively connect students to Steps: 1.Encourage students to watch International news
current global events and develop critical
2. In a portfolio, students analyze and share their perspectives on the
thinking skills?
issues.
3. Encourage students to consider the cultural and international
impact of the event and relate it to their own lives.
132
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Observation: Digital Global Map Exploration
Can students explore the geographical and Steps: 1. Introduce students to an interactive digital map (e.g., Google
cultural diversity of the world through an Earth).
interactive experience?
2. Assign each student a country or region to explore and learn about
its culture, language, and notable landmarks.
3. Have students create a presentation summarizing what they
learned.
4. Facilitate a group discussion where students share their findings,
encouraging questions and comments from peers.
Product: Country Research Projects with a Focus on Peace Efforts
Can students reflect on their growth in Steps: 1. Assign each student a country to research, focusing
empathy, humanitarian awareness, and specifically on its peace and humanitarian contributions.
commitment to global peace?
2. Guide students to explore famous peace figures, treaties, or
initiatives linked to that country.
3. Students create a presentation using tools like PowerPoint,
emphasizing the importance of the selected peace efforts.
4. Host a "Peace Fair" where students present to peers, promoting
peer-to-peer learning on global peace values.
133
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6-EDM-S-3- Investigate the Product: Case Study Exploration
negative consequences of poor
Can students gain an understanding of the Steps: 1. Provide students with a digital case study on a real-world
international relations with other
impact of poor international relations by international conflict (e.g., trade sanctions, environmental disputes).
countries
analyzing real-world conflicts?
History of Israel-Palestine Conflict
The history of the Cuban Missile Crisis - Matthew A. Jordan
2. Guide students to analyze the causes, key players, and impacts on
each country involved.
3. Facilitate a class discussion on lessons that can be learned from
these conflicts.
Conversation: Structured Debate Activity
Steps: 1. Assign students into two groups, each representing different
Can students use critical thinking and have
sides of a conflict scenario.
the ability to articulate arguments on poor
international relations? 2. Provide background resources on the conflict and assign each
group to argue the economic, social, and environmental impacts of the
situation.
3. Facilitate a respectful debate, ensuring students provide evidence
for their arguments and listen to counterpoints.
Scenario:
A country has decided to impose strict trade sanctions on a
neighboring nation due to political disagreements. This neighboring
nation heavily relies on exports to the sanctioning country for its
economic stability. As a result, both countries are experiencing
economic strain: the sanctioned country faces rising unemployment
and shortages of essential goods, while the sanctioning country sees
134
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
increased prices on imported goods and strained diplomatic relations
with its allies.
Debate Topic:
“Should countries impose trade sanctions even if they harm both the sanctioning
nation and the sanctioned nation’s economy and society?”
Group Assignments:
• Group 1: Pro-Sanctions – Argue that trade sanctions are a
necessary measure to promote justice, political stability, or
human rights, despite economic and social impacts.
• Group 2: Anti-Sanctions – Argue that sanctions should not be
imposed because they harm citizens, create economic
hardship, and can escalate tensions without necessarily
achieving intended political goals.
Key Debate Focus Areas:
1. Economic Impact – Discuss how sanctions affect job
markets, prices, and overall economic health in both
countries.
2. Social Impact – Consider the effects on citizens, including
access to essential goods, healthcare, and quality of life.
3. Environmental Impact – Examine any potential
environmental impacts, such as increased pollution if supply
chains change or shift to less eco-friendly practices in
response to the sanctions.
135
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product: Reflection Journaling
Can students express their personal Steps:
reflections on the global impacts of poor
1. Assign students a reflection journal to respond to prompts on how
international relations?
international conflicts affect global citizens.
Step 1: Reflection Journal Prompts
1. Economic Impact (Money and Jobs):
o How do you think conflicts between countries affect people’s
jobs and money?
o If a country relies on trading with others, what might happen to
prices or the availability of products during a conflict?
2. Social Impact (People’s Lives):
o How could people’s daily lives be affected if their country has a
conflict with another?
o Think about food, medicine, school, and safety – how might
these things change?
o What do you think happens when people have to leave their
country because of conflict?
3. Environmental Impact (Nature and Resources):
o How might conflict harm nature, like plants, animals, or
natural resources?
o What happens if countries cannot work together on big
environmental problems, like pollution or climate change?
4. Global Ripple Effects (Effects on Other Countries):
136
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
o If two countries are in conflict, how might other countries be
affected too?
o How do organizations like the United Nations try to help in
these situations, and why is it important?
5. Personal Connection (Your Thoughts):
o Why do you think it’s important to learn about conflicts in
other parts of the world?
o What can people do to try to prevent conflicts and work
together?
2. Guide students to write about the potential impact on economies,
societies, and the environment.
Step 2: Guidance for Reflection Writing
• Encourage Simple Examples: Remind students to use
simple examples, like the effect on jobs, school, and access to
things they need.
• Add Personal Connections: Ask them to think about how
they would feel if their school or town was affected by a
similar issue and write about it.
• Use Clear Sections: Suggest that students organize their
thoughts by writing one paragraph for each prompt, keeping
it focused and clear.
3. Conclude with a group sharing session, allowing students to discuss
their reflections and understand different perspectives.
137
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Group Sharing Session Guide
1. Discussion Starter: Start with a simple question:
o What part of your journal entry did you find most interesting
to write about?
2. Comparing Ideas: Encourage students to share the
examples they wrote about, asking:
o What examples did others write about that you hadn’t thought
of?
3. Building Empathy: Guide students to listen and respond
with questions like:
o How would you feel if you or your family were affected by a
conflict?
o Why do you think it’s important for different countries to work
together to prevent conflicts?
4. Final Reflection: End with a question that emphasizes
teamwork and peace:
o What are some ways people can work together to keep peace
between countries?
138
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product Interactive Map Activity
Steps: 1. Assign each student or group a recent international conflict
Can students’ research and show
and provide them with digital tools like Google Maps to map the
presentation skills by mapping out recent
location and affected areas.
conflicts and their consequences?
2. Students research the conflict’s causes and effects, labeling
significant regions and providing brief descriptions on the map.
3. Host a presentation session where each group presents their
findings and discusses the broader impact of the conflict.
Observation: Diplomacy Simulation
Can students' understand diplomacy as a Steps:
means of resolving international conflicts?
1. Set up a simulation where students role-play as representatives from
different countries in a mock international summit.
2. Each "country" has a specific interest in the conflict and must
negotiate a solution that benefits all parties involved.
3. After the simulation, students reflect on the challenges of diplomacy
and the importance of peaceful negotiations.
139
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Observation: Collaborative Research Project on International Relations
Evaluate teamwork and collaboration skills in Steps: 1. Divide students into groups and assign each a different
group activities related to international international issue with negative relations (e.g., trade embargoes,
relations projects. environmental disputes).
Trade Embargoes on Goods from Country A to Country B
• Example: The United States' trade embargo on Cuba, which
has restricted trade between the two countries for decades,
affecting Cuba's economy and access to certain goods.
Environmental Disputes Over Deforestation
• Example: The Amazon rainforest dispute, where countries are
concerned about Brazil’s deforestation practices and their
impact on climate change, biodiversity, and indigenous
communities.
Water Rights Disputes Between Neighboring Countries
• Example: The Nile River dispute between Egypt and Ethiopia,
where both countries depend on the Nile for water but
disagree on how the water should be used and shared.
Fishing Rights Conflicts in International Waters
• Example: The South China Sea dispute, where countries like
China, Vietnam, and the Philippines disagree over fishing
rights and territory, impacting local fishing industries and
marine life.
Border Disputes and Migration Issues
140
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Example: The border dispute between India and Pakistan in
the Kashmir region, which has led to ongoing tension and
migration issues for people living in the area.
Sanctions on Oil Exports Due to Political Tensions
• Example: Sanctions on Iran’s oil exports by countries like the
United States, which impacts Iran’s economy and the global
oil market, leading to higher prices in some regions.
Disagreements Over Climate Change Responsibilities
• Example: Tensions between developed countries (like the
United States and European nations) and developing
countries (like India and China) on who should bear more
responsibility and costs for reducing greenhouse gas
emissions.
Territorial Disputes Over Islands or Maritime Areas
• Example: The dispute between Japan and China over the
Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands in the East China Sea, which has
caused tension over ownership and resource rights.
Conflict Over Nuclear Weapons Development
• Example: Tensions between North Korea and other countries
(such as the United States and South Korea) due to North
Korea’s nuclear weapons program, leading to international
sanctions and security concerns.
Disputes Over Refugee Policies and Immigration
141
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Example: European Union countries facing disagreements on
how to handle refugees from Syria and other conflict zones,
leading to strain on resources and differing policies.
2. Groups research their topic and create a shared presentation on the
impact of the issue.
3. Students present their findings to the class, followed by a Q&A
session where peers engage with the material.
6-EDM-V-3 -Appreciate the Product: Class Pen Pal Program with Cultural Exchange
importance of maintaining positive
Can students reflect on the value of positive Steps:
relations with others in the world
international relations and their personal role
1. Set up a pen pal exchange program through a secure platform or
in promoting them?
partner school, preferably within the OECS
2. Guide students in writing letters about their culture and asking
questions about their pen pal’s experiences.
3. Facilitate reflection sessions where students discuss what they
learned about global understanding and respect.
142
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Observation: Collaborative Research on Global Cultural Practices
Can students collaborate and respect diverse Steps:
perspectives when exploring different
1. Assign students into groups to research cultural practices in
cultures?
different countries:
Japan:
• Hanami (Cherry Blossom Viewing): Celebrating the
blooming of cherry blossoms with outdoor gatherings and
picnics.
• Tea Ceremony: A traditional ritual focused on the
preparation and presentation of matcha tea.
India:
• Diwali (Festival of Lights): A major Hindu festival
symbolizing the victory of light over darkness.
• Holi (Festival of Colors): Celebrated by throwing colored
powder and water to mark the arrival of spring.
Mexico:
• Día de los Muertos (Day of the Dead): A celebration to
honor and remember deceased loved ones, featuring vibrant
altars and parades.
• Quinceañera: A coming-of-age celebration for a girl’s 15th
birthday.
143
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Brazil:
• Carnival: A famous festival marked by street parades,
elaborate costumes, music, and dancing.
• Capoeira: A Brazilian martial art combining dance,
acrobatics, and music.
China:
• Chinese New Year: The Lunar New Year celebration
includes dragon dances, fireworks, and family feasts.
• Qixi Festival (Chinese Valentine’s Day): Celebrates the
ancient love story of two mythical lovers.
France:
• Bastille Day: A national holiday on July 14 with parades,
fireworks, and celebrations of French heritage.
• Beaujolais Nouveau Day: Celebrating the first wine of the
season with tastings and festivities.
Ghana:
• Homowo Festival: Celebrates the harvest with feasting and
traditional dances.
• Naming Ceremonies: Celebrations to officially name
newborns, deeply rooted in Ghanaian culture.
Australia:
• ANZAC Day: A day of remembrance for Australian and
New Zealand soldiers, featuring dawn services and parades.
144
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Dreamtime Stories: Aboriginal storytelling that conveys
cultural beliefs and the origins of the world.
Italy:
• La Befana: A holiday tradition where an old woman delivers
gifts to children on Epiphany Eve.
• Ferragosto: A public holiday celebrated in August with
feasts, fireworks, and festivals.
Nigeria:
• Egungun Festival: Honors ancestors with colorful
masquerades and dances.
• New Yam Festival: Celebrates the yam harvest season, a
staple crop in Nigerian culture.
South Korea:
• Chuseok: A major harvest festival where families gather to
give thanks and honor ancestors.
• Seollal (Korean Lunar New Year): Celebrated with traditional
games, food, and ancestral rites.
United States:
• Thanksgiving: A holiday for giving thanks, celebrated with
family gatherings and meals.
• Independence Day (4th of July): Celebrated with fireworks,
parades, and patriotic displays.
145
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Spain:
• La Tomatina: A massive tomato-throwing festival held
annually in Buñol.
• Semana Santa (Holy Week): A week of religious processions
leading up to Easter.
South Africa:
• Heritage Day: Encourages South Africans to celebrate their
diverse cultural heritage.
• Ubuntu Philosophy: The practice of community and
compassion, often summarized as "I am because we are."
Russia:
• Maslenitsa (Butter Week): A festival celebrating the end of
winter with pancake feasts and folk performances.
• Victory Day: Celebrates the victory over Nazi Germany with
parades and patriotic songs.
Thailand:
• Songkran (Thai New Year): Celebrated with water fights,
symbolizing washing away the past year’s misfortunes.
• Loy Krathong: A festival where people release floating
lanterns on rivers as a symbol of letting go.
Ethiopia:
• Timkat: A celebration of the Epiphany, involving
processions and reenactments of Jesus's baptism.
146
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Enkutatash (New Year): Celebrated with music, dancing,
and family gatherings.
Scotland:
• Hogmanay (New Year’s Eve): A celebration with bonfires,
fireworks, and traditional songs.
• Highland Games: A festival featuring traditional Scottish
athletic events, music, and dance.
Morocco:
• Ramadan: Observed with fasting, prayer, and nightly iftar
meals during the holy month.
• Fantasia: A traditional horse performance showcasing
equestrian skills in regional festivals.
Nepal:
• Dashain: A major Hindu festival celebrating the victory of
good over evil, observed with rituals and family gatherings.
• Tihar (Festival of Lights): Similar to Diwali, honoring animals
and celebrating with lights and decorations.
2. Guide groups to present their findings using a digital presentation
tool (e.g., PowerPoint, Google Slides).
3. Encourage discussions that allow students to share thoughts on the
value of respecting different cultures.
147
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Conversation: Digital Cultural Fair
Can students provide constructive feedback Steps:
on each other's understanding and
1. Organize a “Cultural Fair” where students create digital displays of
presentation of global perspectives?
chosen cultures, incorporating images, facts, and videos.
2. Students explore each other's displays and comment on what they
learned.
3. Wrap up with a reflection discussion on the importance of positive
relations in understanding and appreciating cultural diversity.
Interactive Global Map Activity
Steps: 1. Use an interactive digital map tool (e.g., Google Earth) to let
students explore different countries.
2. Assign students to research and present on a notable person or
peace initiative from their chosen country.
3. Discuss the significance of these contributions to global relations
and understanding.
Country Notable Person Peace Initiative
South Africa Nelson Mandela Truth and Reconciliation Commission
India Mahatma Gandhi Nonviolent resistance (Satyagraha)
148
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
United States Martin Luther King Jr. Civil Rights Movement
Pakistan Malala Yousafzai Malala Fund (Education for Girls)
Myanmar Aung San Suu Kyi National League for Democracy
Tibet/China Dalai Lama Tibetan peace movement
Northern Ireland John Hume Good Friday Agreement
Kenya Wangari Maathai Green Belt Movement
Norway Fridtjof Nansen Nansen Refugee Award
Germany Angela Merkel Refugee humanitarian work during the Syrian
crisis
Liberia Leymah Gbowee Women of Liberia Mass Action for Peace
Poland Lech Wałęsa Solidarity Movement
149
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Argentina Adolfo Pérez Esquivel Nonviolent human rights advocacy
United Kingdom Mother Teresa (born in Albania, worked Missionaries of Charity
primarily in India)
Japan Sadako Sasaki (symbol for Hiroshima Peace) Hiroshima Peace Memorial and annual Peace
Ceremony
Brazil Chico Mendes Environmental activism in the Amazon
El Salvador Óscar Romero Advocacy for human rights during the civil war
Israel/Palestine Yitzhak Rabin and Yasser Arafat Oslo Peace Accords
Rwanda Paul Rusesabagina Efforts to save lives during the Rwandan
Genocide
Ethiopia Abiy Ahmed Ethiopia-Eritrea peace treaty
Costa Rica Óscar Arias Sánchez Central American Peace Accords
150
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Bangladesh Muhammad Yunus Microfinance and social entrepreneurship
France Simone Veil European integration and women's rights
advocacy
Russia Mikhail Gorbachev Policies of Glasnost and Perestroika
Canada Lester B. Pearson United Nations Peacekeeping Operations
Turkey Mustafa Kemal Atatürk Establishment of a secular and peaceful republic
South Korea Kim Dae-jung Sunshine Policy
Philippines Corazon Aquino Peaceful People Power Revolution
Peru Rigoberta Menchú Indigenous rights and peace activism
Colombia Juan Manuel Santos Peace agreement with FARC
151
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Sweden Raoul Wallenberg Rescue of Jews during the Holocaust
Jordan Queen Rania Advocacy for education and refugees
Australia Eddie Mabo Native land rights for Indigenous Australians
Mexico Alfonso García Robles Treaty of Tlatelolco (nuclear-free Latin America)
Belgium Audrey Hepburn (UNICEF Goodwill Humanitarian work for children
Ambassador)
Italy Gino Strada Founder of Emergency (medical care in conflict
zones)
China Liu Xiaobo Democracy and human rights advocacy
Yemen Tawakkol Karman Women's rights and democracy advocacy
152
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Iraq Nadia Murad Activism against sexual violence
Malawi William Kamkwamba Innovation and education advocacy
Product: Guest Speaker on Global Collaboration
Can students reflect on their growth in Steps: 1. Arrange for a guest speaker involved in international work
appreciating diverse cultures and the (e.g., a humanitarian or cultural ambassador) to speak with students.
importance of positive global relations?
2. Prepare students with a background on the speaker’s work and
culture.
3. Facilitate a Q&A session where students can ask questions and
interact with the speaker.
4. Conclude with a reflection on what students learned about global
collaboration and respect.
Observation: Role-Play Scenario on Diplomacy and Collaboration
Can students engage, respect, and understand (Suggested Scenarios: Role-Play Scenario on Diplomacy and
during discussions on positive global Collaboration
relations.
Steps: 1. Create role-play scenarios that encourage students to
collaborate and resolve issues diplomatically.
2. Assign each student a role (e.g., delegate from a country), with a
specific cultural background to consider.
3. Guide students through the scenario, encouraging them to negotiate
and collaborate while respecting cultural differences.
153
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Digital Resources Books and Printed Materials Multimedia and Interactive Tools
1. UNICEF’s Voices of Youth: Articles, 1. "I Am Malala" by Malala Yousafzai: 1. Google Earth and Virtual Reality Tours:
videos, and activities that provide a An inspiring autobiography that Interactive exploration tools to virtually tour
youth-focused perspective on global provides insights into cultural landmarks and culturally significant sites
issues and encourage empathy and challenges and the importance of around the world, which provide a sense of
awareness of diverse cultural education, which can spark discussions place and visual connection to the topic.
challenges. on global rights and equality.
2. Documentaries and Educational Films:
2. Peace Corps WorldWise Schools: Free 2. "The Breadwinner" by Deborah Ellis: Examples include "He Named Me Malala" (Malala
lesson plans, videos, and stories from A story set in Afghanistan that helps Yousafzai’s story), "Living on One Dollar" (about
Peace Corps Volunteers around the students understand cultural poverty in Guatemala), and "13th" (on systemic
world, which help students connect differences and resilience, encouraging injustice), which can provide powerful insights into
with real-life cultural experiences and empathy and awareness of global social and cultural issues globally.
peacebuilding efforts. issues.
3. UN and UNESCO Websites: Resources and
3. Global Citizen: Resources and articles 3. Atlases and World Culture Books: information on peace initiatives, global heritage sites,
on current global issues, such as Physical or digital world atlases and and cultural preservation projects that can be
climate change, poverty, and equality, books on world cultures to help integrated into classroom discussions and activities.
which help students understand students explore countries, cultural
international collaboration efforts. practices, and important historical
events.
4. TED-Ed Talks on Cultural
Understanding: Short, engaging videos 4. "We Are All Born Free: The Universal
on topics such as empathy, diplomacy, Declaration of Human Rights in
and cultural exchange, with Pictures": A beautifully illustrated
accompanying discussion questions book that introduces students to
and activities. human rights in an accessible way,
fostering discussions on equality and
5. National Geographic Kids: Interactive
peace.
maps, videos, and articles on world
cultures and geography, which provide
154
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
engaging visuals and facts about
countries and traditions.
155
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Strand (Topic): Economic Decision Making: Resources
Essential Learning Outcome: Recognize that regional and international movement of goods, people, and services shapes Caribbean society
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
1. Classify major resources in the world (renewable/non-renewable) and compare with their country’s resources
2. Analyse reasons why some countries have limited resources
3. Determine ways to utilise the world’s resources better/fairly
Focus Questions:
1. What types of resources are most common in our country?
2. Why do some countries have more resources than others?
3. What can we do to protect resources for future generations?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: • Can students differentiate between the Online Worksheets on Natural Resources
two types of resources?
6-EDM-K-4 - Classify major https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/social-studies/916840
resources in the world and compare • Are students able to identify examples
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/science/135114
with their country’s resources of renewable and non-renewable
resources?
Differentiated Instruction:
156
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Why can renewable resources be used Use Visual aids by using charts, diagrams, or interactive models
over and over again, while non- to depict the different resources in the country.
renewable resources cannot?
• How long does it take for non-
renewable resources to be replenished?
Discussion and Critical thinking
• Can students identify significant
resources in their country and say what What are the different resources found in your country and the
products these resources are used to world?
produce?
What is the difference between renewable and non-renewable
• Are students able to identify resources resources?
in the Caribbean and the World and
Why is it important to use more renewable resources than non-
discuss how they are used?
renewable resources?
• Why is it important to use renewable
Class discusses the different types of resources and classifies
resources instead of non-renewable
them.
ones?
Individual research
• How can we reduce our reliance on
non-renewable resources? a. Find out about a resource in your country and say how
it creates jobs.
b. Gives ways it helps benefit the economy
c. Students ask and answer questions based on the
resource they research.
d. Trace a resource from the raw material to the finishing
product.
Complete the table:
157
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Renewable Non- countries Uses and
resource renewable with resource by products
resource
water Dominica
petroleum Trinidad
6-EDM-S-4 - Analyse reasons why • Can students differentiate between Collaborative learning
some countries have limited resources found in their country to
Students work in groups to research a Caribbean country and
resources those found in other countries?
present information about resources found there.
• Can students explain why some
Students can find out:
countries have more resources than
others • Resource name, renewable or non-renewable
• Are students able to explain how the • Industry, products and by-products
industry of a country is by the resources
found there? • How it benefits a country's economy
• How might having limited resources • Imports and exports of resources
affect a country’s economy?
• How might limited resources influence a
Hands on Activities
country’s trade with other nations?
Use physical models (e.g., maps, resource charts) or digital
• How could limited resources affect
tools (e.g., Google Earth) to help students visualize resources
people’s access to food, water, and
and how they affect factors such as access to food, water etc.
energy?
Show how trade is affected due to limited resources of some
countries.
Case Studies:
158
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• What might happen to communities if Present case studies of countries with limited resources (e.g.,
resources become too expensive or Haiti, Barbados)
unavailable?
Analyze real-world examples on the complexity of issues faced
• How might limited resources lead to in the country such as threat of scarcity on the country's
overuse or damage to the environment? economy, the overuse or damage to the environment.
• What problems could arise if a country Class Debate
must import most of its resources?
Students can be separated into two groups to discuss:
• What are some examples of renewable
resources we can use instead of non-
renewable ones?
• How is energy from the sun (solar
power) different from energy from
•
fossil fuels like coal?
The importance of using renewable resources vs non-renewable
• Why do renewable resources last longer resources.
than non-renewable ones?
•
Limited resources can affect people’s access to food, water,
and energy?
159
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
•
Limited resources affect a country’s economy.
Project-Based Learning (PBL):
Select a form of renewable resource
( Solar, hydro, geothermal, turbine, tidal, biomass)
State the benefits of using these resources
What are the challenges faced by countries to implement the
use of these resources?
How is the energy from the resource selected different from
fossil fuel energy?
How can we protect the resource selected?
What would be the economic impacts of transitioning to
renewable energy for businesses and households in different
regions?
What role can renewable energy play in achieving net-zero
emissions for future generations?
160
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6-EDM-V-4 - Determine ways to • What happens when people cut down Online Worksheets on Renewable resources
utilize the world’s resources too many trees or use too much water in
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/science/1697345
better/fairly a country with few resources?
Individual or Group Activity
• How do renewable resources help
protect the environment compared to a. Define the following:
non-renewable ones?
1) Conservation
• Why is it important to switch to
2) Preservation
renewable resources for future
generations?
b. What are the natural resources that you throw in the
trash the most?
• What are some examples of how people
in our community already use renewable
b. Which resources do you use the most?
resources?
b. Why is it important to conserve natural resources?
• What do the words "preservation" and Because we need resources for food, transportation
"conservation" mean? and everything else. If we use them up, we will not
have the things we need, or the next generations will
• How are preservation and conservation
not have the things they need.
similar, and how are they different?
E) What would happen to the earth if we used more resources
• Can you think of an example of
than it could make? We would run out of the things we need to
preservation and an example of
live.
conservation in the environment?
f) How can we conserve natural resources in our daily lives?
• Which approach, preservation or
Reducing, reusing, recycling, and composting.
conservation, focuses on keeping nature
in its natural state without any human
use?
Conservation Initiative program
• What are some ways humans conserve
Choose a resource: ( Forest, Petroleum, Water, Soil)
resources like water, forests, or wildlife?
a) State some of its uses and its benefits.
161
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• How do conservation efforts allow b) Discuss some ways humans can overuse this resource
people to use resources while protecting
c) Explain ways conservation efforts can allow people to use
them for the future?
d) Resources while protecting them for the future?
• How does conservation help balance
human needs with protecting the e) How can you balance human needs while protecting the
environment? environment and this resource?
Resource Clean-up Campaign
Select a park, beach, garden, pond, wetland and partner with a
local organization to do a clean-up campaign. To help reduce
pollution and environmental damage.
Collaborative Learning:
Students do class research on resource conservation where
students design posters or flyers and present solutions to
environmental challenges.
Reflection and Action:
• Encourage students to reflect on their own use of
resources and think about ways they can adopt more
sustainable practices in their daily lives
• Have students create action plans or campaigns to
promote sustainability at school or in their community.
162
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: )
Natural ressources content notes: https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/science/753679
Renewable Resources:
1. Solar energy - Energy from the sun; abundant and sustainable.
2. Wind energy - Power generated by wind; increasingly used in wind farms.
3. Hydropower - Energy derived from water flow; widely used globally.
4. Geothermal energy - Heat energy from the Earth's core; sustainable in regions with volcanic activity.
5. Biomass - Organic materials used as fuel (wood, crop waste, etc.); renewable but can be controversial depending on use.
6. Tidal energy - Energy from tidal movements in oceans; still developing in many places.
Non-renewable Resources:
1. Fossil fuels - Oil, coal, and natural gas; used globally but finite in supply.
2. Minerals - Metals like iron, copper, and gold; important for manufacturing but limited in quantity.
3. Nuclear fuels - Uranium; used in nuclear energy production but comes with environmental concerns.
4. Phosphates - Essential for fertilizers but limited and non-renewable.
Comparing with Country’s Resources:
To compare global resources with your country’s resources, consider:
• Local availability of renewable energy sources like solar, wind, or hydroelectric.
• Dependence on non-renewable resources such as fossil fuels or minerals.
• Sustainability efforts within your country to move towards renewable energy sources or resource conservation.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Resource passages can be used to teach Comprehension: (Fact and Opinions, Main Idea, Cause and Effect)
Science lesson on Conservation and Preservation of resources in Ecosystems
163
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Strand (Topic): Economic Decision Making: Economic Sectors and Employment
Essential Learning Outcome: Recognize that regional and international movement of goods, people, and services shapes Caribbean society
Grade Level Expectations:
1. Identify the different types of economic activities in the world in which people are employed
2. Compare some major industries of the world with those in their country
3. Appreciate how the Caribbean contributes to world economic activities and vice versa
Focus Questions:
1. What are the major industries associated with the various sectors in developed, developing and underdeveloped countries?
2. What are the jobs associated with the various industries?
3. Compare some major world industries with those of our countries
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Product The teacher should develop a series of activities to help students
review and recall prior concepts which will be the foundation for
Are students able to retrieve prior knowledge to
6-EDM-K-5- -Identify the different new concept building.
apply within the objectives?
types of economic activities in the
Intro Activities:
world in which people are
employed 1. Worksheet: Match these:
• match key terms vocabulary with meaning
• match scenarios with key terms
2. K-W-L ( Traditional Or Online)
164
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
a. The teacher can present students with word cards of all the
key terms they should have covered in the previous grade.
b. Students will categorise the key terms into a K-W-L chart.
They should move those they want to review first.
c. A student who knows the answer can choose to remove a
word card from the W section and put it in the K section, then share
what they know about it.
d. To help reinforce student knowledge, the teacher should
create resources (class chart, worksheets, mini-games) based on
his/her summative assessment of the K-W-L activity.
Key Terms: Conversation and Discussion
Primary, Secondary, Tertiary, quaternary and Have students share career-related information about family
quinary sectors of the economy members who reside abroad.
Are students able to categorise jobs/ careers Question Prompts:
based on sector: the primary, secondary, tertiary,
1. Do you have a family who resides overseas?
quaternary and quinary sectors?
2. What job do they do?
3. Which sector of the economy are they employed?
The teacher draws conclusion that…
Viewing and Discussion
Class views the following video; and discusses the content. This
video can be used to launch other student-centered activities such as
those below.
165
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5 Economic Sectors - Primary, Secondary, Tertiary, Quaternary, &
Quinary
Compare and Contrast:
Have students compare and contrast the quaternary and quinary
Sectors.
Graphic Organisers
Create Graphic organisers for the different sectors of the economy
Can students identify major industries associated Traditional or online Worksheets/ Online games such as Quiziz
with the various developed, developing and
The teacher creates worksheets or online games to check students'
underdeveloped?
understanding.
Can students identify the major natural resources
For example :
of selected countries?
The teacher provides students with traditional or online worksheets
to categorise selected international countries as developed (MDCs),
developing and underdeveloped (LDCs) countries.
Using Secondary Sources of Information: The Atlas
The teacher guides students to use the atlas to find out the main
industries and exports of selected international nations such as
Russia, China, Kenya, South Africa; The UAE, India, Botswana,
Britain, America, France
Create a table to list major industries and exports of Caribbean
nations:
166
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Lesser Antilles e.g. Dominica, St. Lucia, Barbados, Grenada, St.
Vincent, Trinidad, St. Martin
Greater Antilles
The Bahamas
Central America (Mexico, Belize, Panama)
Mainland Territories (Venezuela, Columbia, Guyana, Brazil)
Public Speaking/Presenting
Can students analyse the role natural and man- Critical Thinking
made resources play in a country’s GDP?
Teachers ask questions to trigger critical thinking skills. The teacher
corrects any misconceptions.
Or the teacher may use
Anticipation Guides
1. Provide students with scenarios to test their knowledge and
correct misconceptions about
2. Provide students with 4 slips of different coloured paper.
3. Assign a colour to each word. Students will write the word
in bold print on the appropriate paper. For Example
4. The teacher tells the students to listen, read the statement,
and decide if they agree or not/are true or false. Hold up the
appropriate card to show your choice. Then turn to your
partner and discuss your reasoning. (Or the teacher may call
a few students per prompt to discuss their reasoning.)
167
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5. The teacher corrects misconceptions and praises correct
reasons.
6-EDM-S-5-Compare some major Can students compare the major industries of Compare and contrast
industries of the world with those larger nations with those of their
The teacher can provide students with the necessary information
in their country country’s industries?
(from YouTube videos/text extracts) to compare and contrast
Industries industries of larger nations with their country's industry.
Agricultural industries Discovery Learning
Forestry: Dominica, Guyana
Worksheets or Exit Tickets.
Extractive industry
Use worksheets or exit tickets to ascertain how much students
Crude oil: Trinidad and UAE
learned.
Health Industries:
Cuba and Canada
Clothing and textile: Haiti and India
Information technology:
Financial Industry: America and Barbados
168
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6-EDM-V-5- Appreciate how the Can students recall the key terms covered in Introduce and explicitly define key terms such as:
Caribbean contributes to world previous grades to build on learning?
Explore concepts of trade; global trade, interdependence, GDP,
economic activities and vice versa
Can students identify the importance of trade surplus, trade deficit, brain drain, supply chain, circular
international trade? economy
Can students identify countries with which the Discovery Learning
region does the most trading?
Have students identify some items in their home to determine where
Can students identify the positive and negative they came from.
impacts of trade?
For example appliances, food products, clothing, cleaning supplies
Have them create a table and fill in the information
Product Made in
Rice Guyana
TV China
Drawing Conclusion
Trade and Interdependence Among Countries for Kids
Have students draw conclusions on the importance of trading with
other countries.
Worksheets or Exit Tickets.
Summative: Worksheets/ Quiz and Tests
169
Grade 6 Social Studies Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Difference between Developed and Developing Countries (Developed vs Developing Countries)
The Importance of the Fishery Industry for Global Food Security and Economic Development (3 Minutes)
30 Exit Ticket Ideas and Examples That Give Immediate Feedback
170
