November 2024
OHPC Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
OVERVIEW OF THE GRADE 5 OECS HARMONISED PRIMARY CURRICULUM
The Grade 5 mathematics curriculum is structured around six key content strands: Number Sense (N), Operations with Numbers (O), Patterns and
Relationships (P), Geometric Thinking (G), Measurement (M), and Data Handling (D). It emphasizes the development of crucial mathematical process
skills, including problem-solving, reasoning, communication, connection, and representation. These skills are integral to helping learners engage actively
with mathematical concepts, justify their reasoning, articulate their ideas, and connect various mathematical ideas across different contexts. Grade 5 math
instruction should prioritize fluency in fraction operations, foundational multiplication and division of fractions, division with two-digit divisors, decimal
operations to the hundredth place, and volume understanding while addressing all grade-level standards.
• In the Number and Operations – Fractions and Operations and Algebraic Thinking domains, learners embark on a journey of learning that starts
with understanding the basics of fractions and ends with them being able to perform addition and subtraction of fractions with unlike
denominators. They also become proficient in calculating and estimating the sums and differences of fractions. Additionally, learners explore the
concepts of multiplication and division with fractions, learning to explain why certain procedures, such as dividing unit fractions by whole
numbers and vice versa, are effective.
• In the Operations and Algebraic Thinking and Number Operations in Base Ten domains, learners delve deeper into their understanding of
division and decimals. These domains play a pivotal role in the Grade 5 mathematics curriculum, as they help learners gain a deeper understanding
of division by examining base-ten numerals and operation properties. They also work on adding and subtracting decimals to hundredths,
developing fluency in decimal computations, and making reasonable estimates. By exploring the relationships between decimals, fractions, and
whole numbers, learners learn to explain why multiplication and division of finite decimals are valid.
• In Patterns and Relationships, learners develop a greater understanding that repeating patterns consist of a repeated core sequence, a concept
they can apply to music, art, and even computer programming. They recognise that growing patterns involve an increase in elements or their size,
while shrinking patterns involve a decrease. Additionally, learners become aware that many real-life objects and events can display multiple types
of patterns at the same time.
• In the Measurement, data handling, and Geometry domains, learners are introduced to the concept of volume and recognise it as a characteristic
of three-dimensional space. They learn to measure volume using standard units, estimate and solve volume-related problems, and decompose
shapes to find the volumes of right rectangular prisms. Learners are able to select and justify the most appropriate graph type, accurately display
data with proper titles and labels, and analyze various data presentations. They critically evaluate data, challenge assumptions, and draw
conclusions to make informed decisions. Learners assess the chances of events taking place and utilize this data to anticipate future developments.
The comprehensive approach outlined above ensures that learners build a strong foundation in mathematics, preparing them for more complex concepts
in the future.
1
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Number Sense
Introduction to the Strand:
Number Sense is an important skill in Mathematics. Learners are expected to develop it gradually over time as they are provided with the opportunities to explore
numbers. As learners' experiences are nurtured, they will further understand numbers and show improvement in Mental Mathematics performance. Moreover, as
they are exposed to the strategies within this Essential Learning Outcome, learners are expected to develop a better understanding of numbers (good number sense)
as opportunities are given to visualize numbers in various contexts and serve as a basis for other concepts in Mathematics.
Essential Learning Outcome N1.1. Whole Number – Saying Number Sequence, Meaningful Counting and Skip Counting
Grade 5 Level Expectations:
- Demonstrate an understanding of the meaning of all whole numbers to six digits
- Model, describe, and identify special sets of numbers (E.g., square, prime, and composite)
- Count by 2s, 5s, 10s, 100s, 1000s and 10 000s from any number (to 100 000)
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Product: Group Work Provide opportunities for learners to investigate
special sets of numbers such as odd, even, square,
Knowledge Have learners work in small groups and use number lines prime and composite numbers; identify and
1. Identify and describe special sets of or hundred charts to identify special sets of numbers by describe them using arrays.
numbers (square, prime, and composite) inserting, shading or circling the numbers in any order.
2. Skip count by 2s, 5s, 10s, 100s, 1000s Observe as learners work together using arrays or factor For example:
and 10 000s from any number up to 100 trees or division tables to determine type of number and Square numbers can be arranged in arrays that
000 complete task. form squares.
3. Complete increasing and decreasing Question learners about their choice of strategy selected to
number sequences (including special determine type of numbers.
sets of numbers, such as square, prime
and composite), beginning at any point
2
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Skills Product Google images: square-number-arrays-
4. Model skip counting by 2s, 5s, 10s, Ask learners to create a Venn Diagram to show the 300x119.png (300×119) (artfulmath.com)
100s, 1000s and 10 000s up to 100 000 relationship between Prime and Composite / Odd and
using lines, concrete materials, currency. prime etc. for Whole Numbers from 1 to 20. Prime numbers can be arranged in arrays that
form straight lines.
Values
5. Discuss and share real - life situations
where skip counting by 2s, 5s, 10s, 100s,
1000s and 10 000s up to 100 000 is
relevant
Google images:
2a13120f2ee0034e2bbfb5a3045c304c.jpg
(736×1324) (pinimg.com)
Composite numbers can be arranged in arrays that
Retrieved from https://www.smartick.com/lp/prime- form the shape of rectangles.
numbers/
Observation:
Observe and listen to learners skip count by 2’s, 5’s, 10’s,
100’s, 1000’s, and 10 000’s up to 100 000 starting from
different points.
Google images: arrays2.jpg (1404×576)
Check to see what resources they might be using e.g.
(sineofthetimes.org)
number lines or charts.
Provide learners with opportunities to identify
square, prime and composite numbers by listing
factors of numbers and categorizing them using
methods of listing, factor tree or division tables.
3
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Observational Checklist
For example,
Listing:
Learner Behaviour/ Comment/
Factors of 8 = 1 x 8 Factors of 5 = 1 x 5
Skill Observation
2 x 4 Factors = 1, 5
Factors = 1, 2, 4, 8
Factor Tree
Observation:
Observe as learners model skip counting using concrete
materials such as place value blocks, money and counters.
Question learners about their sequences.
Questions:
- What is the next number in this sequence?
- How did you determine the order or next term in
the sequence? Google images: Prime-Numbers-vs-Composite-
Numbers.png (846×705)
Learner Skill Observation
(curvebreakerstestprep.com)
Division ladder
Product: Exit Cards
Have learners complete work cards with dot to dot puzzles
with sequences for skip counting by 2’s, 5’s, 10’s, 100’s,
1000’s, and 10 000’s. Invite them to use number lines or
concrete materials and justify the reasons for use of
specific material. Google images: divisionmethod1.png (223×271)
(onlinemath4all.com)
4
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
For example:
Learners can use the Sieve of Eratosthenes to find
all prime numbers from 2 to 100
Google images connect-dots-children-educational-
drawing-game-dot-to-dot-numbers-game-kids-printable-
worksheet-activity-butterfly-104829175.jpg (1600×1690)
Google images:
(dreamstime.com)
Animation Sieve of Eratosth - Sieve of
Eratosthenes - Wikipedia
Think - Pair - Share:
Observe as learners discuss/talk about their sequences and
the pattern shown. question learners about the patterns.
Have learners use concrete materials like money,
number lines and place value blocks to skip count
Are they increasing or decreasing?
by 2’s, 5’s, 10’s, 20’s, 100’s, 1000’s and 10 000’s.
What will be the next term?
What will be the 5th term?
For example:
Product: Game (Puzzles)
Money - counting by 10’s and 100’s
Have learners complete puzzles or play games in small
groups where they read the situations or story problems
about skip counting and use the solutions to complete
puzzles/games.
5
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Observe learners as they play. Ensure that they use Google images: east-caribbean-dollar-coins.jpg
concrete materials and explain their choices and solutions. (2000×1505) (manorfx.com)
ESCA100.jpg (285×600)
Checklist (foreigncurrencyandcoin.com)
Learner Skill/ Behaviour Comments/
name Observation
Number line for counting by 5’s
Uses appropriate
materials
Can explain or give
reason for choices
made Google images:
https://images.twinkl.co.uk/tw1n/image
Provides accurate
solutions Place value blocks - counting by 10’s
Think - Pair - Share
Have learners work in small groups and discuss
a specific counting pattern.
Learners can share ideas about where the pattern is most
useful or applicable and justify their answers.
Listen as learners engage in discussion and provide
Google images: 15162738391969487349base-ten-
additional prompts or questions
rod-clipart.med.png (228×300) (clker.com)
Example:
Why is skip counting necessary?
Identify real - life situations when skip counting skills are
most useful and Why?
6
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Provide opportunities for discussion about pattern
and order of sequences presented. Invite learners
to complete number sequences starting from
different points and also including special
numbers.
For example:
7 960, 7 980, ___, ___
1 144, 1 142, ___, ___
Invite learners to create or generate story
problems and role play skip counting.
Provide opportunities for learners to discuss
situations where skip counting is useful or
applicable.
For example:
Skip Counting Puzzles: Create puzzles where
learners must fill in missing numbers in a skip
counting sequence.
Pattern Exploration: Challenge learners to
identify and create their own skip-counting
patterns.
Skip Counting by Fractions: Introduce skip
counting by fractions, such as 1/2, 1/4, or 1/3.
Additional Resources and Materials
- number lines
- number cards
- counters ( beads, stones, pebbles, sticks)
- coins, bills
7
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
- hundred charts/mats
- base 10 blocks/ place value blocks
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Skip counting is a skill developed over time. Learners will eventually be able to count on, from any number, not just the familiar sequences.
Skip counting is important in developing fluency in calculation, number sense and a foundation for multiplying and dividing.
Skip counting involves adding the same number over and over. For example, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5… (adding 1 each time) and 15, 20, 25 … (adding 5 each time).
Opportunity for Subject Integration:
Mathematics: All topics that requires reading and writing numbers
Money: counting amounts (coins, notes)
Data Handling: Representing data - Tally marks for the tally charts, graphs, numbers for labeling the axis
Language Arts:
Comprehension: Use clues and invite learners to read and make inference/ draw conclusions based on the clues to determine the answer.
General Science:
Body Parts: Fingers/Toes - five on one hand/foot, ten in all, Some parts come in pairs - nostril, eyes, ears, hands, legs, breasts
8
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome N1.2. Whole Number – Representing and Partitioning Quantities
Grade Level Expectations:
- Read, represent and partition any given number to 100 000 concretely, pictorially, and symbolically
- Read and write multi-digit whole numbers using base-ten numerals, number names, and expanded form to 100 000.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Product: Provide learners with opportunities to use place
Invite learners to represent/ model whole numbers up value charts, base 10 blocks and expanded
Knowledge to 100 000 using drawings and concrete materials. notation to model and represent numbers up to
1. Represent/ Model five-digit numbers Ensure they are using place value and expanded form 100 000 concretely, pictorially and symbolically.
concretely, pictorially, and symbolically to help them represent numbers.
2. Read and write multi-digit whole numbers
For example:
up to six digits using base-ten numerals and
Observation:
names
Listen as learners read numbers up to 100 000 out loud
3. Express whole numbers up to 100 000 in (without using ‘and’).
expanded form
Observe them as they write the numbers using proper
spacing.
original-2998632-2.jpg (350×247)
Values
For example:
(teacherspayteachers.com)
4. State real - life examples/ situations where
19 324 - nineteen thousand three hundred twenty-four.
expanded notation is used
Checklist
Learner Skill Observation Intervention/
Follow - up
Have learners read and write numbers using
concrete materials such as base 10 blocks and
place value charts.
9
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product: Exit Card
Distribute exit cards with various examples of numbers Invite for opportunities to read numbers in real-
up to 100 000 and invite learners to expand the life situations such as invoices, bills, receipts,
numbers in one or more ways. learners numbers, area codes etc.
For example:
Exit Card: Example: invoice
Expand the number 14 364
Numerically: Base 10 blocks:
Place Value:
Play Games:
Let learners play games in small groups. Games such as
dominoes, tarsia puzzles and use of riddles using the
expanded form of numbers
Example:
1. Dominoes (matching) Google image:
1 100 Sample-Invoice-printable.png (612×792)
392 +30+ 5 (invoicesimple.com)
Example: Area Code
135 5000 + 1 758 (SLU)
900
2. Riddles
10
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
I am a four-digit even number with nine hundreds, six Example: Learner number
tens, three thousands and no ones. Which number am
I?
Think - Pair - Share
Have learners work in small groups where they discuss
real-life situations/ examples of the use of expanded Google image:
notation. Info.png (1552×486)
Listen as learners share real-life examples where
expanded notation should be used and justify their Invite learners to expand numbers up to 100 000
responses. Question learners about reasons for and numerically and concretely using base 10 blocks,
choice of responses. arrow cards, place value charts.
provide opportunities for learners to create games
and riddles using expanded forms of numbers.
Example:
Place Value Chart
Thousands Hundreds Tens Ones
(1 000) (100) (10) (1)
5 3 4 1
11
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Google images:
0b6770083a05a5c8c0b920e7b7871b85.jpg
(736×981) (pinimg.com)
Provide opportunities for learners to discuss and
generate real-life examples or situations where
expanded notation is used.
For example: bank slips invite for some use of
expanded notation.
Additional Resources and Materials
- base ten blocks
- place value charts
- number cards
- hundred charts
- dice
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Digits are mathematical symbols that are arranged in a specific order to represent numeric values. There are ten different digits in our number system. When writing
numbers, we make use of the digits 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. The value of each digit depends on the position of the digit within a number. It is the position of
each digit within a number that determines its place value. One digit alone can also represent a number.
A number can be represented in expanded form as 34 187 = 30 000 + 4000 + 100 + 80 + 7, or as 3 × 10 000 + 4 × 1000 + 1 × 100 + 3 × 10 + 7, to show place
value relationships.
●Numbers can be composed and decomposed in various ways, including by place value.
12
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
●Numbers are composed when two or more numbers are combined to create a larger number. For example, the numbers 100 and 2 can be composed to make the
sum 102 or the product 200.
●Numbers can be decomposed as a sum of numbers. For example, 53 125 can be decomposed into 50 000 and 3000 and 100 and 25.
●Numbers can be decomposed into their factors. For example, 81 can be decomposed into the factors 1, 3, 9, 27, and 81.
● Numbers are used throughout the day in various ways and contexts. Most often, numbers describe and compare quantities. They express magnitude and provide
a way to answer questions such as “how much?” and “how much more?”.
Opportunities for subject integration:
Mathematics: All topics that require reading and writing numbers
Measurement- Perimeter, Area, Volume
Money- Total cost, change,
Language Arts:
Writing: Learners can write brief descriptions of numbers, which may include the names and place values, total values, and expanded forms.
Comprehension: Use clues and invite learners to read and make inferences/conclusions based on the clues to determine the answer.
Social Studies:
(Data Handling)
Population; birth rate, death rate
Area of islands of the Caribbean e.g. Saint Lucia
Arts and Craft:
Draw shapes and pictures to use for expanding and for representing numbers.
13
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome N1.3: Whole Number – Comparing and Ordering Quantities
Grade Level Expectations:
- Compare two multi-digit numbers based on the meanings of the digits in each place (to five place values), using >, =, and < symbols to record the results of
comparisons.
- Tell the number that is 100, 1000, 10,000, or 100,000 more or less than a given number.
- Apply strategies to contextual situations and create story problems involving the comparison of whole numbers
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
“More, Less, Same” Card Game Comparing Population Size
Knowledge:
In groups, provide learners with a story problem
In pairs, provide each learner with six flash cards. Have relating to the populations of two different
1. Compare two whole numbers up to 99 999 using
each child dip for three, 5-digit numbers, two 4-digit countries in the Caribbean. Ensure that the
the symbols (>, = and <)
numbers and one 3-digit number. Invite learners to write population of countries chosen is less than 99999
2. Calculate the whole number that is 100, 1000, 10
a number on each card. Invite learners to play the game but similar in terms of the number of digits.
000 or a 100 000 more or less than a given number
of “compare,” where each child turns over the card that Provide each group with two place value charts
up to five digits.
is at the top of his/her stack. The learners compare their and manipulatives such as blocks, counters. Have
flipped cards by comparing the number of digits or using learners represent each population on the place
Skills
the place value chart to determine who has more. The value chart and base ten blocks. Invite them to
learner with more gets to keep the cards. If the cards are compare the number of counters in each place
3. Arrange a set of five or less whole numbers in
the same then they get to keep their card. The learners value column for both numbers starting from
ascending and descending order up to 99 999.
repeat the process until one learner has all the cards. right to left. Invite learners to choose the number
4. Create real life story problems, games and puzzles
with the greater value and explain their reasoning
involving the comparison of whole numbers up to
to indicate why one number is more or less than
100000.
another number.
5. Perform mental calculations for games and
puzzles involving whole numbers which are (100,
1000, 10000, 100000) more or less than a given
Where do I fit? Puzzle Game.
number.
14
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Values Example: 32426
Teacher will create a puzzle based on the class
6. Discuss and share strategies to solve population. The first and last number should be inserted.
contextualized problems and puzzles, based on The teacher will continue by inserting a number in every
whole number comparisons up to 99 999. sixth slot starting from the first number. Each group will
be focusing on numbers that fall between two markers.
Members of groups will dip for their numbers. Together,
using place value charts, learners will order numbers in
Retrieved from:
ascending or descending order, whichever one that is
https://images.app.goo.gl/FtWVGQi4eMHih9U1
stipulated by the teacher. When learners are done, each
A
learner will come up to the puzzle board to place their
number in the right ordinal position. This will happen on
52248
a group-to-group basis for ease of validation.
Example of Puzzle
Repeat this activity using other numbers. Ensure
that there are variations in the use of numbers; for
instance:
● Two numbers with unequal numbers of
digits. Example: 23645 and 8387
Retrieved from:
● Two numbers with equal number of digits
https://www.kindergartenworksheetsandgames.com/ord
where the first digits are the same.
inal-numbers-game/
Example: 45763 and 43562
Question, Show and Tell.
15
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Two numbers with the same number of
Learners will be divided in three groups for an in-class digits with only one digit being different.
competition. Teacher will read the question, while Example: 53768 and 53968
learners calculate the answer mentally and write it on the
card given. The learner will raise their card to show and
read his answer. A total of 30 seconds will be given to
answer each question.
Can I Complete the Number Line?
Each child will be given the opportunity to answer a
question. If the child fails to give the correct answer,
another member of his or her group will get a chance to
answer for half the mark. The group with the highest
total wins the competition.
Example of Question:
Retrieved From:
1. Tom has $34, 568. He bought a phone for $1000.
https://images.app.goo.gl/SUdURohianJf3PkDA
How much money does he have now?
Invite each child to take a number card from a
stack. In groups learners are to figure out the
ordinal position of their number in ascending and
descending order. Provide each group with a place
value chart. Learners will write their number on
the chart. Moving from right to left, the learner
will compare the face value of numbers under
each place value to determine which is the greatest
or least. Following the rule for comparing
numbers, learners will place their numbers in
16
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
ascending and descending order, using pegs on a
number line.
Retrieved from: https://www.math-only-
math.com/arranging-numbers.html
Teacher will repeat steps using numbers with at
least one or two of the first set of digits being the
same.
Calculator Brains
Inform learners that they will be learning a skill set
for mental calculations. Learners will be given a
story problem asking them to find 100, 1000,
10000 or 100000 less than a given number. Each
group will be focusing on a different increase in
number. Learners will be provided with place
17
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
value disks or a spike abacus to help them to
complete the task.
Retrieved From:
https://images.app.goo.gl/Bs8DutcqJe8KpfQcA
https://images.app.goo.gl/QuEtW254fazbAoiP9
Each group will be given an opportunity to
present their work and explain their strategy.
Probing questions should be asked to guide them
to make the generalized statement of subtracting 1
to the thousands column if a number is decreased
by 1000, or 1 to the hundreds if the number is to
decrease by 100.
Questions;
1. How were you able to get the answer
when the number was decreased by 1000?
Repeat question for 1000, 10000, 100000
respectively
18
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Provide learners with examples where the number
in the 100’s, 1000’s, 10000’s place is zero. Invite
them to use the manipulatives to show what needs
to be done to find the answer. Provide them with
the opportunity to explain their strategy.
For struggling groups, revert to the idea of making
bundles of 10 to move from 1 place value to the
next.
Retrieved from:
https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/articles/zw267yc
19
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Repeat this activity, by asking them to use place
value to help them to calculate numbers which are
100, 1000, 10000, 100000 more or less than a
given number
Retrieved from:
https://www.lbq.org/Search/Mathematics?quick
Ref=10408
Additional Resources and Materials
Material
Place value disks
Blocks
Counters
Place value charts
Number cards
Puzzle mats
Pegs
string
20
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Books
Alfie the Alligator by: Sundy Turley
Websites
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oVa_cAllL-w
https://elementaryedu.com/2022/08/games-for-comparing-numbers.html
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Comparing numbers means identifying a number that is smaller or greater than the rest. We can compare numbers using different methods such as a number line,
counting, counting the number of digits, or by using place value of numbers.
Step for Comparing Numbers
1. Compare the number of digits. The number with the most digits is the greater number.
2. If the number of digits is the same then compare the higher place values.
3. If the digits are the same at the highest place value, compare the digit in the next place value to the right.
1. Keep comparing with the same place value until you find digits that are different. The one with the highest face value is the greater number.
Ordering Numbers
After comparing numbers, we can arrange them in ascending and descending order.
· Ascending Order: The arrangement of data from the smallest to the largest value.
· Descending Order: The arrangement of data from the largest to the smallest value.
21
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Art and Craft
Creating card games
Creating puzzles
Creating board and floor games
Science and Technology
Recording and comparing quantitative data
Link population sizes of countries to the concept of comparing and ordering
Social Studies
Work effectively in groups.
Language Arts
Creating rules for games and puzzles created.
22
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome N1.4: Whole Number – Understanding Place
Grade Level Expectations:
- Recognise that in a multi-digit number, a digit in one place represents 10 times as much as it represents in the place to its right and 1/10 of what it
represents in the place to its left;
- Represent the place value of numbers in base-ten groupings concretely, pictorially, contextually, verbally and symbolically;
- Explain the pattern regularity of the place value system; Identify the value of a digit as determined by its position;
- Explain patterns in the number of zeros of the product when multiplying a number by powers of 10 using place value explanations (not "counting" zeros),
and explain place value patterns in the placement of the decimal point when a decimal is multiplied or divided by a power of 10; Use whole-number
exponents to denote powers of 10;
- Use place value understanding to round multi-digit whole numbers to ten thousands; Use place value understanding to round multi-digit whole numbers to
hundred thousands
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Whole Class Bingo game?
Investigating Place Value
Knowledge Prepare bingo cards with the values of numbers that
are 10 times greater than the value to the right of
1. Recognise that in a multi-digit whole number the number in question.
up to 100 000, each place has a value of ten times
Example:
greater than the place immediately to its right
Retrieved from:
BINGO
2. Recognise and apply the principle that in a https://images.app.goo.gl/oLP7gQLSgqzttvmo9
whole number up to 100,000, each place is 1/10
30000 400000
of what it represents in the place to its left.
3. Express the place value of a numeral within
2000 500
context, up to 100,000, using concrete, pictorial,
verbal, and symbolic representation.
23
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4. State the value of any digit within a whole
number up to 100 000 using concrete, pictorial, Bingo questions
verbal, and symbolic representations.
I am looking for a number with a place value which
is ten times the place value of the 3 in the number
5. Explain the pattern of zeros in the product
3457.
when multiplying a whole number by a power of
10 up to 100000.
Think Pair Share
6. Explain the patterns in the decimal point
Provide learner with a story problem:
placement when a decimal with up to three
decimal places is multiplied or divided by a power
Example: Peter had 3210 chicks in his brooder last
of 10.
week. After his end-of-month sale, he now has 321
Retrieved
chicks left. Using the concept of place value, explain
from:https://images.app.goo.gl/SmJDxubj1NpSwS9
7. Recognise that whole number exponents can be the similarities and differences in the values of the
g8
used to denote powers of 10. two numbers.
Provide each group with a place value chart and a set
8. Round off any whole number up to 100 000 to Listen to the discussion and provide learners with
of place value base ten blocks or disk. Provide
the nearest 10 000 and 100 000 an opportunity to share their findings.
learners with a number less than 999999 which has at
least two of the same digits next to each other. For
Values Place Value Bingo
example 459922. Invite them to record the number
on the place value chart, use base ten block and place
9. Appreciate that tens are nested in hundreds and Provide each child with a bingo card and counters.
value formation to explain the relationship between
thousands and use that knowledge to rename Read the place value expanded number and have
the highlighted numbers.
whole numbers. learners find the corresponding number on their
cards. Invite learners to use place value charts if
2 tens
10. Discuss and share the importance of rounding needed. Continue to call numbers until you get a
multi-digit whole numbers to a hundred thousand winner.
2 bundles of 10
in real-life situations.
Example of cards:
2x10 =20
24
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The number 2 in the tens place is 10 times the 2 in
the ones place. Whereas the number 9 in the
thousands place is ten times the number 9 in the
hundreds place.
Working Backward
Through the use of an example, begin the lesson by
reviewing the place value of each digit as 10 times
greater than the place immediately to its right.
Draw learners’ attention to numbers on a place value
chart.
Retrieved from:
https://www.twinkl.co.uk/resource/t2-m-1872-6-
digit-number-bingo Hth Tth Th H T O
Observation 2 0 0 0
Learners will be observed as they expand numbers 2 0 0
and assessed using an observational checklist.
2 0
2
Engage learners in discussions to explain the shift in
place value of numbers; Each place is 1/10 of what it
represents in the place to its left.
25
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Criteria Y N
Provide other examples for practice.
1. Learners used the place value chart to
identify the place value of digits in the
Does Place Value Matter?
number
In groups, invite learners to choose any six numbers.
2. Learners use manipulatives or pictorial
Invite learners to form the largest or smallest number
representation to help understand the
using their six digits. Provide learners with a place
task. Example:
value chart and base ten blocks to visually represent
numbers. Have learners explain why their number is
the largest number that can be formed. Provide
opportunities for learners to explain the value of each
digit based on its position.
Retrieved from:
https://images.app.goo.gl/pJrcXTmYPDQDmhcA9
https://images.app.goo.gl/pJrcXTmYPD
QDmhcA9
3. Learners were able to express the value
of each digit by multiplying it to its
corresponding power of 10:
A. Hundred thousand
B. Ten thousand
C. Thousand
Retrieved from: https://learn.e-
D. Hundreds
limu.org/topic/view/?c=49&t=289
E. Tens
F. Ones
4. Learners provided accurate
explanations for their answers.
26
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Exit tickets Provide learners with other numbers and have them
to identify and explain the place value of each digit
Provide learners with exit tickets to assess lesson number.
objectives. It is better to create your own to vary
problems given for practice. Investigating Patterns in Powers of Ten
In groups, provide learners with a place value chart
with a number and expansion using multipliers of 10
Exit Tickets and powers of 10 for each digit place value. Learners
will observe patterns and discuss.
2x105 = 832950
3x 10n
Th H T O
N=
2 4 3 2
(5 x 104) + ( 3 x102) 4000
2x1000 4x 100 3x10 2x 1
=50000 + _______ 4 x 10n
2 x 100 x 10 4x10x10 3x10 2x1
2x10 x10 x10 4x102 3x101 2x100
2 x 103
Peer Assessment
Invite each learner to write an equation for their
partner to solve. Have learners discuss their
solutions and correct each other’s work.
27
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Provide learners with the opportunity to present the In each case, guide learners to provide explanations
work of their peers and explain why their answer for using a base 10 and a particular exponent.
was correct or incorrect. Provide opportunities for further practice.
Discovering Patterns with Powers of 10
“Kennel Search” Card Game.
In groups learners will be given a number, an
instruction card and a place value chart.
Learners will be instructed to:
1. Use their knowledge from the previous lesson
to solve each expression.
2. Write each product on the place value chart
3. Answer the questions which follows:
a. Compare the products of each expression,
What do you notice?
b. What changes took place in the place value of
the original number as the exponents increased.?
2 x 100 = 2
Retrieved from:
2 x 101 = 20
https://images.app.goo.gl/RPF7fKcjEoigvQKW7
2 x 102 = 200
2 x 103 = 2000
Give each child a sheet with four pups. Write a 2 x 104 = 20000
number on each pup and ask the learner to find the
number rounded to the correct 10000.
Example: Pup 1: 34896 Hth Tth Th H T O
Kennel number: 30000
28
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Invite each child to take Four kennel shaped cards 1. The number (2) is in all the products but they
from a pile of cards. Place one card in the center. increase in place value.
Begin by inviteing anyone who needs the card in the
center to take it and drop what he or she does not 2. Each time an additional 10 is multiplied the
need. Continue to play until someone has found digit moves one place value to the left.
homes for all their pups.
https://www.vectorstock.com/royalty-free-
Play Dough Slicing Activity
vector/set-of-cartoon-cute-dog-coloring-page-
vector-16112643
Begin by modelling repeated division by 10 until 1 is
reached.
https://www.etsy.com/in-
en/listing/734452222/dog-kennel-mdf-craft-shape-
Use of Manipulatives: Provide each child with a
wooden-blank
decimal place value chart, play dough and a plastic
knife.
Learners will create a model of a square with
playdough and divide it by 10.
Learners will put 1 in the ones column of the place
value chart and record answers on the chart as they
continue to divide and move from 1 place value to
the next.
Encourage learners to make use of powers of 10 in
recording answers. Invite learners to examine the
patterns of numbers as it is divided.
29
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1 ÷ 10 = 0.1
0.1 ÷ 10 = 0.01 0r 1 ÷ 102
0.01 ÷ 10 = 0.001 / 1 ÷ 103
Provide opportunities for further practice with
division by powers of ten.
Reporting Less or More
In groups, provide learners with a story problem and
a number line.
Example:
The St.Lucia Electricity Service actual profit for the
last financial year was $582500. However, the report
stated that the profit was $580000.
What could be the reason for the disparity in the
amounts?
Retrieved from:
https://selliliar.live/product_details/474247.html
Using the number provided, show and justify your
answer.
30
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Materials
Place Value Chart
Number lines
Play dough
Plastic Knife
Base 10 blocks
Place Value disks
counters
Websites
https://thirdspacelearning.com/us/math-resources/topic-guides/number-and-quantity/powers-of-10/#common-core
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SKrujXYeFcIttps://youtu.be/SKrujXYeFc
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Patterns in the Number of Zero’s
In teaching patterns between the powers of ten and the number of zeros at the end of numbers, learners may easily make mistakes when dealing with
numbers with zeros in between. Example: 103000 0r 1.001 x 104. Therefore, it is important to expose learners to these types of numbers and
equations to avoid misconceptions.
The base and the exponent
Learners frequently make mistakes by multiplying the base by the exponent. It is important to emphasize the base as the only number being
multiplied. The exponent tells us how many times to multiply the base.
31
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Art and Craft:
Creating bingo game
Creating Card Games
Science and Technology
Linking income, expenditure, imports and exports to rounding off
Social Studies
Work effectively in groups and follow the rules of the game.
Language Arts
Write their own real life problems and create booklets
Write short paragraphs to explain place value patterns
32
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome N2.1: Fractions, Decimals, and Rational Numbers– Representing Fractions
Grade Level Expectations:
- Represent fractions as simple mixed numbers or improper fractions concretely, pictorially, and symbolically;
- Understand a fraction as part of a whole, part of a set, and measurement;
- Understand a fraction as a quotient and as an operator
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge Observation CONCRETE/VISUAL MANIPULATIVES
Observe learners as they use manipulatives to represent ● AREA MODEL
1. Identify and name mixed numbers and given improper fractions and mixed numbers. Assess Invite learners to use manipulatives such as
improper fractions using various modes them using an observation checklist such as the one fraction bars, fraction circles and fraction tiles to
of representation such as the area, linear, below. represent and name mixed numbers and improper
set, and technology-based models
fractions
2. Write a fraction in the form a/b, where a
represents the number of parts of the CRITERIA YES NO
whole or set shaded and b represents the (Applicable to all fraction models)
total number of equal parts the whole is
divided into
UNDERSTANDING
1.Learner demonstrates understanding of
3. Represent fractions as mixed numbers
mixed numbers and improper fractions. SOURCE:
and improper fractions, using
https://visualfractions.com/mixed-fractions-
manipulatives such as cutouts and
2. Learner uses models correctly. circle/
number lines
4. Demonstrate the relationship between 3.Learner provides accurate explanations
mixed numbers and improper fractions for representations of given fractions.
using pictures and drawings
33
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5. Recognise that a/b means a divided by b,
4. Learner can demonstrate the
where a is the dividend and b is the
relationship between mixed numbers and
divisor
improper fractions using models.
Skills
6. Convert mixed numbers to improper PARTICIPATION/INTEREST
fractions and vice versa 4. Learner is actively engaged in the use
of the fraction model.
Values
5.Learner shows interest and enthusiasm
7. Identify examples of fractions of wholes while using fraction models.
and sets in everyday life SOURCE:
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/98023729367394
473/
● LINEAR MODEL
EXIT CARDS
Use number lines or tape diagrams to represent
Provide learners with exit cards at the end of the lesson
mixed numbers and improper fractions
and have them answer the questions on their cards.
SAMPLES OF CARDS:
SOURCE:
https://www.cuemath.com/numbers/fractions-
on-number-line/
34
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
GAMES
Have learners play games where they label missing
parts of a number line using either improper
fractions or mixed numbers or both.
● SET MODEL
Have learners find objects in their environment
such as M&Ms, Skittles, mini chocolates, beads,
beans and bottle caps. Invite them to use a set of
items to form groups with an equal number in
each group, where the entire set is regarded as a
whole.
SOURCE:
https://www.teacherspayteachers.com/Product/Fractio
● TECHNOLOGY--BASED MODELS
ns-of-a-Set-and-Whole-583017
Invite learners to manipulate interactive models to
deepen understanding of mixed numbers and
TECHNOLOGY-BASED ASSESSMENT
improper fractions
https://www.iknowit.com/lessons/b-fractions-of-
sets.html
EXAMPLES OF WEBSITES:
https://www.geogebra.org/m/c6DFEKDY
GAMES- MATH BINGO
Play a Bingo game where each learner is provided with a
card similar to the one below. Learners will convert each
mixed number called out by the teacher to an improper
fraction and will highlight the fraction on his/her card.
The first player to highlight five fractions in a row wins
the game.
35
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
PROBLEM SOLVING
Use problem solving to name and represent
fractions.
For example:
1.
A cake is cut into 4 equal pieces. Ryan eats 2 of
SOURCE:
these pieces. What fraction of the cake does Ryan
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/37274330667059241
eat?
9/
Write your answer in simplest form (lowest
terms).
SOURCE OF PICTURE:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fraction
2.
SOURCE:
https://slideplayer.com/slide/14797687/
36
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
RUBRIC FOR ASSESSMENT:
SCORE CRITERIA
SCO #3, 4
ACCURACY/UNDERSTANDING
Learner:
3 -converts mixed numbers to
improper fractions accurately with no
errors.
https://www.mathswithmum.com/mixed-to-
2
improper-fractions/
-converts mixed numbers to
improper fractions with minimal
1 errors.
—------- -is unable to convert mixed numbers
PEER GUIDANCE/ COOPERATIVE
to improper fractions
LEARNING
3 —-------------------------------------------
-----------
Invite learners to perform calculations along with
their peers. They can also work in small groups of
2 -converts improper fractions to
three or four so that the success of each group
mixed numbers accurately with no
member determines the success of the group. Use
errors.
flash cards and other materials to stimulate
1
interest.
-converts improper fractions to
mixed numbers with minimal errors.
3
-struggles to convert improper
fractions to mixed numbers
2 PARTICIPATION
37
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
-actively participates with a high level
of interest and enthusiasm
1
-participates, but with little interest
and enthusiasm
-is reluctant to participate
SOURCE:
https://visualfractions.com/mixed-number-to-
8-9: EXCELLENT fraction/
6-7: GOOD
4-5: NEEDS IMPROVEMENT
1-3: BELOW EXPECTATION
Additional Resources and Materials
LINEAR MODEL
https://www.khanacademy.org/math/arithmetic-home/arith-review-fractions/mixed-number/v/postive-improper-fractions-on-the-number-line
REPRESENTING MIXED NUMBERS AND IMPROPER FRACTIONS
https://www.vasolsuperstars.com/post/understand-mixed-numbers-without-getting-mixed-up
CONVERTING MIXED NUMBERS TO IMPROPER FRACTIONS
https://www.mathswithmum.com/mixed-to-improper-fractions/
https://mathgeekmama.com/convert-improper-fractions-to-mixed-numbers/
FRACTION OF A SET
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=C3W1ZdDxPWQ
38
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
An improper fraction is a fraction where the numerator is greater than or equal to the denominator. Examples of improper fractions: 4/3, 8/8, 9/2.
A mixed number consists of a whole number and a proper fraction. Examples of mixed numbers: 5 ⅓, 3 ½ , 10 ¾.
https://cimt.org.uk/projects/mepres/book7/bk7i10/bk7_10i4.htm
https://www.cuemath.com/numbers/mixed-number-to-improper-fraction/
Improper Fraction to Mixed Number
https://calcworkshop.com/fractions/improper-fraction-to-mixed-number/
39
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Music –
The lengths of musical notes are usually denoted using fractions.
Food and Nutrition –
Measurements in recipes are often written using mixed numbers and improper fractions. Sometimes converting mixed numbers to improper fractions (and vice
versa) is required when changing recipes
40
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome N2.2.: Fractions, Decimals and Rational Numbers – Comparing and Ordering Fractions
Grade Level Expectations:
- Compare proper and improper fractions;
- Compare mixed numbers;
- Describe fractions in simplest or least terms
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
EXIT CARDS It is important for learners to understand how to compare
Knowledge Provide learners with fraction strips and invite them to and order fractions as there are many real-life applications
1. Compare two proper fractions, improper compare given fractions using correct statements or of this concept.
fractions, and/or mixed numbers with arrange fractions in ascending or descending order using
similar and unlike denominators using <,
strips. Ensure that they are able to justify their answers.
> or =
AREA MODEL
SAMPLES:
2. Arrange up to four proper fractions,
Use visual models such as fraction circles,
improper fractions and/or mixed
numbers in ascending and descending fraction bars or fraction walls and invite learners
order to represent proper fractions, improper fractions
or mixed numbers by colouring/shading, so that
3. Express a fraction in simplest terms by they can easily compare.
dividing the numerator and denominator
by the highest common factor (H.C.F.)
4. Explain why fractions in simplest form
represent the same proportion or part of
a whole or set https://brainly.in/question/24492489
41
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Skills They can also be given cards with fractions that they
5. Differentiate between proper and have to compare. Do this at the end of the lesson and
improper fractions using visual models have learners post their cards on the classroom wall, with
such as the area, linear, set and
the correct signs between them (<, > or =).
technology-based models
GAME
Values
6. Demonstrate understanding of proper
fractions, improper fractions and mixed
numbers by identifying real life examples
SOURCE:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0bpnpexliv
Y
Have learners physically compare two fractions
using manipulatives such as fraction strips,
fraction tiles, fraction walls and cutouts. Write
Retrieved from
statements using the appropriate symbols.
https://www.teacherspayteachers.com/Product/Fr
action-War-Card-Game-4157237
Number of players: 2-4
Learners can play a card game where the deck of cards is
shuffled face-down in a stack.
In each turn, a player or team flips over two cards from
the stack. The players must determine which of the two
fractions is greater. If they answer correctly, the player or
team keeps the pair of cards. If they don’t answer
correctly, the player or team turns the cards back over, SOURCE:
and it's the next player's turn. https://cindyelkins.edublogs.org/2018/02/10/fr
actions-part-4-compare-fractions/
42
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
After each turn, players discuss and explain the reasoning NUMBER LINES
for their answer. Have learners plot fractions on number lines to
enable them to visually compare based on their
Use the scoring rubric below to assess learners as they positions. If done in pairs, have them write
play. statements using correct symbols. If more than
two fractions are plotted, have them write in
ascending or descending order.
CRITERIA 3 2 1
POINTS POINTS POINT
ACCURACY Learner’s Learner’s Learner
answers answers struggles to
are are provide
accurate accurate accurate
all of the most of answers.
time the time
REASONING Learner Learner Learner
SOURCE:
AND consistentl provides struggles to
EXPLANATION y provides reasoning provide https://www.mathswithmum.com/mixed-to-
clear and reasoning improper-fractions/
reasoning explanatio and
and n but may explanation
explanatio be
n incomplet PROBLEM-SOLVING
e or clear Use real-life scenarios to create word problems
at times involving comparison of fractions. Teach
concepts through problem-solving and encourage
COLLABORATI Learner Learner Learner
the use of problem-solving strategies to
ON actively occasional works
collaborat ly independent stimulate critical thinking skills. Embrace this
es with collaborate ly and does opportunity to integrate other subject areas
other s with not actively
and other mathematical concepts, for example:
players other collaborate
players with other
players. 1. Food and Nutrition
43
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
8-9: EXCELLENT Jan used 2 ¼ cups of sugar to bake a
6-7: GOOD vanilla cake and 5/2 cups of sugar to
4-5: NEEDS IMPROVEMENT make some cookies. Which recipe
1-3: BELOW EXPECTATION required more sugar?
PEER ASSESSMENT- USE OF LEARNER 2. Time
ERRORS Pete took ⅗ of an hour to run a
marathon, while Roger took ⅔ of an
● Have learners complete worksheets on hour to run the same marathon. Who
simplifying fractions to be corrected by the took more time?
teacher. Pair learners based on mixed ability and
invite them to analyse the errors from corrected
NB. Encourage learners to draw diagrams to
scripts. Have them rework the questions and
represent given fractions when necessary.
discuss.
● Form mixed ability groups of three or four and
Refer to the following website for more word
have learners write their own examples of problems.
fractions. Invite them to simplify these fractions https://resources.finalsite.net/images/v15915766
as a group, then exchange with other groups. 36/brockton/ogfxkwd7trjwkzljnbps/June9Math
Teacher observes as she walks around. Use a
Gr3-Day2.pdf
checklist such as the one below.
CRITERIA YES NO NUMERICAL COMPARISON
After developing conceptual understanding
ACCURACY
through visual models and manipulatives, have
-Learners write fractions that can be
learners engage in abstract thinking.
simplified.
When comparing mixed numbers and improper
-Fractions are simplified correctly.
fractions with similar denominators, encourage
learners to convert mixed numbers to improper
-Learners are able to explain how they
fractions so that the numerators can be easily
reduced fractions to lowest terms.
compared.
44
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
PARTICIPATION/INTEREST
-Learner is actively engaged in the
activity.
-Learner shows interest and enthusiasm
during activity.
SOURCE:
https://www.k5learning.com/blog/compari
ng-improper-fractions-mixed-numbers-same-
denominator
When denominators are not the same, have
learners rewrite them using equivalent fractions
with a common denominator before comparing.
SOURCE:
https://study.com/academy/lesson/comparing-
ordering-mixed-numbers.html
45
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
PEER TUTORING
Pair learners and have them explain the process
of reducing fractions to each other using
examples. Have them use white boards or any
other materials that would stimulate interest and
enthusiasm.
SOURCE:
https://www.mathsisfun.com/definitions/simple
st-form-fractions-.html
Provide learners with recipes and have them
reduce fractions to lowest terms.
Create fraction puzzles where pieces only fit
together if the fractions are correctly reduced.
46
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
PRINTABLE FRACTION STRIPS
https://filefolderfun.com/FirstGradeMath/FractionTiles
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
It is important to use a variety of models when comparing fractions in order to cater to learners with varying learning styles and abilities. As much as possible
teachers should use visual aids as well as manipulatives to enhance learning and to ensure conceptual understanding.
47
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
SOURCE:
http://mrnonnemakersinvestigators.weebly.com/our-class-blog/representing-and-comparing-fractions
REDUCING A FRACTION TO SIMPLEST FORM (LOWEST TERMS)
To write a fraction in simplest form, follow the following steps.
1. Find the Greatest Common Divisor (GCD) or the Highest Common Factor (HCF) of both the numerator and the denominator.
2. Divide the numerator and the denominator by this GCD or HCF.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Science and Technology –
Comparing fractions of species within an ecosystem.
Social-Studies –
Comparing fractions of a population with different ethnic backgrounds. Reduce to lowest terms when possible.
48
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Food and Nutrition –
Use food labels to write nutritional content of given foods in fraction form. Compare fractions and reduce to simplest form.
Language Arts –
Write poems comparing fractions and/or reducing fractions to the simplest form.
49
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome N2.3.: Fractions, Decimals and Rational Numbers – Representing Decimals
Grade Level Expectations:
- Represent decimals using concrete materials and pictorials (tenths, hundredths);
- Describe decimals in context, verbally and symbolically; Use decimal notation for fractions with denominators 10 or 100. For example, rewrite 0.62 as
62/100; describe a length as 0.62 meters; locate 0.62 on a number line diagram.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Group Work Use of Hands-on Manipulatives
Knowledge
Learners, in groups of 5, will be given a combination of Use base -10 blocks as models.
1.Recognise and define decimals (tenth and base 10 blocks made of cubes, flats and rods. Give each
hundredths) using concrete materials (base -ten group a place value chart.
blocks, counters, grid paper) and pictorial
representations.
Whole tenths hundredths
2. Write a given fraction with a denominator of
10, or 100 using decimal notation.
3. Express dimensions of objects/shapes in Model
Whole Flat Rod
different units (metre, centimetre, millimetre),
using decimal notation. Decimal
Retrieved from:
Skills
https://thirdspacelearning.com/us/blog/what-
are-base-ten-blocks/
4. Measure and record lengths of objects using Number =
decimal notation.
5. Design models such as grids, number lines, to
50
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
represent decimal values. Distinguish the relationship between the cube,
Learners will be required to complete the chart based on flat and rod. Ten rods make a flat; ten flats make a
Values the combination of base 10 blocks they were given. whole.
6. State real life situations where decimal notation Learners are given the charts, as seen below and will be The whole or 1
is used. required to complete the chart.
Model Whole tenths hundredths
represents the whole or 1
Display to learners the flat, and the relationship
between the flat and the cube. Learners count the
number of flats that make up the whole. (Ten flats
make up the whole). Inform learners that the flat
represents tenths.
Decimal
Number =
51
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
CARD GAME
This game has two decks of cards.
One deck has fractions with denominators of 10, or 100
and the other is a deck of cards that has decimal
equivalents.
All cards are shuffled and placed face down in two
separate sections..
represent tenths
Learners take turns taking two cards, one from each
Learners count the number of rods that make up
section.
the flat (Ten rods make up the flat). Inform
Learners read the fraction on the card and then compare learners that the rods represent hundredths.
it to the card with the decimal value.
Learners decide whether they are equal.
If the cards are correctly matched, the learner keeps the
pair and then draws another two cards.
If the cards are not correctly matched, the cards will be
placed face down in their original positions.
Learner with the most cards at the end of the game wins. represent hundredths
52
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Create a chart to show the relationship between
the model and the decimal.
Whole tenths hundredths
Model
Retrieved from:
https://ofamilylearningtogether.com/2017/11/29/deci
Decimal 1 0.1 0.01
mal-pages/
Practical Activity (Pairs)
Learners measure the dimensions of the objects with
Number = 1.11
appropriate measuring instruments and record their
measurements.
53
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
One learner measures, and the other records and checks
that the value stated by his classmate is correct. Then, Whole Tenths Hundredths
the learners switch roles.
Model
Project
Assign learners different decimal values. Invite learners to
create two different models for their assigned decimal
(10X10 shaded grid; number line; base ten blocks).
Models must be labelled clearly and learners must write a
brief explanation of models chosen, describing how the
decimal values were represented.
Real Life Situation
Set up a classroom shop with various items with their
prices placed on them. Invite each learner to pick one
item from the shop. With play money, the learner has to
Decimal 1 0.3 0.02
come up with the exact notes and coins to pay for the
item chosen.
Number = 1.32
54
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Questions:
What is the value in the tenth place?
What is the value in the hundredth place?
What is the place value of 3 in the number 1.43?
Use of Hands-on Manipulatives
Base -10 blocks
https://www.teacherspayteachers.com/Product/Fr
ee-Classroom-Grocery-Math-Templates-2563236
55
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Demonstrate to learners that there are 10 flats that
make up a cube and so each flat is 1/10 of a
whole and is represented as a decimal notation by
0.1. It is read as one tenth.
If there are two flats, it is represented as the
fraction 2/10 and in decimal notation as 0.2.
Show learners that there are 100 rods that make
up a whole, so each rod is 1/100 and is
represented by the decimal notation 0.01. This is
read as one hundredth.
56
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1/100
Questions:
What is the decimal notation of one flat in relation
to a cube?
What is the decimal notation of one rod in
relation to a cube?
What is the decimal value of 1/100?
Demonstration/Group Work
Give learners measuring instruments: measuring
tape, centimetre rulers, metre ruler, thermometer.
Demonstrate to learners how to read the values
on each measuring instrument. Learners work in
groups where they will be given the opportunity to
read the values on the measuring instrument.
57
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Demonstrate to learners how to use the measuring
instruments to measure the length, height, width
of objects and temperature of liquids.
In groups, learners will measure and record the
dimensions of various objects and the temperature
of liquids.
Retrieved from:
https://www.shutterstock.com/search/ruler-cm
Retrieved from:
https://kids.britannica.com/learners/article/ther
mometer/277324
58
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Question:
What is the length of the object? Express your
answer as a decimal?
Think, Pair, Share
Place learners in pairs.
Distribute squared paper (10 X 10 grid ) to
learners to create a model to show decimal values.
Demonstration of grid
Explain that the entire grid represents 1 whole;
each column or row represents 0.1 and each small
square represents 0.01.
whole 0.1 0.01
Retrieved from:
59
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.printablee.com/post_10-by-10-
grids-printable_402493/
https://study.com/skill/practice/writing-
decimals-shown-in-grids-questions.html
Learners use their squared paper to shade or
colour squares that represent decimal numbers.
Demonstration on a Number Line
Draw a number line from 0 to 1, with intervals of
0.1 and 0.05, on a chart. Demonstrate to learners
different decimals numbers ( e.g 0.3, 0.75) on the
number line.
Learners create their own number lines using
strips of colourful paper. Learners place various
decimal numbers on their number line.
Question:
What decimal value does the model represent?
Discussion and questioning, use of videos
Engage learners in a discussion on situations
where decimals are used.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=scdG75
TGiPk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ypVQD
ZL18SQ
60
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Use of real-life activities
Introduce banknotes ($5, $10) and coins (5 cents,
10 cents, 25 cents, $1.00) to learners.
Write the value of the bank notes and coins as a
decimal. For example, learners will be shown that
$0.25 is equivalent to a 25 cents coin and $1.50 is
made up of six 25 cents coins or $1.00 coin and
two 25-cent coins.
Combine banknotes and coins to attain different
amounts, and these will be written as decimals.
Example, one $5 note and one 10 cent coin is
$5.10.
Question:
Can you identify other real-life situations where
decimals are used?
Additional Resources and Materials
Daisy’s Decimal Disaster by Joan Diaz
Decimal place value charts
Decimal dice
Fraction circles (divided into tenths and hundredths)
Flashcards
https://mathteachercoach.com/introduction-to-hundredths/
https://nz.ixl.com/maths/year-5/model-decimals-and-fractions
https://nz.ixl.com/maths/year-5/what-decimal-number-is-illustrated
61
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Measurement:
Decimals are commonly used in measurement. Hence, becoming familiar with various units of measurement and how to convert between them is necessary. Also,
there must be an understanding on how to use measuring instruments and how to read measurements using decimal notation.
Geometry:
Teachers should understand how decimals are used in the calculation of perimeter, area, and volume.
Statistics:
Decimals are frequently encountered in data analysis and statistics. Teachers should know how to interpret and represent decimal data in graphs and charts, as well
as to calculate measures of central tendency and variation.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Science:
● Measurement conversions involving decimals, such as centimeters to meters or milliliters to liters.
● data involving decimals, such as temperature, amount of rainfall, windspeed.
Social Studies:
● Currencies, converting between different currencies involving decimals
● Share prices , rate of inflation , prices of goods and services.
● Heights of mountains
Language Arts:
● Write explanations or reports on real-world applications of decimals.
● Prepare a recipe.
62
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcomes N2.4.: Fractions, Decimals and Rational Numbers – Comparing and Ordering Decimals
Grade Level Expectations:
- Compare two decimals to hundredths based on meanings of the digits in each place, using >, =, and < symbols to record the results of comparisons and
justify the conclusions, e.g., by using a visual model;
- Order decimals to hundredths based on place value understanding. Round decimal numbers to the nearest tenth, in various context.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Observation Use of hands-on manipulatives
Knowledge
Present learners with pairs of decimals numbers and Learners will be given 10X10 grids of similar
1. Compare two decimal values (hundredths) invite them to use comparison symbols (<, >, =) to sizes.
using appropriate symbols (<, >, =). compare them. Also present them with pairs of amounts
of money to do the same.
2. Arrange decimal numbers in ascending and
descending order. Observation Checklist:
3. Round off decimal numbers to the nearest
Criteria Yes No Comments
tenth and hundredth
Skills Learner correctly reads the
pair of decimals. Retrieved from:
4. Use manipulatives and pictorial representations
https://www.printablee.com/post_10-by-10-
to show decimals ( tenths and hundredths) in
grids-printable_402493/
ascending or descending order.
Learner uses a grid or base
With two 10 X 10 similar grids, learners shade
Values ten blocks or place value
squares to represent decimal numbers, for
chart effectively to show
example, 0.44, 0.97.
5. Identify real-life situations when decimals are
63
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
used to make comparisons (greater than, less than,
the decimals.
equal to)
6. State instances where rounding off is used in
everyday life. Learner uses the symbols <,
>, = correctly to represent
the relationship between
the decimals.
Retrieved from:
https://kgmathminds.com/2015/02/02/decimal-
quick-images/
Learner provides adequate
explanations for his choice
Learners compare the shaded squares on the two
of symbol.
cards.
EXIT CARDS
Provide learners with exit cards at the end of the lesson.
The questions on the cards must be answered.
The grid with more shaded squares is the greater
of the decimal numbers.
The grid with fewer shaded squares is the smaller
of the decimal numbers.
64
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Sample If the grids have the same number of shaded
squares, then the decimal numbers are equal.
Learners place the appropriate sign (<, >, =)
between the two grids, and then between the two
decimal numbers.
0.44 0.97
https://www.teacherspayteachers.com/Product/Or
dering-Decimals-and-Place-Value-Paper-Activities-
3962354?st=63618179756d3a080fa161c32559e61c
Additional Online Assessment
https://nz.ixl.com/maths/year-5/put-decimal-
numbers-in-order
65
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
PUZZLE Base 10 Blocks
Learners use base ten blocks to compare two
decimals (hundredths).
Set 1
https://www.shutterstock.com/search/blank-
puzzle-pieces
Provide learners with two puzzle pieces. One of the
puzzle pieces would contain a decimal written with tenth
place, e.g. 12.7. Invite learners to write two different
decimals (with two decimal places), on the second piece
of the puzzle, so that when rounded off correctly to the
nearest tenth, gives the decimal that was originally given.
Repeat this process with the first puzzle piece having a
decimal with hundredth place and learners must come
up with two decimals (with three decimal places) so that Retrieved from:
when rounded off, it gives the original decimal. https://thirdspacelearning.com/us/blog/what-
are-base-ten-blocks/
66
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
GROUP WORK Set 2
Sports: Cricket Ball Throw
Eight learners throw the cricket ball in the marked area
on the playing field, from a particular point. Learners
measure and record the distance of each throw from the
appropriate starting line.
Invite learners, in small groups, to compare the results of
the throws to determine the longest throw, the shortest
throw. Invite learners to round off the lengths measured
to the nearest tenth. Invite learners to arrange the lengths
in ascending or descending order.
Retrieved from:
https://thirdspacelearning.com/us/blog/what-
are-base-ten-blocks/
https://www.trackalerts.com/2018/05/thomas-stars-
Decimals numbers representing the base 10 black
with-record-throw-during-insports-primary-champs/
models are written and appropriate signs are
placed between them.
67
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Questions:
Which decimal is greater, smaller when comparing
two values?
Which decimal value is greater than 3.27, less than
3.15, equal to 2/10?
Group Work
Divide learners into small groups. Give decimal
cards to each group of learners. Each card has a
different decimal number.
Retrieved from:
https://www.eaieducation.com/Product/506480/
Decimal_Pocket_Chart_Cards.aspx
Retrieved from:
https://www.homeschoolmath.net/teaching/d/h
undredths.php
68
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Give each group a number line. Learners will
place the set of cards in the correct position on
the number line.
Learners write down the decimal numbers on their
cards in ascending order. Learners then write the
decimal numbers on their cards in descending
order.
The two groups then exchange half of their cards
and follow the same procedure above to write the
new group of decimal numbers in ascending and
descending order.
Question:
What patterns do we notice when arranging
decimal numbers?
Games
https://thirdspacelearning.com/us/math-
resources/topic-guides/number-and-
quantity/rounding-decimals/#introduction
69
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners work in pairs. Learners take cards with
decimal numbers from a deck of cards. Learners
place the card on the given number line (above).
If the card is placed in the orange section on the
number line, the rounded value to the nearest
tenth is the first number on the number line. If
the card is placed in the blue section on the
number line, then the rounded value to the nearest
tenth is the last number on the number line.
Learners continue until all cards have been placed
and rounded off to the nearest tenth.
Learners will discuss among themselves what is
noticed and write a generalization about rounding
off to the tenth place.
Repeat activity using the following number line.
https://thirdspacelearning.com/us/math-
resources/topic-guides/number-and-
quantity/rounding-decimals/#introduction
70
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners work in pairs. Learners take cards with
decimal numbers from a deck of cards. Learners
place the card on the given number line (above).
If the card is placed in the orange section on the
number line, the rounded value to the nearest
tenth is the first number on the number line. If
the card is placed in the blue section on the
number line, then the rounded value to the nearest
tenth is the last number on the number line.
Learners continue until all cards have been placed
and rounded off to the nearest hundredth.
Learners will discuss among themselves what is
noticed and write a generalization about rounding
off to the hundredth place.
Question:
What patterns do we follow when rounding
decimals to the nearest tenth?
What patterns do we follow when rounding
decimals to the nearest hundredth?
How is the rounded off number different from
the actual number given?
Is the rounded off number greater than or less
than the original number?
71
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Real Life Situations
Supermarket Shopping
Prepare a list of grocery items with prices in
decimal form. List similar items from different
brands. E.g. Blue Waters 410 ml, Crystal Clear 410
ml. Learners compare the prices of the different
items to determine the cheaper items.
Banking
Learners weigh different objects using a digital
scale which gives readings up to hundredths.
Learners record the weight of the objects and
round off each weight to the nearest tenth.
Present learners with foreign exchange rates from
a local bank. Learners round off the currencies to
the nearest cent.
72
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://1stnationalbankonline.com/foreign-
exchange-rates/
Question:
Can you think of examples where decimals are
used in everyday life? How are they used?
What professions or industries is knowledge of
decimal operations particularly important?
Additional Resources and Materials
Decimal place value charts
Decimal dice
IXL - Compare decimal numbers (Year 5 maths practice)
https://www.commoncoresheets.com/up-to-hundredths/249/download
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Place Value: Understanding the concept of place value is essential for working with decimals.
Decimal Operations: A good grasp of basic decimal operations such as addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. This includes understanding how to
align decimal points and carry out calculations accurately.
73
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Estimation: Understand the purpose of estimation and be able to approximate decimal numbers to the nearest tenth and hundredth to make quick calculations
and judgments.
Comparing Fractions and Percentages: Relationship between decimals, fractions, and percentages and being able to convert between them.
Real-World Contexts: Real-world contexts and practical application for rounding off and comparing decimals.
Units of Measurement. How to read measuring instruments.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Science Integration:
Data Analysis in Experiments: Learners can analyze data from scientific experiments, such as measuring liquid volumes in a beaker, temperatures, or distances in
meters. They can compare, order, and round these measurements to better understand the data.
Environmental Science: Use data on water usage, energy consumption, or pollution levels, where learners compare and order decimal values. This reinforces the
concept while exploring real-world environmental issues.
Social Studies Integration:
Economics and Currency: Compare and order prices of goods or services in different currencies, particularly when decimals are involved, such as in financial
literacy lessons or when discussing different economies. Rounding could apply to budgeting exercises.
Population Studies: When discussing population data, GDP, or other statistics, use decimal numbers. Learners can compare, order, and round these figures to
understand trends and patterns.
Technology Integration:
Learners can be introduced to writing simple code to compare, order, and round decimal numbers, reinforcing both math and coding skills.
Data Representation: Learners can use spreadsheets to enter data, use functions to round numbers, and visualize comparisons using charts, fostering a connection
between technology and mathematics.
Art Integration:
Learners can work with decimal measurements for scaling and proportions, compare dimensions and order sizes, and round to the nearest tenth to create precise
designs.
74
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Physical Education Integration:
Sports Statistics: Analyze statistics from sports, such as average times, distances, or scores, where decimals are commonly used. Learners can compare athletes’
performance metrics, order them, and round for simplified reporting.
Language Arts Integration:
Technical Writing: Have learners write explanations or justifications for their decimal comparisons and rounding, focusing on clarity and precision in mathematical
communication.
Story Problems: Integrate decimal operations into narrative story problems that require comparing, ordering, and rounding as part of the plot or solution.
75
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome N2.5.: Fractions, Decimals and Rational Numbers – Decimal Place Value
Grade Level Expectations:
- Extend the positional structure of the place value system to include decimals (tenths, hundredths)
- Read and write decimals to hundredths using base-ten numerals, number names, and expanded form, e.g., 347.39 = 3 × 100 + 4 × 10 + 7 × 1 + 3 × (1/10)
+ 9 × (1/100)
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Presentation/Group Work/Checklist Use of Place Value Chart
The learners will read, write and represent
Knowledge The learners in groups are presented with the following numbers in a place value chart.
activity which they will be required to present to the
1.Read and write decimals to hundredths using class. 1. The learners learn the following poem to assist
base-ten numerals, number names, and expanded with reading and writing decimal numbers.
form, e.g., 347.39 = 3 × 100 + 4 × 10 + 7 × 1 + 3 Activity
× (1/10) + 9 × (1/100 1. Read the given number.
2. Write the given number in words.
2.Using numerals and place-value counter 3. Write the number in expanded notation.
representations, represent base ten numerals up to 4. Use any of the place value charts interacted with to
hundredths in a place-value chart. explain your solution to the class.
5.Justify your expanded notation representation of the
2. The learner represents given decimal numbers
Skills number.
in a place value chart like shown below.
3.Convert the expanded form of decimal numbers
up to hundredths expressed using base-ten
numerals to their representative base-ten numerals.
4.Interpret the representations of decimals up to
hundredths on a place value chart, place value
counter representations, and write the numeral and
76
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
expanded form version of the value represented. 3. The learner then studies the place values of
Checklist
each digit. For example
Values
No. Criteria Yes No
5.Justify the expanded form representations of
1 Did the learners read the
decimal numbers up to hundredths for given
number correctly?
numbers,
2. Did the learners write the
4. The learners make the connection between
number correctly in words?
place values and total values of the digits when
reading and writing numbers.
3. Was the diagram representation
used appropriately?
4. Was the number written in
expanded notation correctly?
5. Were the learners able to justify
their response?
Observation Using an assessment tool
chart.
77
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5. Using the place value chart as a guide, the
Observational Checklist
learner completes the following to write numerals
in expanded form.
No. Criteria Yes Almost No Notes/
_______ = (___ x 1000) +( ___ x 100) +
Feedback
1
( ___ x 10) + ( ___ x 1) + ( ___ x ) + (
10
1 The learner 1
___ x )
demonstrates 100
For Example:
understanding
4578.02 = (_4__ x 1000) +( _5__ x 100) +
of place value.
( _7__ x 10) + ( _8__ x 1) + ( _0__ x
1 1
2 The learner has ) + ( _2__ x )
10 100
identified all
the positions Place Value Chart using Counter
correctly. Representations
The learners use place value counter
3 The learner
representations to help them read and write
writes the
decimal numbers up to hundredths.
correct number
representation
The learners use place value counters to represent
for the
a number like shown below.
expanded form
1. The learner studies the numeral.
given.
2. Identifies the digits in the numeral.
3. Identifies corresponding counters.
In a Think, Pair, Share activity, the learners interpret 4. Uses the place value chart like shown in the
diagram representations of decimal numbers and then diagram below.
write them in numeral and expanded form.
Activity 1
a. Study the diagram.
b. Write the number the diagram represents.
c. Write the number in expanded notation.
78
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
d. Justify their responses.
5. The total values of the digits are then written
or
from the digit with the highest value to the one
with the least value for the whole numbers. Then,
the number of decimal places following the point
is identified. The place value of the digit farthest
from the decimal point on the right, determines
how the number is read. For example, The digit
farthest away from the decimal point is in the
hundredths place. Consequently the number after
The learners do the above individually before pairing to
the decimal point will be read as hundredths.
discuss. The pairs are given ten minutes to work on the
In the case of 7548.23, the number is read as:
presentations they are to deliver to the class.
seven thousand, five hundred, forty-eight and
twenty three hundredths.
The learners' presentations are assessed with the
Note that numbers are written the way they
following.
are read in words.
SCO 3 Discussion
The learner converts numbers expressed in
expanded notation into standard form.
1. The learners are asked how do we express a
number in expanded notation?
79
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The learners are asked to explain the process step
Criteria Yes Almost No Notes/
Feedback by step.
2. The learners are then asked what they think
Accuracy of ten
should be done to convert a number expressed in
the placement thousands
expanded notation to standard form.
of digits in the
numeral thousands 3. A step by step approach is discussed with the
learners:
hundreds
For example: 7 x 10 000 + 5 x 1000 + 3 x 100 + 2
x 10 + 8 x 1 + 6 x 1/10 + 3 x 1/100
tens
1st. Work out the total value of each
ones
multiplication part of the number sentence.
7 x 10 000 + 5 x 1000 + 3 x 100 + 2 x 10 + 8 x 1
tenths
+ 6 x 1/10 + 3 x 1/100
hundredths
7 x 10 000 = 70 000
Accuracy of ten 5 x 1 000 = 5 000
expanded thousands 3 x 100 = 300
notation 2 x 10 = 20
thousands
8 x 1 = 8
hundreds 6 x 1/10= 6/10
3 x 1/100= 3/100
tens
2nd. Convert the fraction representations to a
ones decimal number.
6/10 = 0.6
tenths
3/100 = 0.03
hundredths
80
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3rd. Find the sum of the products of the parts.
70 000
5 000
300
20
8
0.6
+ 0.03
75 328 .63
The learners are encouraged to talk through the
steps.
Use of Graphic Organizer
The learners are guided in using a graphic
organizer like the one shown below to represent
the values for each place.
1. The learners write the expanded notation form
to be converted.
7 x 10 000 + 5 x 1000 + 3 x 100 + 2 x 10 + 8 x 1
+ 6 x 1/10 + 3 x 1/100
81
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. They are then encouraged to underline the
number found in front of each multiplication sign.
For example:
7 x 10 000 + 5 x 1000 + 3 x 100 + 2 x 10 +
8 x 1 + 6 x 1/10 + 3 x 1/100
3. After, the learners match the underline number
to the number it is multiplied by in the graphic
organizer.
The learner looks at 7 x 10000 for example, and
writes 7 under the 10 000 slot in the table since 7
is multiplied by 10 000.
The same is done with the other numbers. The
numbers are matched to the slot/column which
matched the numbers they are multiplied by.
The learners interpret the diagram representations
to read and write the decimal number represented.
1. The learners will first study the diagram below.
82
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. The learners then write the total values found in
each place starting with the position with the
highest numerical value.
In the diagram above, the position of highest
value is thousands. The numbers after the point
are written as decimal numbers.
Example 7000, 500, 40, 8, 0.2, 0.03
3. The learners then find the sum of the numbers.
7000
500
40
8
0.2
+ 0.03
7548.23
The learners use any of the processes they have
learned or discovered to explain how they come
up with the expanded notation form of numbers.
Additional Resources and Materials
https://youtu.be/82kKb093oic
https://youtu.be/EWHM8gMzVck
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Reading a Decimal Fraction
● Read the whole number part as usual. (If the whole number is less than 1, omit steps 1 and 2.)
For example in the number 567.89, the whole is read as five hundred and sixty seven
● Read the decimal point as the word "and."
83
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
For example: five hundred sixty seven and
● Read the number to the right of the decimal point as if it were a whole number.
For example: five hundred and sixty seven and eighty nine
● Say the name of the position of the last digit.
For example five hundred and sixty seven and eighty nine hundredths
Expanded Form of Decimal Numbers
Using the place value chart, the digits after the decimal points are represented as tenth (1/10), hundredth (1/100), thousandth (1/1000) and so on.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Science Integration:
Measurement and Units: Integrate decimals when measuring length, mass, or volume in science experiments. Learners can express these measurements in base-ten
numerals, number names, and expanded form, reinforcing the place value system while engaging in scientific inquiry.
Astronomy: Use the concept of decimals to understand astronomical distances or the size of planets and stars. For example, learners could write the distance from
Earth to various planets in decimal form, extending their understanding of place value in a meaningful context.
Social Studies Integration:
Learners could use decimal notation to express coordinates (latitude and longitude) or to describe population densities. They could then practice writing these
decimals in expanded form or as base-ten numerals, reinforcing mathematical and geographical understanding.
Economic Data: Explore topics like inflation rates, interest rates, or GDP per capita, which often involve decimals. Learners could practice writing these figures in
expanded form and discuss how small changes in decimals can have significant impacts in economic contexts.
Technology Integration:
Introduce basic coding or spreadsheet skills where learners input and manipulate decimals. They can use software to expand or decompose decimal numbers,
showing their understanding of place value through digital tools.
Data Management: In a spreadsheet, learners could enter numerical data that includes decimals, use functions to convert these into number names, and explore how
decimal place values affect calculations.
84
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Art Integration:
Learners can use decimals to describe dimensions when working on projects involving scale models or proportions. For instance, they could write the length of a
scaled-down object in decimal form and then express it in expanded form to understand how small differences impact the overall design.
Perspective Drawing: Learners can apply their understanding of decimals in creating perspective drawings, where accurate measurements are crucial. They can write
these measurements using base-ten numerals and expanded forms.
Physical Education Integration:
Fitness Tracking: Use decimals to record and analyze learners' fitness data, such as time laps in running or swimming. Learners can then express this data in
expanded form, reinforcing their understanding of decimals through real-world application.
Scoring Systems: In sports like gymnastics or diving, scores often include decimals. Learners can practice reading and writing these scores in various forms,
deepening their understanding of place value.
Language Arts Integration:
Descriptive Writing: Have learners write narratives or reports that include numerical data with decimals. They can practice converting these decimals into expanded
forms or writing them out as number names within a story or descriptive passage.
Cross-Curricular Math Journals: Learners can maintain a math journal where they regularly practice writing decimals in different forms. They could reflect on how
decimals are used in various subjects, reinforcing their understanding of place value through written expression.
Music Integration:
Rhythms and Time Signatures: Explore musical rhythms, where time signatures might include decimal concepts. Learners can write these out using base-ten
numerals or expanded forms, linking math with musical timing and structure.
Tempo and Beats: When discussing tempo, learners could use decimals to express beats per minute (BPM) or changes in tempo, practicing how to read and write
these decimals in different forms.
85
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Operations with Numbers
Introduction to the Strand:
Embarking on the journey of teaching addition and subtraction of fractions and decimals lay the cornerstone for mathematical literacy and problem-solving skills.
These concepts are evident in the real world and are often regarded as the bedrock of numerical understanding, thus serving as fundamental components for grasping
more advanced concepts in mathematics. Beyond the confines of the classroom, fractions and decimals manifest themselves in everyday scenarios, from dividing a
pizza among friends to buying snacks. Teaching the addition and subtraction of fractions and decimals equips learners with essential skills for navigating real-world
scenarios. Thus, the role of educators is not merely to transmit knowledge but to cultivate inquisitive minds. In this introductory journey, we invite learners to embark
on a voyage of discovery, where fractions and decimals serve as guiding stars illuminating the path to mathematical mastery and real-world application. To develop
skills in fractions and decimals learners should observe pictures, diagrams and models participate in hands-on activities, provided with the opportunity to make real -
life connections, collaborative learning and opportunities to engage in technological activities.
Essential Learning Outcome O1.1: Additive Thinking – Understanding the Meaning of Addition and Subtraction and how they are
Related
Grade Level Expectations:
- Understand addition and subtraction of fractions as joining and separating parts referring to the same whole
- Add and subtract decimals to hundredths, using concrete models or drawings and strategies based on place value, properties of operations, and/or the
relationship between addition and subtraction; relate the strategy to a written method and explain the reasoning used.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Manipulatives
Knowledge GAMES Give opportunities for learners to show that a
1. Recognise addition and subtraction of Teaching addition and subtraction of fractions through fraction is part of a whole by cutting appropriate
fractions as combining and separating games can make the learning process enjoyable and fruit/materials into equal parts such as: halves,
parts of the same whole. engaging. Here are some game ideas: quarters etc.
2. Add and subtract fractions with like and Fraction Bingo: Create bingo cards with fractions on Have learners listen and read stories relating to
unlike denominators, showing how them, such as 1/2, 1/3, 1/4, etc. Call out addition or addition and subtraction of fractions.
changes in the numerators or common subtraction problems involving fractions, and players mark
86
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
denominators affect the sum or the correct answer on their bingo cards. The first to get a
difference as it relates to the whole. line or a full card wins. In a village pie party, villagers share pies cut into
fractions. Lena shares 2 out of 4 pie pieces with
3. Use manipulatives and visual aids, such Fraction Board Games: Create a board game where Mike, leaving her with 2 pieces. Mike, who has a
as fraction strips, circle bars, area players move along a path by correctly solving addition or pie cut into 3 pieces, eats 1, leaving 2 pieces.
models, number lines, and technology, subtraction problems involving fractions. You can Activities like "Fraction Action" invite learners to
to model fraction subtraction. incorporate dice or spinners to determine how many decompose and reassemble fractional parts using
Skills spaces to move. strips, tiles, or bars.
4. Add and subtract decimals to the For example: Fraction snakes and ladder.
hundredths place value.
Fraction Dominoes: Create a set of dominoes with
fraction addition and subtraction problems on one side
5. Use concrete models or drawings to and the answers on the other. Players take turns matching
represent decimal addition and the problems with the correct answers, building a chain of
subtraction. dominoes.
Interactive Games :
6. Apply commutative and associative Play interactive games that require them to add and
properties, to add and subtract decimals. subtract fractions
WEBSITES
7. Relate addition and subtraction of
https://www.iknowit.com/lessons/d-adding-subtracting-
decimals to their representations on a
fractions-unlike-denominators.html
number line.
https://games.legendsoflearning.com/game/fractions-
intro-lab/2595?partner=legends-public&media=video
Values
https://games.legendsoflearning.com/game/busy-bus-
stop/3482?partner=legends-public&media=video
8. Communicate mathematical thinking
clearly and precisely, orally and in
writing, when explaining addition and
subtraction processes.
https://www.learn-with-math-
games.com/fraction-strips-up-to-20.html
Checklist To Assess Learners' Understanding of
Fractions From Games Played
87
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Conceptual Understanding Have learners add fractions with like
Understanding of Fractions: denominators by decomposing a given fraction.
- Can the learner identify numerators and E.g.
denominators? Use part- part- whole diagrams to add and
- Does the learner understand proper fractions, subtract fractions with like denominators. e.g.
improper fractions, and mixed numbers? Have learners use fractional charts, bars, strips and
number lines to add and subtraction fractions with
Common Denominators:
like denominators.
- Can the learner find the least common
denominator (LCD) for two or more fractions?
Simplification:
- Does the learner know how to simplify fractions
to their lowest terms?
Procedural Skills
Addition of Fractions:
- Can the learner add fractions with like
denominators?
- Can the learner add fractions with unlike
denominators by finding the common
denominator?
- Can the learner simplify the result after addition?
https://www.eaieducation.com/Product/533788/
Subtraction of Fractions:
Jumbo_Magnetic_QuietShape%C2%AE_Foam_F
- Can the learner subtract fractions with like
raction_Circles_Numbered_-_Set_of_51.aspx
denominators?
- Can the learner subtract fractions with unlike
Fraction Number Lines: Number lines marked
denominators by finding the common
with fractions help learners visualize the relative
denominator?
size and placement of fractions on a scale. They
- Can the learner simplify the result after
can be used to compare fractions, locate fractions
subtraction?
between whole numbers, and perform addition
and subtraction of fractions.
Problem-Solving Skills
Application to Word Problems:
88
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
- Can the learner translate word problems into
fraction addition or subtraction problems?
- Does the learner solve real-life problems involving
fractions correctly?
https://exam-corner.com/topic/practise-adding-
Accuracy and Precision and-subtracting-fractions-using-a-number-line/
Correct Calculation: Provide opportunities for learners to add and
- Does the learner perform calculations accurately, subtract fractions with unlike denominators by
including all steps? identifying equivalent fractions on a fraction chart
or by using fraction tiles.
Simplification Accuracy: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T5OAS4_h
- Can the learner consistently simplify their answers n7c
correctly?
Subtraction Activity:
Reasoning and Explanation
Rolling the Dice: Learners roll two dice to get
Justification of Steps:
two fractions to subtract. Ensure the first fraction
- Can the learner explain their process for finding a
is larger or equal to the second to avoid negative
common denominator or simplifying fractions?
results.
Error Identification: Visual Representation: As with addition,
- Can the learner identify and correct mistakes in learners use fraction tiles to model the fractions.
fraction addition and subtraction problems?
Use of Tools and Strategies
Utilization of Visual Aids:
- Does the learner use number lines, fraction bars,
or diagrams to aid understanding?
Use of Mathematical Strategies:
- Can the learner use strategies such as cross-
multiplication for finding a common
denominator?
https://support.mathies.ca/en/mainSpace/Fracti
onStripsTool.php
Engagement and Confidence
89
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Engagement in Practice:
- Is the learner actively engaged in fraction addition
and subtraction activities?
Confidence in Solving Problems:
- Does the learner show confidence in solving
fraction problems, asking for help only when
necessary?
Decimal Games
Decimal Bingo: Create bingo cards with decimal numbers
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FpKr2_-
on them, such as 0.25, 0.75, 1.50, etc. Call out addition or
sbPk
subtraction problems involving decimals, and players mark
the correct answer on their bingo cards. The first to get a
Addition with Fraction Tiles:
line or a full card wins.
Select Fractions: Learners choose two fraction
tiles to add.
Aligning Tiles: Learners physically align the tiles
next to each other to visually see the combined
length.
Finding Common Denominators: Guide
learners to see how different tiles can represent
the same fractional value (e.g., two 1/4 tiles equal
one 1/2 tile).
Summing Fractions: Learners place the tiles
together and, if needed, convert to a common
denominator to sum the fractions.
Subtraction with Fraction Tiles:
Select Fractions: Learners choose one fraction
tile and another smaller or equal fraction tile to
subtract.
https://printablecreative.com/bingo- Aligning Tiles: Learners place the smaller tile on
maker/card/fractions-and-decimals-bingo top of the larger tile to see the difference.
Group Discussion on Properties
90
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1. In small groups, have learners solve problems Finding Common Denominators: Help learners
using the properties of addition. understand how the remaining part can be
2. Encourage learners to explain their reasoning and represented in a common denominator format.
how they applied the properties. Subtracting Fractions: Learners remove the
3. Have groups present their solutions and smaller tile from the larger tile and determine the
explanations to the class. resulting fraction.
Number Line Manipulatives
Description: Provide learners with physical or digital
number line manipulatives that they can use to represent
decimal addition and subtraction.
Assessment:
https://www.amazon.com/ETA-hand2mind-
Rainbow-Fraction-Tiles/dp/B074QY86L5
Task: Given the problem 0.6+0.40 + 0.46+0.4, learners
use the manipulatives to visually show the addition process
on a number line.
Check for Understanding: Ask learners to explain each
step as they move along the number line and label their
final position.
Reflection: Have learners write a short paragraph
describing what they did and why it makes sense.
Math Journals https://lauracandler.com/introduce-decimals-
Activity: Reflective Math Journaling with-base-ten-blocks/
Description: Invite learners to maintain a math journal
where they write about their problem-solving strategies,
challenges, and insights after completing assignments.
91
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Example Prompt: Reflect on how you solved the SUBTRACT DECIMALS USING BASE 10
addition problem 4.57 + 3.89. What strategies did you use, BLOCKS
and why?
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2kaLBS09i9
k
https://www.onlinemathlearning.com/decimals.ht
ml#google_vignette
Applying Properties of Operations to Add and
Subtract Decimals
Understanding and using the properties of
operations, such as the commutative and
associative properties, can make it easier to add
92
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
and subtract decimals. Here’s how these
properties apply:
Commutative Property of Addition
The commutative property of addition states that
the order in which numbers are added does not
change the sum.
Example:
Add 3.25 and 4.75 using the commutative
property.
1. 3.25+4.75=8.00
2. 4.75+3.25=8.00
No matter the order, the sum is the same.
Associative Property of Addition
The associative property of addition states that the
way in which numbers are grouped does not
change the sum.
Example:
Add 1.5, 2.75, and 3.25 using the associative
property.
1. (1.5+2.75) +3.25
o First, add 1.5+2.75=4.25
o Then, add 4.25+3.25=7.50
2. 1.5+(2.75+3.25)
o First, add 2.75+3.25=6.00
o Then, add 1.5+6.00=7.50
No matter how the numbers are grouped, the sum
is the same.
Commutative Property of Subtraction
The commutative property does not apply to
subtraction because changing the order of the
numbers changes the result.
93
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Example:
Subtract 2.5 from 5.0.
1. 5.0−2.5=2.5
2. 2.5−5.0= the result will not be 2.5
The results are different, so the commutative
property does not apply to subtraction.
Associative Property of Subtraction
The associative property does not apply to
subtraction because changing the grouping of the
numbers changes the result.
Example:
Subtract 1.5 from the result of subtracting 2.0
from 4.5.
1. (4.5−2.0)−1.5
o First, subtract 4.5−2.0=2.5
o Then, subtract 2.5−1.5=1.0
2. 4.5−(2.0−1.5)
o First, subtract 2.0−1.5=0.5
o Then, subtract 4.5−0.5=4.0
The results are different, so the associative
property does not apply to subtraction
Number Line Basics
Using a number line is a great way to visualize the
addition and subtraction of decimals. Here’s how
to relate these operations to their representations
on a number line:
Number Line: A horizontal line with evenly
spaced marks representing numbers.
94
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Decimals: Placed on the number line between
whole numbers.
https://cindyelkins.edublogs.org/2017/09/23/dis
covering-decimals-part-2/
Metacognitive Strategies:
Teach metacognitive strategies such as self-
questioning, self-monitoring, and reflection.
Encourage learners to think about their thinking
process while solving problems, identify errors,
and adjust their strategies accordingly. This
promotes deeper understanding and independent
problem-solving skills. For example
Think-Alouds
Activity: Think-Aloud Problem Solving
Description: Provide opportunities for learners
to solve math problems out loud, explaining each
95
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
step of their thought process. This can be done
individually, in pairs, or in small groups.
Example Problem: Subtract 3.74 from 5.86
Additional Resources and Materials
Adding fractions refers to finding the sum of two or more fractions with same or different denominators.
Subtracting fractions refers to finding the difference of two or more fractions with same or different denominators.
Addition and subtraction with like denominators
Add or subtract the numerators, and write the result over the same denominator.
Addition of fractions with same denominator:
Subtraction of fractions with same denominator
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-cbse-maths-class-7/section/2.2/primary/lesson/addition-and-subtraction-of-fractions/
To add unlike fractions, we first convert them into the corresponding equivalent like fractions and then these are added.
96
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Addition and subtraction with unlike denominators
Since 2 and 8 are both factors of 8, a half and an eighth can be written into eighths.
We can see that 1/2 is equivalent to 4/8 and that ⅛ is the same. Now that the pieces are the same size, eighths, we can add them together
97
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
How to add decimals
● Write the numbers in a vertical list, lining up the decimal points.
● If the numbers have a different amount of digits, there may be some gaps in the columns. Fill in any gaps with a zero so that each number has the same
number of decimal places.
● Add a decimal point in the answer space, lined up with the others.
● Start at the right, the column with the least place value
● Add the digits in the column.
● If the total is less than 10, enter the digit in the answer space.
● If the total is 10 or more, enter the units digit in the answer space for the column and carry the tens digit to the next column on the left.
● Move left to the next place value column. Add the digits in the column and add any digit that was carried to this column. Repeat the addition process in
each column until the calculation is complete.
Addition of Decimals
The addition of decimals is done by starting from the right-hand side and then we move on to the left adding each column. For example, let us add 12.5 + 14.9
using the following steps.
98
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
● Step 1: Write the numbers one below the other such that they are aligned as per their place values and the decimal point is placed one below the other.
● Step 2: Now add the decimal numbers to get the sum. In this case, 12.5 + 14.9 = 27.4
https://thirdspacelearning.com/us/math-resources/topic-guides/number-and-quantity/adding-decimals/
Subtraction of decimals
● Step 1: Write the numbers one below the other such that the larger number is on top and the smaller number is written below it.
● Step 2: Now subtract the decimal numbers starting from the tenth’s column, moving on to the ones column, and then the tens column. Copy the decimal
as it comes. In this case, 15.8 - 2.7 = 13.1
99
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
1. Use real-life objects/manipulatives or situations to introduce the concept of fractions and decimals.
For fractions, use items like pizzas, chocolate bars, or measuring cups to demonstrate how a whole can be divided into equal parts.
For decimals, use money, rulers, or measuring tools to show how they represent parts of a whole or quantities along a number line.
- Define Fractions and Decimals: Clearly define fractions and decimals. Explain that fractions represent parts of a whole, with a numerator
representing the number of counting parts (parts being dealt with) and a denominator representing the total number of equal parts (naming parts).
Similarly, explain that decimals are a way to represent parts of a whole or quantities smaller than one, using a decimal point to separate the whole
number part from the fractional part.
- Visual Representation: Use visual aids such as fraction bars, fraction circles, or grids to represent fractions and decimals visually. This helps learners
visualize the concept and understand the relationship between the numerator, denominator, and the size of the fractional or decimal part.
- Relate Fractions and Decimals: Highlight the connection between fractions and decimals. Show how fractions can be represented as decimals and
vice versa. For example, demonstrate how the fraction 1/2 is equivalent to the decimal 0.5.
- Explore Place Value: Help learners understand the place value system in decimals. Show how each digit in a decimal represents a different place value
(tenths, hundredths, thousandths, etc.) and how the position of the decimal point affects the value of the number.
- Real-World Applications: Show learners how fractions and decimals are used in everyday life. Provide examples of how they are used in
measurements, money, cooking recipes, and other real-world contexts to emphasize their practical significance.
-
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Art and craft - Fraction and decimal scrapbook.
100
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: O1.2: Additive Thinking – Compute Fluently Using Operations (+,-)
Grade Level Expectations:
- Fluently add and subtract multi-digit whole numbers, fractions and decimals to hundredths using standard algorithms
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Problem Solving
Give learners real-world problems that require adding and Concrete Manipulatives:
Knowledge: subtracting multi-digit whole numbers. Provide different colored blocks or objects for
Assess their ability to apply the standard algorithm in learners to represent each place’s value (ones, tens,
1. add and subtract multi-digit whole numbers context. hundreds). By physically arranging the blocks, they
(up to five digits) using the standard can visualize how numbers are constructed and
algorithm with and without regrouping The standard algorithm is a step-by-step method used to how each digit relates to its place value.
perform basic arithmetic operations like addition, .
2. apply strategies to solve word problems subtraction, multiplication, and division. These algorithms Have Learners practice regrouping by physically
involving addition and subtraction of multi- follow a specific sequence of steps that help ensure exchanging 10 ones for 1 ten, or 10 tens for 1
digit whole numbers. accuracy and consistency in calculations. hundred, using manipulatives. This hands-on
approach helps them grasp the necessity and
Skills: Performance Tasks: process of regrouping when performing multidigit
Design tasks that involve real-world scenarios requiring addition and subtraction.
3. solve word problems involving addition and multi-digit addition and subtraction. These tasks assess the
subtraction of fractions. application of skills in practical contexts.
4. add and subtract decimals to hundredths Example
using the standard algorithm. You are part of the school events committee responsible for organizing
a fundraising event to support a local charity. Your task is to plan
5. demonstrate proficiency in aligning decimal the budget for the event by calculating the total costs and expected
points when adding and subtracting income using addition and subtraction of whole numbers.
decimals.
Rubric for performance task https://www.mathcoachscorner.com/2023/10/th
Scoring Levels e-standard-algorithm-for-multidigit-addition-and-
4: Exceeds Expectations subtraction-in-3-easy-steps/
3: Meets Expectations
2: Approaching Expectations
1: Below Expectations
101
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Accuracy
Level Description
4 All answers are completely correct with no errors.
3 Most answers are correct with minor errors that
do not significantly affect the final result.
2 Several answers are incorrect due to calculation
errors, indicating partial understanding.
1 Many answers are incorrect, showing a significant
lack of understanding of the process.
Correct Use of the Algorithm
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/70437481801759
Level Description
/
4 The standard algorithm is used correctly and
Number Lines: Invite learners to create physical
efficiently for all problems.
number lines using strips of paper or rope. They
3 The standard algorithm is used correctly for most
then use these number lines to explore and
problems, with occasional minor errors.
practice ordering numbers, performing addition
2 The standard algorithm is attempted but with
and subtraction, and identifying number patterns
frequent errors in the steps.
through hands-on movement along the
1 The standard algorithm is rarely or incorrectly
line.
used, showing a lack of understanding.
Process
Level Description
4 The learner clearly explains and justifies each step
of the process, showing a thorough understanding. https://www.cuemath.com/numbers/additio
3 The learner explains most steps of the process n-on-number-line/
clearly, with minor omissions or errors.
2 The learner explains some steps but omits key Have learners use manipulatives like fraction
parts or makes frequent errors. circles, bars, or tiles to physically visualize and
1 The learner provides little to no explanation of the handle fractions as parts of a whole. This hands-
process, showing significant gaps in understanding. on approach helps them understand that fractions
represent equal parts and invites them to easily
compare, add, or subtract fractions by aligning and
combining the pieces.
102
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Proper Notation https://funkyfractionsforfifthgrade.wordpress.co
Level Description m/common-core-standards/
4 Correct mathematical notation is used consistently
and all work is organized and easy to follow.
3 Generally correct notation is used, with occasional
minor mistakes. Most work is organized and logical.
2 Notation is often incorrect or inconsistent, and
work may be disorganized or difficult to follow.
1 Notation is incorrect or missing, and work is
disorganized or illegible.
Math Software:
Incorporate educational software that offers practice https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FpKr2_-
problems and tracks learner progress over time. For sbPk
example,
Gamification: Many math programs incorporate game- Error Identification
like elements to make learning fractions more engaging. Have learners review sample problems involving
Learners can earn rewards or progress through levels as decimal addition and subtraction that contain
they master fraction concepts, which can motivate them to intentional errors. They identify, analyze, and
practice more and improve their skills. correct these mistakes, reinforcing their
Interactive Simulations: Software often includes understanding of decimal concepts and the correct
interactive activities where learners can "slice" pizzas, procedures for performing these operations.
"pour" liquids, or "divide" objects to create and compare
fractions, making the learning process more fun and Activity: Provide worksheets with intentionally
relatable incorrect decimal problems for learners to analyze
Websites: and correct.
https://quizizz.com/admin/quiz/5ad09a251039df001a66c Steps:
5b6/adding-and-subtracting-large-numbers ● Create or find worksheets with common
https://www.begalileo.com/math-games/Grade-5/Add- decimal errors in addition, subtraction,
and-Subtract-Fractions/Add-Like-Fractions/1327 multiplication, and division.
● Have learners work individually or in pairs
Error Analysis to identify and correct the mistakes.
Peer Review and Discussion ● Discuss as a class why the errors occurred
Present learners with a problem that has an error and and how to avoid them.
learners must identify the error, as well as correct the error.
103
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Peer Teaching and Observational Checklist Example:
Have learners explain and teach fraction addition and Identify and correct the errors in the following
subtraction problems to peers. problems:
Assess their understanding based on the clarity and 1. 3.25 + 4.7 = 7.52
accuracy of their explanations. 2. 5.34 - 2.6 = 2.34
Self-Assessment Checklist for the Explainer Simulation
Clarity of Explanation Simulation of a shopping experience which forces
☐ I clearly stated the problem and the goal (what we are children to add and subtract decimals to
trying to find). hundredths. For example
Scenario: School Supplies Shopping
☐ I broke down the solution into clear, understandable
Problem Statement:
steps.
Invite learners to engage in problem solving
☐ I used appropriate vocabulary and mathematical terms.
activities. For example: You have a budget of
Accuracy of Explanation
$30.00 to spend on school supplies. You need to
☐ I used the correct method and algorithm for solving the buy various items, each with a specific price. Use
problem. decimal operations to determine how much you
☐ I checked my work to ensure all calculations were will spend, how much money you will have left,
accurate. and make decisions if your total exceeds your
☐ I correctly simplified the fractions, if necessary. budget.
Engagement with Peers
☐ I asked questions to check if my peers understood each
step.
☐ I encouraged my peers to ask questions if they were
confused.
☐ I responded to my peers’ questions accurately and
clearly.
Use of Visual Aids and Examples
☐ I used visual aids (like fraction strips or diagrams) to
illustrate the problem.
☐ I provided examples to reinforce my explanation.
Confidence and Communication
☐ I spoke clearly and confidently.
104
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
☐ I maintained eye contact and used body language to
engage my peers.
Performance Based Assessment
Decimal Simulation Exercise Checklist
Checklist Items Yes No
Can the learner identify the place
value of digits in decimal numbers?
Can the learner correctly add and
subtract decimals
using the standard algorithm?
Can the learner align whole numbers
and decimals correctly when adding
and subtracting?
Can the learner explain the difference
between addition and subtraction of
decimals?
Does the learner demonstrate
understanding of regrouping and
borrowing when necessary?
Does the learner perform addition
and subtraction of decimals
accurately?
105
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Whole Numbers:
Begin with place value, emphasizing the importance of each digit's position (ones, tens, hundreds, etc.).
Teach regrouping (carrying) and borrowing in multi-digit addition and subtraction.
Introduce the standard algorithm: align numbers vertically, add or subtract each place value from right to left, carrying or borrowing as necessary.
Fractions:
Review what fractions represent (parts of a whole) and how to represent them visually.
Teach adding and subtracting fractions with like denominators by adding or subtracting the numerators while keeping the denominators the same.
For fractions with unlike denominators, find a common denominator before adding or subtracting.
Use the standard algorithm: align fractions vertically, find a common denominator if needed, and add or subtract numerators.
Decimals:
Revisit place value, focusing on the tenths and hundredths place for decimals.
Teach aligning decimal points when adding or subtracting decimals.
Demonstrate regrouping with decimals, carrying over or borrowing as needed.
Apply the standard algorithm: align decimals vertically, add or subtract each place value from right to left, carrying or borrowing as necessary.
Integration:
Connect concepts by showing how to transition between whole numbers, fractions, and decimals within the same problem.
Practice adding and subtracting mixed numbers and a combination of whole numbers, fractions, and decimals.
Encourage estimation to check the reasonableness of answers.
Problem Solving:
Provide real-world problems that involve adding and subtracting multi-digit numbers, fractions, and decimals.
Guide learners in analyzing and interpreting word problems, identifying key information, and selecting appropriate operations.
Emphasize the importance of checking solutions for accuracy and reasonableness.
106
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Opportunity for Subject Integration:
Civics :
Sub-strand: Goods and Services
Research and write the number of visitors who entered the country during the previous calendar year.
Compare the volume of Caribbean visitors with number of visitors from countries outside the Caribbean.
Literacy :
Expository writing
Learners use recipes to write expository writing.
Learners write expository writing on how to add and subtract fractions and decimals .
Science and Technology:
Sub-Strand: Ecosystem (ECS)
Collect, using quadrats, data on the number of specific organisms within a habitat.
Design, construct and use discarded materials to make useful items.
Technological Methods (TM)
Design and construct objects to satisfy human needs and to make life easier.
107
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome O1.3: Additive Thinking –Make a Reasonable Estimation When Using Operations
Grade Level Expectations:
- Mentally subtracting 1-, 2-, 3-, and multi-digit numbers; Estimating with addition and subtraction of 1-, 2-, 3-, and multi-digit numbers;
- Mentally adding and subtracting tenths and hundredths;
- Estimating with addition and subtraction to hundredths.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Games: Mental Addition and Subtraction Strategies
Understanding Relationships Between
Skills Math Dice Games: Numbers: Engage learners in mental math
Activity: Learners roll dice to generate numbers for mental exercises where they break apart and rearrange
1. Estimate the results of addition and addition and subtraction. Rules are provided to guide the numbers in different ways. This practice helps
subtraction involving 1-digit numbers. calculations, encouraging strategy development for quick them develop a deeper understanding of number
mental math. relationships, laying the foundation for more
2. Estimate the answers to addition and advanced math concepts.
subtraction problems with 3-digit and 2. Math Bingo: 1-Digit Numbers
larger numbers. Activity: Bingo cards feature a mix of addition and Addition:
subtraction problems. Learners solve equations mentally ● Strategy: Use simple counting or number
3. Mentally add and subtract decimal and mark correct answers on their cards, reinforcing bonds.
numbers with tenths and hundredths mental math in a fun, competitive format. ● Example: 7+5
without using written algorithms or Think: 7+3=10, then 10+2=12, Thus, 7+5=12
manipulatives. 3. Digital Math Games: Subtraction:
Activity: Learners engage with interactive online math ● Strategy: Count back from the larger
4. Use mental strategies such as rounding, games that involve adding and subtracting numbers of number.
compensation, and adjusting to mentally varying difficulty levels. The games offer immediate ● Example: 9−4
add and subtract tenths efficiently. feedback and can be customized to meet different skill Multi-Digit Numbers
levels. Addition:
5. Extend their mental calculation skills to ● Strategy: Break into place values
adding and subtracting decimals to the (thousands, hundreds, tens, units) and
hundredths place, add.
● Example: 1,235+3,468
108
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6. Estimate the results of addition 4. Mental Math Quiz: Think: 1,235+3,000=4,235, then
problems involving decimals to the Activity: A quiz with a range of addition and subtraction 4,235+400=4,635, then 4,635+60=4,695, and
hundredths place problems, from simple 1-digit to complex multi-digit finally 4,695+8=4,703. Thus, 1,235+3,468=4,703.
equations, is designed to assess and reinforce mental math Subtraction:
skills at various levels of difficulty. ● Strategy: Subtract place values separately
or round and adjust.
Checklist for teaching mental addition and ● Example: 5,672−2,348
subtraction of whole numbers Think: 5,672−2,000=3,672, then
3,672−300=3,372, then 3,372−40=3,332, and
CHECKLIST ITEMS YES NO
finally 3,332−8=3,324. Thus,
Can mentally subtract and add single- 5,672−2,348=3,3245,672 - 2,348 = 3,324.
digit numbers quickly and accurately.
Digital manipulatives
Can mentally subtract and add multi- Provide digital manipulatives for learners who may
digit numbers, demonstrating benefit from interactive visual aids, such as virtual
understanding of place value concepts. base-ten blocks or online number lines.
Demonstrates proficiency in using Place Value Disks Decimals » Toy Theater |
mental strategies such as counting Learn • Create • Play
back, breaking numbers into parts, or
using number bonds. https://toytheater.com/base-ten-blocks/
Utilizes mental math strategies Have learners interact with Poems. For example:
effectively to solve subtraction and
addition problems efficiently. The Estimation Rhyme
Completes mental subtraction and
When you need to add, but the numbers seem too
addition tasks within a reasonable time
high,
frame, demonstrating efficiency in
Estimate to simplify, and give it a try.
problem-solving.
Round each number to the nearest ten,
Add them up, and then you'll know when.
Demonstrates proficiency in mentally
adjusting numbers to facilitate
If it’s close to five or higher, round up, you see,
estimation, such as rounding up or
If it’s lower than five, round down, easy as can be.
down.
Now add your rounded numbers, quick and fast,
109
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Oral Assessments Estimation helps, it’s a skill that will last.
Provides Insights into Problem-Solving Strategies Subtracting too can be done this way,
Variety of Approaches: Oral assessments invite teachers Round the numbers first, then take away.
to see the variety of strategies learners use to solve Estimation makes math less of a chore,
problems. This insight helps in understanding how Practice it often, you’ll learn more and more.
learners approach mental addition and subtraction tasks
and where they might need further instruction. Verbal and Auditory Techniques:
Real-Time Problem Solving: present problems in real Use mnemonic devices, chants, or rhymes to help
time and observe how learners think through and solve learners remember subtraction facts and reinforce
them, gaining a better understanding of their problem- mental computation skills.
solving processes.
Example: Use Storytelling to engage learners with addition and
Description: Pose problems orally and ask learners to subtractions, for example
solve them without using paper or calculators. This can be The Adventure of Jaden and Anaya: The Nutmeg
done individually or in small groups. Treasure Hunt.
Benefits: Directly assesses learners' ability to perform In the lush island of Grenada, siblings Jaden and
mental calculations and think on their feet. Anaya discover a treasure map under a nutmeg
Example: "What is 7.5 + 3.4?" or "Subtract 2.3 from 5.6." tree. Following the clues written in the Grenadian
Oral assessments to be graded using a rubric. dialect, they use addition and subtraction to
navigate the island.
Rubric for Assessing Mental Addition and
Subtraction of Decimals Chapter 1: They find a map and decipher the first
This rubric is designed to evaluate learners' proficiency in clue involving adding steps from a mango tree and
mentally adding and subtracting decimals. Each criterion is a cocoa house, totaling 81 steps.
rated on a scale from 1 to 4, where 1 is "Needs Chapter 2: They subtract the number of spice
Improvement," 2 is "Approaching Proficiency," 3 is baskets from their total, leaving them with 54
"Proficient," and 4 is "Advanced." steps.
Chapter 3: The next clue requires halving their last
Criteria: answer and adding 15, leading to 42 steps.
Accuracy Chapter 4: They subtract the number of
1 - Needs Improvement: Frequently makes errors in fishermen's huts from 42, arriving at 24 steps.
calculations, with correct answers less than 50% of the Chapter 5: At the final location, they dig up a
time. chest containing coins, beads, and a letter from
their late grandfather.
110
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2 - Approaching Proficiency: Sometimes makes errors, The letter read, “To my dear Jaden and Anaya, I
with correct answers between 50% and 70% of the time. hope you enjoyed this adventure. Remember, with
3 - Proficient: Usually accurate, with correct answers mental math, you can solve any problem and find
between 70% and 90% of the time. any treasure. Love, Grandpa.”
4 - Advanced: Consistently accurate, with correct answers Jaden and Anaya smiled, knowing their
90% of the time or more. grandfather had given them more than just a
treasure. He had taught them the power of mental
Speed math.
1 - Needs Improvement: Takes significantly longer than
average to complete calculations. Strategies for Estimating Decimal
2 - Approaching Proficiency: Takes slightly longer than Calculations
average, but within a reasonable time frame. Rounding
3 - Proficient: Completes calculations within an average Rounding is the most common technique for
time frame. estimating decimal calculations. Depending on the
4 - Advanced: Completes calculations quickly and required precision, decimals can be rounded to the
efficiently, often faster than average. nearest whole number, tenth, hundredth, etc.
Understanding of Place Value Examples:
1 - Needs Improvement: Shows little understanding of ● 4.67≈5(rounding to the nearest whole
place value, leading to frequent mistakes. number)
2 - Approaching Proficiency: Shows some understanding ● 3.24≈3.2(rounding to the nearest tenth)
of place value but occasionally makes mistakes.
3 - Proficient: Demonstrates a good understanding of Front-End Estimation
place value, making few mistakes.
4 - Advanced: Shows a deep understanding of place value, Front-End Estimation focuses on the most
rarely making mistakes. significant digits (the digits in the largest place
value) and adjusts the remaining digits.
Strategy Use Examples:
1 - Needs Improvement: Rarely uses strategies or uses ● For 56.789+34.234, use 56+34=90.
ineffective strategies. Adjust by considering the decimal parts,
2 - Approaching Proficiency: Sometimes uses effective so the estimate might be slightly above
strategies but not consistently. 90.
3 - Proficient: Usually uses effective strategies to solve ● For 78.6−43.27, use 78−43=35. Adjust
problems. by considering the decimal parts, so the
estimate might be slightly above 35.
111
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4 - Advanced: Consistently uses highly effective strategies, Compatible Numbers
demonstrating flexibility and efficiency. Compatible Numbers are numbers that are easy
to compute mentally and close to the original
Mental Math Fluency numbers.
1 - Needs Improvement: Struggles to perform calculations
mentally, often resorts to written methods. Examples:
2 - Approaching Proficiency: Can perform some ● For 6.73+3.28, use 6.7+3.3 because they
calculations mentally but lacks confidence. are easy to add mentally: 6.7+3.3=10.
3 - Proficient: Performs most calculations mentally with Invite learners to solve problems through songs.
confidence. For example
4 - Advanced: Performs all calculations mentally with high
confidence and accuracy. “Decimal Addition Boogie” (Tune: "Hokey
Pokey")
Application of Concepts
1 - Needs Improvement: Has difficulty applying decimal Verse:
addition and subtraction concepts to different contexts. You put the decimals in, you line them up right,
2 - Approaching Proficiency: Can apply concepts to You add the tenths and hundredths, and hold
familiar contexts but struggles with unfamiliar ones. your answers tight.
3 - Proficient: Can apply concepts to both familiar and You move from right to left, and then you write it
unfamiliar contexts with minimal difficulty. out,
4 - Advanced: Easily applies concepts to a variety of That’s what it’s all about!
contexts, including complex and unfamiliar situations.
Error Analysis Chorus:
You do the decimal boogie and you turn yourself
1 - Needs Improvement: Unable to identify or correct around,
errors in their own work. That’s what it’s all about!
2 - Approaching Proficiency: Sometimes identifies errors
but struggles to correct them. 2. “Subtracting Decimals Song” (Tune:
3 - Proficient: Usually identifies and corrects errors in their "Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star")
own work. Verse:
4 - Advanced: Consistently identifies and corrects errors, Subtracting decimals isn’t hard,
demonstrating a thorough understanding of the concepts. Line up the dots, then you’ll go far.
Borrow if you need to, don’t forget,
Start from the right, you won’t regret.
112
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Confidence Chorus:
1 - Needs Improvement: Lacks confidence in their ability Subtracting decimals, one by one,
to perform mental math with decimals. Practice makes it really fun.
2 - Approaching Proficiency: Shows some confidence but
is easily discouraged by mistakes. “Rounding Decimals” (Tune: "Twinkle,
3 - Proficient: Generally confident in their abilities and Twinkle, Little Star")
recovers well from mistakes. Verse:
4 - Advanced: Highly confident in their abilities and rarely When you round a decimal,
discouraged by mistakes. Look at the digit, don't be dull.
Scoring: If it’s five or more, move up the score,
32-28 points: Advanced Four or less, keep the rest.
27-23 points: Proficient Chorus:
22-18 points: Approaching Proficiency Rounding decimals, it's so fun,
17-8 points: Needs Improvement Now you know how it’s done
Math Relay:
Divide learners into teams and set up a relay race format
where each team member solves either an addition or
subtraction whole numbers and decimals problem before
passing the baton to the next teammate.
Include a mix of addition and subtraction of whole
numbers and decimal problems with varying difficulty
levels.
Encourage collaboration and teamwork as learners work
together to complete the relay.
Think-Pair-Share
Description: Learners solve a mental math problem
individually, then discuss their solutions and strategies with
a partner, and finally share with the class.
Benefits: Encourages collaborative learning and invites
learners to explain their thinking process.
Example: "Mentally calculate 5.13 + 2.09. Discuss your
method with a partner and be ready to share."
113
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Mental Math Journals
Description: Learners keep a journal where they record
their mental math strategies and reflections on their
problem-solving processes.
Benefits: Promotes metacognition and helps teachers
understand learners' thought processes.
Example: "Today I solved 8.5 - 3.6 by thinking of 8.5 as
8.50 and subtracting 3.60, which gave me 4.90."
Exit Tickets
Description: At the end of a lesson, give learners a quick
mental math problem to solve before they leave
(estimation or solve fully).
Benefits: Provides immediate feedback on the day's
learning and identifies areas needing review.
Example: "Solve 9.6 - 4.1 mentally and write your answer
on an exit ticket."
Additional Resources and Materials
Mental math strategies:
https://www.nms.ac.uk/media/1157965/mental-maths-strategies.pdf
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Estimation in mathematics is finding an approximate value reasonably close to the exact value.
Key Concepts of Estimation
Rounding: Simplifying numbers to a particular place value to make calculations easier. For example, rounding 487 to the nearest ten gives 490.
Front-End Estimation: is a reasonable strategy to estimate sums and differences when all or most numbers have the same number of digits. To use this strategy,
add or subtract the front digits of the number (or the digits in the greatest place), then make adjustments based on the numbers in the next greatest place.
114
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Example 1, in adding 456 + 378, you might use 400 + 300 = 700.
Example 2 : 345 + 416 + 298. Add the 3, 4, and 2 hundreds (numbers in the greatest place) to estimate 900. Adjust by adding the numbers in the next greatest
place which are 4, 1, and 9 tens to get 140. 900 + 140 gives you a front-end estimation of 1,040.
Compatible Numbers:.is a useful strategy when adding more than 2 addends, or typically a long list of numbers. With this strategy, you look for 2 or 3 numbers
that can be combined to create 10 or 100 to make it easier to determine an estimate.
EXAMPLE 1 When dividing 98 by 4, you might adjust it to 100 divided by 4, which is 25.
EXAMPLE 2: When adding 18 + 39 + 71 + 27 + 78 + 62, I can estimate the sum as 300 by combining numbers that estimate to 100: 18 and 78; 39 and 62; 71
and 27.
Clustering: When numbers in a set are close in value, you can estimate by rounding them all to a common value. For example, estimating the sum of 48, 52, and
50 by rounding each to 50 and then adding 50 + 50 + 50 = 150.
Using Benchmarks: Referring to known values or benchmarks to make a quick estimate. For instance, knowing that 50% of 80 is 40
can help estimate percentages close to 50%.
https://smathsmarts.com/strategies-for-estimating-sums-and-differences/
Rounding
• Rounding is used to determine the nearest 10, 100 or 1000 to the whole number to estimate a sum or difference, many times to give you a closer approximation.
The first step in estimating a sum or a difference is to round the numbers, by changing them to the nearest power of ten, hundred, thousand
Example: 328 + 74. Rounding to the nearest ten I estimate 330 + 70 = 400.
Round each number BEFORE you subtract.
Example 1:
47 rounds to 50 26 rounds to 30
50- 30 = 20
Addition of two numbers, one of which ends in 8 or 9
115
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
We’re going to add 26 + 9.
Since 9 is close to 10, we can replace the 9 with 10 – 1. This way, we are left with 26 + 10 – 1.
Now we add 26 + 10 = 36, and we are left with 1 to subtract: 36 – 1 = 35.
Therefore, 26 + 9 = 35.
Addition of two numbers, one of which ends in 1 or 2
We are going to add 24 + 11.
Since 11 is close to 10, we can replace the 11 with 10 + 1. And we are left with 24 + 10 + 1.
Now we add 24 + 10 = 34. Lastly, we add the 1 that was leftover: 34 + 1 = 35.
Therefore, 24 + 11 = 35.
Subtraction of two numbers with the subtrahend ending in 8 or 9
We are going to subtract 54 – 28.
Since 28 is close to 30, we can write the 28 as 30 – 2, and we are left with 54 – (30 – 2).
Given there is a negative sign in front of the parentheses, the operation would be 54 – 30 + 2.
No we subtract 54 – 30 = 24. Lastly, we add 24 + 2 = 26.
Therefore, 54 – 28 = 26.
Subtraction of two numbers, with the minuend ending in 8 or 9
We are going to subtract 29 – 14.
Since 29 is close to 30, we can write 29 as 30 – 1. This way we are left with 30 – 1 – 14.
Now we are going to subtract 30 – 14 = 16. Lastly, we subtract the 1 that was leftover 16 – 1 = 15.
Therefore, 29 – 14 = 15.
Subtraction of two numbers, with the minuend ending in 1 or 2
116
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
We are going to subtract 32 – 24.
Since 32 is close to 30, we can write it as 30 + 2. Which leaves us with 30 + 2 – 24.
Now we subtract 30 – 24 = 6. Lastly, we add the 2 that was leftover 6 + 2 = 8.
Therefore, 32 – 24 = 8.
https://www.smartick.com/blog/mathematics/addition-and-subtraction/estimate-a-sum/
Partitioning
Calculations with whole numbers which do not involve crossing place value boundaries. E.g. 23 + 45= ? by 40 + 5 +20 + 3 or 40 + 23 + 5
Calculations with whole numbers which involves crossing place value boundaries. E.g. 49 – 32= ? by 49 – 9 – 23 or 57 + 34 = ? by 57 + 3 + 31
Calculations with decimal numbers which do not involve crossing place value boundaries 5.6 + 3.7= ? by 5.6 + 3 +0.7 or 540 + 380= ? by 540 +
300 + 80 or 540 + 360 + 20
Calculations with decimal numbers which involve crossing place value boundaries. E.g. 1.4 + 1.7= ? by 1.4 + 0.6 + 1.1 and 0.8 + 0.35 = ? by 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.15
Compensating and adjusting
Compensation involves adding more than you need and then subtracting the extra.
This strategy is useful for adding numbers that are close to a multiple of 10, such as numbers that end in 1 or 2, or 8 or 9.
The number to be added is rounded to a multiple of 10 plus or minus a small number.
For example, adding 9 is carried out by adding 10, then subtracting 1. A similar strategy works for adding decimals that are close to whole numbers.
These are the ways you can help your class to progress with compensating and adjusting:
Compensating and adjusting to 10. (e.g. 34 + 9=? by 34 + 10 – 1 or 34 – 11= ? by 34 – 100 – 1 = ?)
Compensating and adjusting multiples of 10. (e.g. 38 + 68= ? by 38 + 70 – 2 or 45 – 29 = 45 – 30 + 1)
Compensating and adjusting multiples of 10 or 100. (e.g. 138 + 69= ? by 138 + 70 – 1 or 299 – 48 = 300 – 48 – 1)
Compensating and adjusting multiples with decimals. (e.g 2 ½ + 1 ¾ by 2½ + 2 – ¼ or 5.7 + 3.9 by 5.7 + 4.0 – 0.1)
Calculating using near doubles
117
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
When children have an automatic recall of basic double facts, they can use this information when adding two numbers that are very close to each other.
Near Doubles:
Near doubles to numbers under 20. E.g. 18 + 16 is double 18 and subtract 2 or double 16 and add 2.
Near doubles to multiples of 10. E.g. 60 + 70 is double 60 and add 10 or double 70 and subtract 10 or 75 + 76 is double 76 and subtract 1 or double 75 and add 1.
Decimal near doubles to whole numbers. E.g. 2.5 + 2.6 is double 2.5 add 0.1 or double 2.6 subtract 0.1.
https://thirdspacelearning.com/us/blog/mental-math-strategies/
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Literacy:
Construct a song, jingle or a poem on the steps in rounding off whole numbers and decimals when estimating sum or difference
Make a presentation on the steps in rounding off whole numbers and decimals when estimating sum or difference
Science and Technology:
Sub-Strand: Ecosystem (ECS)
Collect, using quadrats, data on the number of specific organisms within a habitat.
Design, construct and use discarded materials to make useful items.
Technological Methods (TM)
Design and construct objects to satisfy human needs and to make life easier.
118
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome O 2.1: Multiplicative Thinking – Understanding the Meaning of Multiplication and Division and How They Relate
Grade Level Expectations:
- Multiply and divide decimals (tenths and hundredths), using concrete models or drawings and strategies based on place value, properties of operations, and/or the
relationship between multiplication and division; relate the strategy to a written method and explain the reasoning used.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Performance Assessment Modelling/ Interactive Demonstrations
Knowledge Supports Development of Transferable Skills Promoting Collaborative Learning
Real-Life Skills: The skills practiced in performance Group Activities: Use modeling and interactive
1. Multiply decimal numbers by decimals. assessments, such as budgeting, calculating discounts, or demonstrations in group settings where learners
measuring areas, are transferable to real-life situations. collaborate to explore decimal operations. This
2. Multiply decimal numbers by whole number This helps learners see the value of their learning beyond collaborative approach fosters peer learning and
the classroom. discussion.
3. Divide decimal number by decimals.
Shared Exploration: Learners can work together
Application of Decimal Operations: Understanding to use models and interactive tools, discussing
4. Divide decimal number whole numbers
how to multiply and divide decimals effectively prepares their observations and strategies with peers, which
learners for future academic and life situations where these enhances their understanding through social
5. Use inverse operations to simplify division
skills are required. interaction.
problems (e.g., using multiplication to check
division
Example: Use hands-on demonstrations to engage learners
Construction Project Task: in understanding decimal operations.
6. Apply the commutative, associative, and
Description: Learners are tasked with determining the Example Activity: Demonstrating Decimal
distributive properties to multiply decimals.
total area of a construction project and the cost of Multiplication with Grid Paper
materials. Steps:
Instructions: 1. Pose a Problem:
● Provide measurements of the construction project "Let’s multiply 1.5 by 0.4 using grid paper."
in decimals (e.g., length and width of a floor). 2. Guide the Demonstration:
● Ask learners to calculate the total area using ● "How can we represent 1.5 on the grid
multiplication. paper?"
● "Now, let’s represent 0.4. How do these
two areas overlap?"
119
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Provide the cost per square unit and ask learners 3. Encourage Learner Participation:
to calculate the total cost using multiplication and ● "Who would like to come up and help
division. draw the overlapping sections?"
● Show their work using concrete models, area ● "What do we get when we count the total
models, or other visual aids. shaded area?"
● Write a short explanation of their reasoning. 4. Discuss the Results:
● "What does this shaded area represent in
Scoring Rubric terms of our multiplication problem?"
● "How does this visual help us
Criteria Advance Proficien Basic (2) Below
d (4) t (3) Basic (1)
Accuracy All Most Some Many
calculati calculati calculati calculatio
ons are ons are ons are ns are
correct correct correct, incorrect,
with no with but there showing
errors. minor are a lack of
errors. several understa
errors. nding.
Use of Effective Uses Uses Struggles
Models ly uses concrete models to use https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HbmZBLst
concrete or area with models wz0
or area models some accuratel
models to accuracy, y and
to represen but effectivel
represen t most represent y.
t problem ation is
problem s and incomple
s and solutions te or
solutions . unclear.
.
Dividing a Decimal by a Whole Number
120
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Understa Demons Demons Shows Shows
nding trates a trates a partial limited
Place thoroug clear understa understa
Value h understa nding of nding of
understa nding of place place
nding of place value, value,
place value in with with
value in most occasion frequent
all calculati al errors. errors.
calculati ons.
ons.
Explanati Provides Provides Provides Provides
https://baltesbuzz.weebly.com/math.html
on and clear, clear partial minimal
Reasonin thoroug explanati explanati explanati
Think-Pair-Share
g h ons and ons and ons and
Steps:
explanati reasonin reasonin reasoning
1. Think:
ons and g for g, with , showing
reasonin most some limited ● Pose a problem: "Divide 2.4 by 0.6 using
g for all solutions gaps. understa an area model."
solutions . nding. ● Ask learners to think about how they
. would solve it individually.
2. Pair:
Problem- Demons Demons Demons Struggles ● Have learners pair up to discuss their
Solving trates trates trates with thoughts and methods.
Skills strong good basic problem- ● Encourage them to explain their
problem problem problem- solving reasoning to their partner.
-solving -solving solving and 3. Share:
skills and skills and skills frequentl ● Ask pairs to share their solutions and
applies applies with y makes reasoning with the class.
decimal decimal noticeabl errors in
● Facilitate a class discussion on the
operatio operatio e errors. applying
different methods used and their
ns ns decimal
effectiveness.
accuratel accuratel operation
y in y in s.
121
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Using Inverse Operations to Check Decimal
complex most
Division Problems
and real- problem
While inverse operations primarily help in
world s.
verifying answers rather than simplifying the
problem
division process itself, they are crucial for
s.
accuracy.
Example 1:
● Division problem: 12.5 ÷ 2.5 = 5
● Inverse operation (multiplication): 5 * 2.5
= 12.5
● Since the multiplication results in the
original dividend (12.5), the division is
Observational Checklist
correct.
Example 2:
Checklist for Multiplication of Decimals Using
● Division problem: 36.9 ÷ 3 = 12.3
Manipulatives or Area Models
● Inverse operation (multiplication): 12.3 *
Understand Place Value:
3 = 36.9
• Recognise the place value of digits in the decimal
Again, the multiplication verifies the division
numbers being multiplied.
result.
Use a place value chart if necessary.
Prepare the Manipulatives or Area Models:
Use of Manipulatives and Visual Aids:
• Gather base-ten blocks, grid paper, or an area
Incorporate tools such as base-ten blocks, grid
model template.
paper, or interactive digital tools to visually
• Ensure each block or section of the grid represent decimal operations. This helps learners
represents a specific place value (e.g., tenths, understand the place value and the mechanics of
hundredths). the operations.
Set Up the Problem: Example: Use grid paper to illustrate the
• Write the numbers being multiplied. multiplication of decimals, showing how the areas
• Use the manipulatives or draw an area model to correspond to the products.
represent each decimal number.
Use the Area Model:
• For each decimal number, shade or place blocks
to represent its value.
122
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Combine the shaded areas or blocks to visualize
the product (e.g., shade 0.4 of a grid and then
shade 0.3 of that area).
Multiply the Numbers:
• Perform the multiplication using the
manipulatives or area model.
• Count the overlapping shaded sections or
combined blocks to determine the product. Example Questions:
Place the Decimal Point: ● "How did you decide to divide 2.4 by
• Determine the total number of decimal places in 0.6?"
the factors. ● "What steps did you take in your area
model to represent the division?"
• Place the decimal point in the product
● "Did your partner use a different method?
accordingly.
How did it compare to yours?"
Check Your Work:
• Use estimation to verify if the product makes
Applying Properties to Multiply Decimals
sense.
Commutative Property
• Compare the answer to a rough estimate of the
This property states that the order of factors does
product.
not change the product.
Explain the Strategy:
● Example: 3.2 * 4.5 = 4.5 * 3.2
• Be able to explain how you used the manipulatives
Associative Property
or area model to arrive at the answer.
This property states that the grouping of factors
Checklist for Division of Decimals Using
does not change the product.
Manipulatives or Area Models
● Example: (2.1 * 3) * 5.6 = 2.1 * (3 * 5.6)
Understand Place Value:
Distributive Property
• Recognise the place value of digits in the decimal This property states that multiplying a number by
numbers being divided. a sum is the same as multiplying the number by
• Use a place value chart if necessary. each addend and then adding the products.
Prepare the Manipulatives or Area Models: ● Example: 4.2 * (3 + 5) = (4.2 * 3) + (4.2
• Gather base-ten blocks, grid paper, or an area * 5)
model template. .
• Ensure each block or section of the grid
represents a specific place value (e.g., tenths,
hundredths).
123
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Set Up the Problem:
• Write the division problem.
• Use the manipulatives or draw an area model to
represent the dividend.
Use the Manipulatives or Area Model:
• Place the blocks or shade the grid to represent the
dividend.
• Divide the shaded area or blocks into equal parts
to visualize the division.
Perform the Division:
• Divide the shaded area or blocks into groups
equal to the divisor.
• Count the number of groups to determine the
quotient.
Place the Decimal Point:
• Place the decimal point in the quotient directly
above where it appears in the dividend.
Check Your Work:
• Use multiplication to verify the quotient (e.g.,
multiply the quotient by the divisor to see if it
equals the dividend).
• Estimate to see if the quotient makes sense.
Explain the Strategy:
• Be able to explain how you used the manipulatives
or area model to arrive at the answer.
Error Analysis
Objective: Help learners learn from mistakes by analyzing
and discussing errors.
Example Activity: Analyzing Missteps in Decimal
Division
Steps:
Present a Problem with an Error:
• "Here’s a learner’s work on dividing 4.8 by 1.2,
but there’s a mistake. Can you find it?"
124
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Discussion and Questioning:
• "What do you notice about the steps taken?"
• "Where do you think the error occurred?"
• "How would you correct this mistake?"
Encourage Reflection:
• "Why do you think this error happened?"
• "What can we learn from this mistake to avoid it
in the future?"
Example Questions:
● "If you divided 4.8 by 1.2 and got 0.4, what might
have gone wrong?"
● "What should the correct quotient be, and why?"
Summative Assessment
Identify the property:
Which property is illustrated by the equation 3.2 * 4.5 =
4.5 * 3.2?
Justify the use of a property:
Explain how using the distributive property can help you
mentally multiply 7.3 * 9.
Apply properties to solve problems:
Calculate 2.5 * 1.6 * 4 in the most efficient way possible.
Explain your reasoning.
Create examples:
Write a multiplication problem that demonstrates the
associative property.
125
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
MULTIPLICATION OF DECIMALS
How to multiply decimals using base ten blocks?
Use base ten blocks to represent 2 hundredths vertically and 1.3 as 130 hundredths horizontally to make rectangle.
After using the ones and tenths, complete the rectangle by adding hundredths.
Then count the ones, tenths and hundredths.
Use base ten blocks to represent 2 hundredths vertically and 1.3 as 130 hundredths horizontally to make a rectangle.
After using the ones and tenths, complete the rectangle by adding hundredths.
Then count the ones, tenths and hundredths.
AREA MODEL
● Shade the row with one decimal and the column with the other decimal.
● The squares on the grid that overlapped in the shaded region is the solution to the problem.
● Count the squares
126
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
The grid below represents the multiplication of 0.2 x 0.2 = 0.4. 4 squares overlapped in the shaded region, therefore, the result will be 4/10 =0.4
https://byjus.com/us/math/multiplication-of-decimals-by-models/
Multiplication of whole numbers and decimals using models
Example: Find the product of 2 x 0.3 using models.
We can write 2 x 0.3 as 2 x 3/10 or 2 x 3 tenths.
Now, we have to shade 3 columns 2 times.
There are 60 shaded grids in the above-shown model.
Shaded grid = 60 x 1/100 = 0.6.
https://byjus.com/us/math/multiplication-of-decimals-by-models/
2.8×3.5
Represent 2.8 as 280 hundredths vertically and 3.5 as 350 hundredths horizontally on the same area model.
127
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Then, fill in the area to complete the rectangle.
[Figure 4]
Next, add up the number of units from each section.
128
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-interactive-middle-school-math-6-for-ccss/section/4.3/related/lesson/area-models-for-decimal-multiplication-msm6/
DIVISION OF DECIMALS BY WHOLE NUMBER
129
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
130
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TfTTTAtWFGM&t=31s
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dOHEhTuDQQc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IWTC4hYAz7M
https://ecdn.teacherspayteachers.com/thumbitem/Multiplying-and-Dividing-Decimals-on-a-Number-Line-5014768-1573412094/original-5014768-3.jpg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MAV9I6hO7pM
Decimals can be divided or multiplied using the number line
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Science:
In science experiments, use measurements that involve decimals, such as recording the growth of plants in centimeters or mixing solutions in liters. Learners can multiply or
divide these measurements to predict outcomes or analyze data.
For example, if a plant grows 0.5 cm per day, learners can calculate its growth over several days using multiplication. If they have a solution that needs to be divided into
smaller quantities, they can use division.
Social Studies:
Introduce learners to basic economic concepts by having them create budgets or manage money in scenarios that involve decimals. For example, calculating the total cost of
goods, dividing expenses among a group, or adjusting prices with discounts.
Simulate real-world activities like planning a trip where learners need to multiply and divide decimals to budget for transportation, lodging, and food.
131
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Language Arts:
Ask learners to write their own word problems that incorporate multiplying or dividing decimals. This enhances their comprehension and invites them to practice math in a
narrative context.
Vocabulary Building:
Introduce math-specific vocabulary like "product," "quotient," "decimal point," and "place value" within reading assignments. Encourage learners to use these terms
correctly in their writing.
Write an expository essay on the steps to multiply or divide decimals
Write jingles or poems on the steps to multiply or divide decimals
132
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 2.2: Multiplicative Thinking – Compute Fluently with Operations (x&÷)
Grade Level Expectations:
- Use strategies fluently to recall multiplication and related division facts
- Compute 1, 2, and 3-digit by 2 or 3-digit multiplication and division problems.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Observation Checklist Think-Pair-Share through multiplication and
Knowledge division games:
Learner’s observation checklist (Think, pair, share) Example:
1. Recall and apply multiplication and Multiplication and Division Fluency (Think)Provide a multiplication or division
division facts of 1, 2, and 3 digits by 2- Learner's Name: problem to learners. Invite them time to
or 3-digit numbers. Date of Observation: individually solve the problem .
2. Multiply 1-digit numbers by 2, and 3- Criteria for Assessment: (Pair)Then, have them pair up with a classmate to
digit numbers and their relationship discuss their strategies and solutions .
with division fluently. Recalling Multiplication Facts: (Share)Finally, invite pairs to share their
Can the learner recall multiplication facts up to 12x12 approaches with the class, encouraging diverse
Skills fluently? Yes No perspectives and strategies
How quickly and accurately can the learner recall
3. Solve multi-step word problems multiplication facts? Real world connections
efficiently and accurately. ● Fluent (answers within 3 seconds) Encourages Exploration and Inquiry
● Moderately fluent (answers within 5-7 seconds) Investigative Learning: Encourage learners to
Values ● Slow (answers take more than 7 seconds) investigate, experiment, and discover solutions,
Does the learner use effective strategies (e.g., skip fostering a deeper understanding of multiplication
4. Demonstrate the ability to collaborate counting, using known facts, recognizing patterns) to recall and division.
effectively with peers to enhance their multiplication facts? Yes No Creative Problem-Solving: Have learners
fluency in multiplication facts and explore multiple approaches to solving real-world
proficiency in multi-digit multiplication Related Division Facts: problems, which promotes creative thinking and
and division by participating in group Can the learner efficiently recall division facts innovation in applying mathematical concepts.
activities corresponding to multiplication facts? Yes No
How well does the learner apply strategies learned for
recalling multiplication facts to solve related division
problems?
● Effectively
133
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Somewhat effectively Example
● Ineffectively Grocery Store Math
Scenario Setup:
Computing Multiplication and Division Problems: Provide each learner with a shopping list with
Can the learner accurately compute 1, 2, and 3-digit by 2 various items and prices. Items are listed in
or 3-digit multiplication problems? different quantities, requiring multiplication to
Yes No find the total cost per item.
Can the learner accurately compute 1, 2, and 3-digit by 2 Multiplication Task: have learners multiply the
or 3-digit division problems? quantity of each item by its price.
Yes No Division Task: have learners determine how to
How efficiently does the learner solve multi-digit divide items equally among family members or
multiplication and division problems? friends.
● Efficiently (minimal errors, uses appropriate Reflection and Presentation: have learners write
strategies) a brief reflection on how they solved the problems
● Moderately efficiently (some errors, occasional use and present their findings to the class.
of strategies) Discuss different strategies used and any
● Inefficiently (frequent errors, struggles with challenges faced.
strategies)
SCO 3
Maths Journal Evaluating Checklist Differentiated Instruction
https://s3.eu-west- Multiple Representation
1.amazonaws.com/cdn2.mathsnoproblem.com/wp- Differentiated instruction tailors instruction to
content/uploads/2020/01/Maths-Journal-Evaluating- meet the diverse needs, abilities, and learning
Checklist.pdf styles of all learners. It may involves varying
teaching methods, materials, and assessments to
Performance tasks accommodate different learners and ensure that
each learner can access and engage with the
Task Overview: Learners will plan a classroom garden. content. For example,
They will need to calculate the total number of plants in Formats: Offer problems in different formats
the garden and determine how many plants each row will (e.g., visual aids, manipulatives, text, and audio).
have if they are equally distributed. This task integrates Some learners may benefit from seeing the
multiplication and division skills. problem visually or hearing it read aloud.
Instructions: Flexible Grouping: Group learners based on
Garden Layout Design: their current understanding and skills. Invite for
Each learner receives a grid representing the garden plot.
134
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Plant Allocation: fluid movement between groups as learners'
Each learner will choose different plants to fill the garden. proficiency levels change.
The number of plants per type must be a multiple of the Invite each group to come up with at least three
same 1-digit number. different ways to solve the real life problem to
Multiplication Task: cater for differentiated instructions and present
Calculate the total number of plants for each type by their strategies to the whole class. Learners are left
multiplying the chosen 1-digit number by 2- or 3-digit on their own with minimum teacher involvement
numbers. to do the problems.
Division Task:
Distribute the total number of each type of plant evenly
across the rows.
Reflection and Explanation:
• Learners write a short reflection explaining how
they used multiplication to find the total number
of plants and division to ensure equal distribution
across rows.
• Discuss any patterns or relationships they noticed
between multiplication and division during the
task.
Presentation:
• Learners present their garden layout, showing
calculations for both multiplication and division.
• Explain the process and any challenges faced.
Assessment Criteria:
• Accurate use of multiplication algorithms.
• Correctly calculated total number of plants.
• Proper use of division to distribute plants evenly.
• Clear explanation of the relationship between
multiplication and division.
• Presentation and clarity of the garden layout and
calculations.
135
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Differentiated Assessments
Tiered Problems: Offer problems at varying levels of
complexity. Learners can start with simpler problems and
progress to more complex ones, ensuring they are
challenged appropriately based on their skill level.
Tier 1: Basic Problems
Multiplication
Problem: Sarah buys 7 packs of crayons. Each pack has
12 crayons. How many crayons does she have in total?
Steps: 7 * 12
Division
Problem: There are 84 candies and 4 friends want to share
them equally. How many candies will each friend get?
Steps: 84 * 4
Tier 2: Intermediate Problems
Multiplication
1. Problem 5: A factory produces 134 toys every
day. How many toys will it produce in 23 days?
Steps: 134 * 23
Division
Problem: A shipment of 912 books needs to be
distributed equally among 16 libraries. How many books
will each library receive?
Steps: 912 ÷ 16
Tier 3: Advanced Problems
Multiplication
Problem: A company sells 546 computers each month.
How many computers will it sell in 321 months?
Steps:546 * 321
Division
Problem: A warehouse has 7344 boxes of goods to be
packed into containers. Each container can hold 24 boxes.
How many containers are needed?
Steps:7344 ÷ 24
136
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Tier 4: Challenging Problems
Multiplication
Problem 13: A car rental company rents out 487 cars each
day. How many cars will it rent out in 129 days?
Steps: 487 * 129
Division
Problem 15: A total of 17856 liters of water needs to be
distributed equally among 144 water tanks. How many
liters of water will each tank receive?
Steps: 17856 ÷ 144
Additional Resources and Materials
Number Lines
Games and Puzzles
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Data management in identifying the correct scales to use on the y-axis
Number concept in reading and writing numbers
Measurement in money conversion.
137
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: O 2.3: Multiplicative Thinking – Make Reasonable Estimation When Using the Operation (x&÷)
Grade Level Expectations:
- Mentally multiplying and dividing by 10, 100, and 1 000
- Mentally multiplying with 2-, 3-, and multi-digit numbers
- Estimating with multiplication of 2-, 3-, and multi-digit numbers by a 1-digit number.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge Digital Assessments: Use online quizzes and interactive Encouraging Metacognition
tools that provide instant feedback. These can include Encourage metacognition when multiplying
1. show that multiplying by 10, shifts digits to drag-and-drop activities to place digits in the correct using powers of 10. It helps learners reflect on
the left of its place and dividing by 10, shifts columns after multiplication or division. For example their thinking processes and understand the
digits to the right of its place, and the same Nearpod: https://nearpod.com/ strategies they use. Here are some strategies:
concept applies for multiplying and dividing by Nearpod offers interactive lessons and assessments that Visual Models: Use place value charts and base-
100 and 1000 include a variety of question types, such as drag-and-drop, ten blocks to visually demonstrate how
multiple-choice, and open-ended questions. It provides multiplying by powers of 10 shifts digits. Have
Skills instant feedback and detailed reports. learners draw their own models and explain how
● Features: Interactive lessons, formative they work.
2. Interpret and solve word problems that assessments, multimedia integration. Reminder: reinforce place value and the
require multiplying or dividing quantities by ● Pros: Engaging, versatile, supports diverse concept that the each place is 10 time the place
powers of 10. learning styles. to its right
3. Apply mental multiplication and division skills Variety of Assessment Formats
to solve problems involving measurements, Written Assessments: Include word problems that
conversions, and scaling. require multiplying or dividing by 10, 100, and 1000.
Ensure problems are presented in clear, concise language.
4. Interpret and solve word problems that Oral Assessments: Invite learners to explain their
require multiplying or dividing quantities by thought process and solutions verbally. This can be
powers of 10 accurately recorded or presented to a teacher or peer.
For example:
138
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Values Problem: A warehouse has 10,000 items that need to be
packed into boxes, each box holding 100 items. How
5. Show appreciation for the practical many boxes are needed?
applications of mental calculation techniques
and their role in mathematical problem-solving Project
by Assign projects where learners must use instruments such
as measuring tape, meter ruler, cm ruler to record
measurements of things in and around the classroom.
Also, have learners change measurements from larger units
to smaller units and vice versa.
https://www.cuemath.com/learn/mathematics/arithmetic
-length-area-volume-conversions/
https://www.therouttymathteacher.com/place-
value-relationships/
Reflection Journals: Have learners keep
journals where they reflect on their problem-
solving process, challenges faced, and strategies
used.
Think-Alouds: Encourage learners to verbalize
their thought process while solve
https://www.splashlearn.com/math- Multiple Strategies:
vocabulary/measurements/liquid-measurement-chart Division Algorithm
139
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Math in the News: Set up the division problem: 10,000 ÷ 100.
Activity: Have learners read a news article involving Place Value Approach
numbers (e.g., statistics, sports scores) and use mental Recognise that dividing by 100 shifts the decimal
math to interpret or analyze the data. Learners explain point two places to the left.
technique used and also how mental math strategies help https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RssSPp_3
them in their calculations. YTc
Assessment: Evaluate their ability to apply mental math
techniques to real-world data. Repeated Subtraction
Step 1: Start with 10,000 items.
Step 2: Subtract 100 items at a time:
· 10,000 - 100 = 9,900
· 9,900 - 100 = 9,800
· Continue until reaching 0.
Step 3: Count the number of subtractions
performed: 100 subtractions.
Visualization with Manipulatives
Step 1: Use base ten blocks to represent 10,000
items.
Step 2: Group the blocks into sets of 100 to
represent each box.
Step 3: Count the number of sets: 100 sets.
Array Model
Step 1: Create a grid or array with 10,000 items.
Step 2: Group items into arrays of 100 each.
Step 3: Count the number of groups or arrays:
100 groups.
140
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Fraction Approach
Step 1: Express the problem as a fraction:
10,000 ÷ 100 is equivalent to 10,000 / 100.
Step 2: Simplify the fraction: 10,000 / 100 =
100.
Estimation and Adjustment
Step 1: Estimate how many boxes would be
needed if there were 10,000 items and each box
held 100 items.
Step 2: Estimate: 10,000 is 100 times 100.
Step 3: Confirm the exact number by
calculating: 10,000 ÷ 100 = 100.
Learners use base ten blocks to count in tens
and hundreds. Work in groups to discover linear
measurement such as 100cm=1m
1m=1000km
https://www.vedantu.com/maths/convert-
metre-into-kilometre
Solve real life problems on work sheets
https://www.researchgate.net/figure/The-
number-256-represented-using-base-ten-
blocks_fig37_27530408
141
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Article Selection:
Example: An article about a recent sports game
with scores and player statistics.
Activity Instructions:
Read the Article: Learners read the article and
highlight key numbers and statistics.
Tasks:
Basic Task: Calculate the total score of a game
from given points. Intermediate Task:
Determine the average score per game over a
season.
Advanced Task: Compare the performance of
two players using given statistics.
Additional Resources and Materials
Online Tools and Apps:
1. Prodigy: prodigygame.com/main-en/
2. SplashLearn SplashLearn: Fun Math & English Program for Preschool to Grade 5
Classroom Activities
1. Mental Math Drills
2. Games and Puzzles
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Science
● Measurement and Conversions
● Scientific Notation
Social Studies
● Population and Demographics
● Historical Dates and Timelines
142
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Language Arts
● Data Interpretation
● Reading Comprehension
● Writing Projects
143
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome O3.1: Proportional Reasoning – Representing and Working with Rates and Ratios
Grade Level Expectations
Use ratio and rate reasoning to solve real-world and mathematical problems
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Exit Tickets: At the end of the lesson, ask learners to Visual Aids: Use diagrams, pictures, and charts to
Knowledge write a ratio that compares two quantities (e.g., number of represent ratios and rates. Tools like ratio tables,
apples to oranges in a basket). double number lines, and bar models can help
1. Explain a ratio as a comparison of two https://www.cazoommaths.com/ks1-ks2-maths- learners visualize the relationships.
quantities. worksheet/using-ratio-notation-worksheet/ For example:
2. Represent ratios using different notations (e.g
3:2, 3 to 2, 3/2)
3. Explain the concept of equivalent ratios and
how to determine if two ratios are equivalent.
4. Define a proportion as an equation stating that
two ratios are equivalent.
Skills
5. Create and interpret ratio tables to solve the https://www.pinterest.com/pin/22518066863630
problem 997/
6. Solve multi-step everyday problems using ratios
and proportions.
.https://www.tes.com/teaching-resource/y6-ratio-white-
7. Explain reasoning and approach to solving rose-spring-week-10-11830319
problems involving ratios and proportions.
144
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Interactive Activities for Understanding Equivalent
Ratios
Interactive activities can make learning about equivalent
ratios engaging and hands-on. Here are some examples of
activities that involve matching cards with equivalent ratios
and using manipulatives to create visual representations of
ratios.
Matching Cards with Equivalent Ratios
Objective: Learners will identify and match equivalent
ratios.
Materials:
● Index cards or printed cards with ratios written on
https://www.media4math.com/library/definition
them.
-ratios-proportions-and-percents-concepts-
● Pairs of equivalent ratios on separate cards.
equivalent-ratios
Preparation:
Create pairs of cards with equivalent ratios. For example:
o ½ and 2/4
o ¾ and 6/8
o 5/6 and 10/12
Ensure you have enough pairs for the whole class.
Activity:
1. Shuffle the cards and distribute them among the
learners.
2. Have learners walk around the room to find their https://virtualnerd.com/middle-math/ratios-
matching pairs. proportions-percent/ratios-rates/equivalent-
3. Once pairs are found, ask each pair to explain why ratios-definition
their ratios are equivalent.
4. Collect the cards and redistribute for additional Creating and Interpreting Ratio Tables to
rounds. Solve Problems
Variation: Have learners create and use ratio tables to
Make it a timed activity where learners have to find their identify patterns and solve problems. By filling in
pairs within a certain time limit. the tables, they can clearly see how ratios relate to
one another, making it easier to understand and
work with proportional relationships.
145
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Create and Interpret Ratio Tables
Problem : Example Problem and Solution
A school is planning a field trip and has a ratio of 5 Problem: A recipe calls for 3 cups of flour for
learners for every 1 chaperone. If 25 learners are going, every 2 cups of sugar. If you want to make a larger
how many chaperones are needed? batch using 9 cups of flour, how much sugar do
Solution: you need?
Initial ratio: 5 learners to 1 chaperone (5:1 Step-by-Step Solution:
1. Identify the Initial Ratio:
The initial ratio is 3 cups of flour to 2 cups of
sugar (3:2).
2. Set Up the Ratio Table:
Flour Sugar
(cups) (cups)
3 2
Using the Ratio Table above, have learners calculate the 3. Generate Equivalent Ratios:
value of the unknown in the different colour column . Multiply both parts of the ratio by the same
What is the value of X in the Red column? number to create equivalent ratios.
Flour Sugar
, (cups) (cups)
Solve and explain solutions 3 2
1. Solve for y in the proportion 5/9=y/27 6 4
9 6
2. A map has a scale of 1 inch representing 50 miles. 4. Interpret the Table:
If the distance between two cities on the map is 3 From the table, you can see that if you use 9 cups
inches, what is the actual distance between the of flour, you will need 6 cups of sugar
cities?
Contextual Learning: Relate ratios and rates to
Think-Pair-Share: real-life situations that are relevant to learners'
This strategy encourages learners to think individually experiences, such as cooking, shopping, or sports.
about a problem, discuss their ideas with a partner, and This makes learning more meaningful and
then share with the larger group, providing multiple ways engaging.
to process and articulate their understanding. John is making a fish pie. He is using the Recipe
● Since 140=140, the proportion 7/10=14/20is Below.
true.
146
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Think (5 minutes): Solving Proportions
● Present the following problem to the class: "A Invite learners set up proportions and use cross-
recipe calls for 4 cups of flour for every 6 cups of multiplication to solve for the unknown value.
sugar. If you want to make a batch with 8 cups of This hands-on practice helps them understand
flour, how much sugar do you need?" how to establish and solve proportional
● Ask learners to think about the problem and write relationships effectively.
down their solution and reasoning.
Pair (5 minutes): Example Problem:
● Have learners pair up and share their solutions ● Solve for x in the proportion 3/4=x/8 .
with their partners. Solution:
● Encourage them to discuss the steps they took to 1. Set up the proportion: 3/4=x/8
solve the problem and compare their answers. 2. Cross-multiply: 3×8=4×x.
Share (10 minutes): 3. Simplify: 24=4x
● Invite several pairs to share their solutions with 4. Solve for x: x=24/4=6.
the class. So, x=6.
● Write the different solutions on the board and Problem:
discuss the methods used. ● Verify if 7/10=14/20.
Solution:
Quick Checks: Use short, frequent quizzes or polls ● Cross-multiply: 7×20=140 and
(digital tools like Kahoot! or Quizizz can be engaging) to 10×14=140.
gauge understanding and provide immediate feedback. ● Since 140=140, the proportion
7/10=14/20is true.
Additional Resources and Materials
Manipulatives(counters), Number Lines, Maths Story Books, Educational Games (card games, board games, Math War, Online Math Games. Graph papers,
Diagrams.Using Technology: Online Games.
147
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Ratios compare quantities and show the relationship between them.
There are three ways of writing ratios. Using a colon e.g. 4: 3 As a fraction 2/5 or 3 to 4.
When it comes to writing, ratio order is significant.
The ratio should always be written in its simplest. e.g., the ratio 4:6 can be simplified to 2:3.
Equivalent Ratios have different numbers but show the same comparison or relationship. They are very similar to equivalent fractions. We can use multiplication and/or
division to find equivalent ratios. Whenever we multiply or divide the terms by the same number, we have created equivalent ratios.
Simplifying Ratios means reducing ratios to a form where the only divisible common factor is one.
There are six mangoes to 8 apples in a box. What is the ratio of apples to mangoes?
Share $30 between Tom and Peter in the ratio 2:3. How much money does each boy get?
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Language Arts:
● Reading word problems that involve math operations.
● Writing word problems to reinforce understanding.
● Practicing mathematical vocabulary.
● Mathematics Storybook Form
Science:
● Measuring and recording data, then performing basic calculations.
● Studying patterns and sequences in nature that involve math concepts.
● Using math in science experiments and data analysis
Social Studies:
● Cooperative learning among learners in completing group projects.
● Promoting social interaction among learners as they learn.
● Sharing of ideas, strategies when solving real life problems
148
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome O3.2: Use a variety of representations and models of percentages to solve real-world mathematical
problems.
Grade Level Expectations:
- Use a variety of representations and models of percentages to solve real-world mathematical problems
- Represent and create equivalent ratios and rates, using a variety of tools and models, in various contexts
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Choice Boards: Provide learners with a choice of Visual Aids: Use pie charts, bar graphs, and
Knowledge activities to demonstrate their understanding of percentage grids to visually represent percentages.
percentages. For example, learners could choose to create Visual aids help learners who learn best through
1. Define a percent as a part of 100. a pie chart, write a word problem involving percentages, or seeing information.
develop a digital presentation.
2. Express a number as a percentage of
another number.
Skills
3. Calculate a percentage of a given
quantity.
4. Use different methods to convert
percent to decimals and fractions, and
https://www.ablebits.com/office-addins-
vice versa.
blog/make-pie-chart-excel/
5. Create and interpret visual models of
Expressing a Number as a Percentage of
percentages, such as pie charts, bar
Another Number
graphs, and 100 grids. This list of percentages add up to 100%, so our pie chart is
● Focus: Comparing two numbers to find
an accurate representation of the percentages. If they
out what part one number is of the other.
6. Solve word problems involving didn’t add up to 100%, then the wedges of the pie chart
● Process:
percentages in contexts such as would be different from the percentages listed.
1. Divide the first number by the
shopping, cooking, and finance.
second number.
https://content.byui.edu/file/b8b83119-9acc-4a7b-bc84-
efacf9043998/1/Excel-1-3-3.html
149
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. Multiply the result by 100 to
7. Set up and solve proportions to find the Real-World Problem Solving: convert it to a percentage.
part, whole, or percentage in real-world ● Sports Statistics: Use sports data to calculate ● Example: If you have 20 red apples out
contexts. percentages of wins, losses, or player performance of 50 total apples, you would calculate
(20/50) * 100 = 40%. So, 20 red apples
Values Basketball are 40% of the total apples.
Free Throw Percentage: Calculate the percentage of free
8. Choose to explain their reasoning and throws made by a player. Steps to Express a Number as a Percentage of
approach to solving percentage ● Example: A player makes 12 out of 15 free Another
problems, both in writing and orally. throws. What is their free throw percentage? 1. Identify the two numbers: The part (or
● Calculation: (12 ÷ 15) × 100 = 80% the number you are comparing) and the
whole (the number you are comparing it
Data Collection: to).
Learners can collect their own data on their favorite sports 2. Divide the part by the whole: This gives
. teams or players. you a decimal.
3. Multiply the result by 100: This
Real-World Connection: Discuss the importance of converts the decimal into a percentage.
percentages in sports and how they are used by coaches, Formula
players, and fans. Percentage=(Part/Whole)×100
Have learners use the data on the percentage of the table
to construct a diagram of a pie chart.
Real-World Application:
Description: Present contextualized problems that
involve calculating percentages in real-life scenarios. This
can motivate learners and make the learning process more
relevant.
Example: Pose a scenario where learners calculate a
discount. For instance, they can find the final price of a
$20 item with a 10% discount (discounted price = $2)
https://www.onlinemathlearning.com/percent-
of-a-number.html
150
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Manipulatives: Have learners use different types of manipulatives
● Provide physical objects like fraction strips, to calculate percentages of a given quantity. For
percentage circles, or grid papers to help learners Example: Find 25% of 200 marbles. Learners will
visualize percentages and solve problems hands- group manipulatives and solve the problem.
on. 25% means 25 out of every 100
● Have learners write a percentage as a fraction out 25 for the first 100 marbles
of 100. eg 20% is written as 20/100. reduce to 25 for the second 100 marbles
2/10. As a decimal=0.2 25……………… 100
25……………….100
Total = 50 ……………...200 marbles
So 25% of 200 marbles=50
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Xt4UDk7Kzw
Worksheets
https://vimeo.com/414894706
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/fractions-
What percentage of the diagram is decimals-percents-freebie--466967055089767706/
. Shaded
. Unshaded
151
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Group Projects: Learners will use Visual aid and charts to explain
Have learners work in groups to solve real-world problems the relationship among fractions, decimals and
involving percentages. They can present their findings percent.
through posters, slideshows, or oral presentations,
inviteing for different forms of expression. 100 Grids
Learners in groups of fives will conduct an interview with learners in Color Coding: Use different colors to represent
grades 2, 3, 4, and 6 at St. Ann Junior Academy about different categories or percentages on a 100 grid.
their means of transportation to get to school. Shading Activities: Have learners shade in
Each group will collect the data for a given grade, analyse the date squares to represent percentages of a whole.
and make their presentation using percentages. Pattern Recognition: Explore patterns within
the 100 grid to understand percentage
Exit Tickets: relationships.
At the end of a lesson, ask learners to solve a quick Estimation and Calculation: Use 100 grids to
problem involving percentages and explain their method. estimate and calculate percentages.
This can provide immediate feedback on their
understanding.
For Example : Percentage word Problem
Jeff scored 28/40 in a Science test and 17/25 in a Math
test. In which subject did he score the highest percentage?
https://www.twinkl.com.au/resource/fraction-
decimal-and-percentage-grid-posters-au-n-
1688631902
Group Work:
Encourage collaborative problem-solving through
group projects and discussions. Group work
invites learners to learn from each other and see
multiple approaches to the same problem
Place learners in groups of three (3) Each group
will be tasked with finding the cost of a certain
152
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
item in Five named Stores in the parish and their
percentage discount. Each group will collect their
data and compile the information in a table. Each
group will make their presentation to the class.
Learner Choice:
Invite learners to choose how they demonstrate
their understanding of percentages, such as
through written explanations, drawings, or digital
presentations.
Additional Resources and Materials
Manipulatives(counters) Number Line,, Maths Story Books, Educational Games (card games, board games, Math War, Online Math Games. Graph papers,
Diagrams. Using Technology: Online Games. Percentage Chart
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Percent means for every hundred. The symbol % is read as percent and it shows you are dealing with a percentage.
A Percentage is a fraction with a denominator of 100. For example 60/100 = 60%.
100% is the whole. 100/100 =1
5/100 can be written as 0.05 or 5% As a fraction = 5/100. As a decimal= 0.05 As a percentage = 5%
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics:
Percentages: Calculate discounts, tax, and tip amounts during a simulated shopping experience.
Ratios: Use ratio tables to scale recipes or convert between different units of measurement.
Rates: Solve speed problems, such as calculating how long it will take to travel certain distances at different speeds.
Science:
Chemical Mixtures: Use ratios to mix solutions of different concentrations and calculate the percentage concentration of each component.
Population Growth: Calculate growth rates of bacteria or plant populations using percentages and represent the data using graphs.
153
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Nutrition Labels: Analyze food labels to understand the percentage of daily values of nutrients, using ratios to compare different products.
Social Studies:
Census Data: Analyze population data to calculate growth rates, and use percentages to understand demographic distributions (age, income, etc.).
Economics: Compare inflation rates, unemployment rates, and interest rates, using ratios and percentages to understand economic trends.
Elections: Analyze election results by calculating percentage votes, and using ratios to represent voter turnout across different regions.
Art:
Scale Drawings: Create scale models or drawings using ratios to maintain proportion.
Color Mixing: Use percentages to mix paint colors accurately, understanding how ratios of primary colors affect the outcome.
Design Projects: Develop a project where learners design patterns or tessellations using geometric shapes, incorporating ratios to ensure symmetry and balance.
154
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Patterns and Relationships
Introduction to the Strand:
Patterns are central to mathematics; children have intuitive ideas about patterns. As children become more confident in making patterns and seeing connections, they
can talk out loud about what they have noticed. Children will start to identify the mathematical relationships and connections around them in the home, your setting,
and outside of nature. Patterning supports the foundations for recall of the counting sequence and understanding number operations. Learning about patterns and
connections will help children to make their own predictions and form logical connections. It’s an essential foundation for later mathematical thinking and reasoning.
retrieved from: https://help-for-early-years-providers.education.gov.uk/mathematics/patterns-and-connections
Essential Learning Outcome P1.1.: Recognizing, describing and extending patterns – Repeating Patterns
Grade Level Expectations:
- Identify and describe generalized place value patterns of decimal numbers, relationships in polygons and patterns in transformations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Observation
Flip it, Slide it, Turn it
Knowledge: Listen to learners as they discuss what positions the
polygons should move to line up on top of the other. Introduce the term Transformation. and explain
1. Identify and analyze transformation that the flip, turn and slide are called
patterns, such as reflections, rotations, transformations. Relate the ‘new names’ to the
and translations. previous name.
2. Identify and name the place value of
given digits within decimal numbers.
Flip =reflection
4. Recognise and explain the relationship
turn=rotation
between place value positions in decimal
numbers.
155
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Skill
5. Analyze patterns in transformations by Behavioural Criteria E S NI
identifying the changes in position,
orientation, or size of shapes. 1. Identifies the type name of the
polygon
Values
2. Is it a regular or irregular Polygon?
6. Utilize knowledge of place value patterns,
3. Identifies the polygon’s attributes.
polygon relationships, and transformation
patterns to address real-world challenges.
4. Identifies the action need to line
up the shape. .
E -Excellent, S- Satisfactory, NI- Needs Improvement
Have learners complete the following worksheet in
groups or individually. In groups, learners can race to
complete the worksheet first and correctly, by writing
both of the names of the transformation on the paper.
slide=translation
Transformation worksheet
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/41784967165011
https://www.tutoringhour.com/files/transformation/sli 5575/
de-flip-turn/labeling-1.pdf
Have learners watch the following video for
further consolidation.
Flip =reflection
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YD3HI
turn=rotation MUae_4
156
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
slide=translation 1. I can slide, but I don't change my size.
What transformation am I?
Starting with the basic name, then adding the 2. I turn around a point, making a full circle.
sophisticated name for transformation next to it, invites What transformation am I?
for better retention.
3. I flip over a line and change my direction.
What transformation am I?
Play the following game for further consolidation
.
Transformation Game
Transformation Slides
https://wordwall.net/resource/57744063/maths/transf
ormations https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1pXMF
NiStvy7qW4EuYMvrOr33YOUAGQwGHnMyN
sH_lRs/edit#slide=id.g20df9b5ade3_0_18
Think-Pair-Share Activity: Place Value in Decimal Show learners the shapes on the slides above
Numbers using the link. For each shape, have learners
identify the polygon by counting its sides and
Step 1: Think (Individual Activity)
vertices. Then have learners identify which action
would invite them to line up the shapes on each
Take a moment to think about the following questions:
other.
Learners will state if they have to flip it turn, or
1. What is the place value of the digit 5 in the
slide it. For each ‘Transformation, assign a
number 76.452?
physical action to match. (Example:
2. How does the position of the digit 7 differ in the
numbers 3.27 and 0.73?
3. Can you explain the relationship between the
place values of digits in the numbers 4.56 and slide it- translation
45.6?
Step 2: Pair (Partner Activity)
157
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Pair up with a classmate and discuss your answers to the
questions. Make sure to explain your reasoning behind flip it - reflection
your responses and listen to your partner's explanations
as well.
turn it - rotation
Step 3: Share (Whole Group Discussion) Decimal Place Value
To pique learners' interest and activate prior
Share your answers with the class. Be prepared to explain
knowledge.
your thought process and reasoning behind your
responses. Listen to your classmates as they share their
1. Begin by displaying a variety of decimal
insights and ask questions to clarify any confusion.
numbers on the board (e.g., 5.67, 0.84,
3.25).
Group Work worksheet 2. Ask learners to identify the value of
specific digits in each number, using the
following chart.
Along with the place value chart, have learners complete
the worksheet.
https://www.mathworksheets4kids.com/place-
value/decimals/underline-thousandths-1.pdf
Exploration Station
Station 1:
Decimals: That’s the Point
158
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
To Review the concept of place value in decimal 3. Engage learners in a brief discussion
numbers, have learners observe examples of decimals in about the importance of understanding
real life. Then, they will use the decimal chart to identify place value in decimal numbers.
the place and value.
Discussion Questions
1. Identify and list the place values in decimal
1. What is the significance of place value
numbers.
when working with decimal numbers, and
2. Create examples of decimal numbers with
how does understanding place value help
varying place values.
in correctly identifying the value of
3. Discuss and identify any patterns or
specific digits?
relationships found in the place values of
2. Can you explain the relationship between
decimal numbers.
the different place value positions in a
4. Prepare a presentation to explain place value
decimal number, such as tenths,
patterns in decimal numbers to other "Experts."
hundredths, and thousandths?
Exploration Station
Create different exploration stations. divide the
class into teams. have teams rotate at each station.
Each group will present their findings and
knowledge to the other groups.
Encourage discussions on how understanding
place value patterns, relationships in polygons, and
patterns in transformations connect and relate to
each other.
159
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Station 2 Invite time for questions and clarifications from
other groups.
One LittleTwo, Little Three Little Polygons
Encourage collaboration and sharing of insights
1. Research and list different types of polygons
between all "Experts."
Within and outside the classroom and school
environment.
Learners will have a comprehensive understanding
2. Identify the properties of each type of polygon.
of place value patterns of decimal numbers,
3. Discuss the relationships between sides and
relationships in polygons, and patterns in
angles in polygons.
transformations.
4. Explore the concept of symmetry in polygons
and provide examples.
Emphasize the interconnected nature of these
5. Classify polygons based on their properties and
mathematical concepts and how they build upon
discuss unique characteristics.
each other.
6. Prepare a presentation to explain polygon
relationships to other "Experts."
Encourage learners to apply their knowledge to
real-world scenarios to deepen their
understanding.
Reflect on the learning process and discuss any
challenges or insights gained from the Activity.
160
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Station 3
Transformations: More than Meets the Eye
Using polygons in the classroom to include school
supplies and teacher’s resources to model
transformations. Create cards with the following images
represented on them. Learners will pull random cards
and use polygons in the classroom to show the
transformation pulled.
Use multiple polygons to:
slide it- translation
flip it - reflection
turn it - rotation
1. Define and explain different types of
transformations (translations, rotations,
reflections).
2. Identify patterns in transformations of shapes
and discuss any similarities or differences.
3. Provide examples of applying transformations to
polygons.
161
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4. Discuss the relationship between the original
shapes and their transformed counterparts.
5. Prepare a presentation to explain patterns in
transformations to other "Experts."
Additional Resources and Materials
Polygons Game
https://wordwall.net/resource/28633943/polygons
Transformation worksheet
https://www.tutoringhour.com/files/transformation/slide-flip-turn/labeling-1.pdf
Transformation Game
https://wordwall.net/resource/57744063/maths/transformations
Transformations video
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YD3HIMUae_4
Transformation Slides
https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1pXMFNiStvy7qW4EuYMvrOr33YOUAGQwGHnMyNsH_lRs/edit#slide=id.g20df9b5ade3_0_18
162
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Place value worksheet
https://www.mathworksheets4kids.com/place-value/decimals/underline-thousandths-1.pdf
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
163
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
164
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
165
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
166
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome P 1.2.: Recognizing, describing and extending patterns – Increasing and Decreasing Patterns
Grade Level Expectations:
- Demonstrate an understanding of the role of patterns in addition/subtraction situations involving decimal numbers.
- Create and describe patterns to illustrate relationships among whole numbers and decimal tenths
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Think Pair Share
Knowledge Learners will think about what the pattern is. They will Provide learners with a series of decimal addition
pair up in groups of twos or threes and share within their and subtraction problems (e.g., 0.5 + 0.3, 1.4 - 0.2)
1. Recognise and describe patterns in groups how they came up with the rule of the pattern. and have them identify patterns such as consistent
changes in decimal places or predictable results.
addition and subtraction situations
Learners can use a table to record their
involving decimal numbers.
Short Investigation observations and describe the patterns they find.
Learners will create an addition or subtraction word
2. Recall examples of a pattern in an problem which must highlight a pattern. They will solve Create charts with decimal numbers arranged in
the problem in steps and show how they got their rows and columns (e.g., a 10x10 grid of decimal
addition or subtraction situation involving
answer. numbers increasing by 0.1). Have learners perform
decimal numbers. addition and subtraction operations using
numbers from the chart and describe any
observable patterns
3. Explain how patterns in decimal addition
Example:
and subtraction work.
Examples:
Problem: Sarah is saving money to buy a new book. She The "Step" column indicates each step in the
saves money every day, and she notices a pattern in the addition process.
4. Identify elements of a given pattern
amount she saves. On the first day, she saves $0.50. Each The "Expression" column shows the operation
involving whole numbers and decimal
day after that, she saves $0.10 more than the previous performed at each step.
tenths.
167
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5. Explain the relationship between whole day. How much money will Sarah have saved in total The "Result" column shows the outcome of each
after 7 days? operation.
numbers and decimal tenths.
Steps to Solve the Problem: # 1: Adding a Constant Decimal
Skills Pattern: Adding 0.5
1. Identify the pattern in Sarah's savings.
2. Calculate the amount saved each day.
6. Demonstrate the use of patterns to
3. Sum the amounts saved over the 7 days.
simplify the process of adding and
Rubric
subtracting decimal numbers.
7. Apply patterns in decimal
addition/subtraction to solve word
#2: Subtracting a Constant Decimal
problems.
Pattern: Subtracting 0.2
8. Identify and explain the patterns in
relationships among whole numbers and
Sticky Note Discussion- Have learners answer the
decimal tenths. following questions on a sticky note. They will post their
answers on the wall for their classmates to view. They Develop a set of cards with decimal addition and
will then have a class discussion to see how well the subtraction problems on one set and their
Values
understood the concept. solutions or pattern descriptions on another.
Learners match problems with their
9. Generate a plan for using patterns to 1. I am a set of numbers that follows a sequence. corresponding solutions or pattern descriptions,
When you add me to a whole number, the result reinforcing their ability to recall and apply
solve addition/subtraction problems with
patterns.
is always a decimal tenth. What am I?
decimal numbers.
2. I am a pattern that repeats every 0.1. What am I? Use number lines marked with decimal increments
(e.g., 0.1, 0.2, etc.). Learners perform addition and
168
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
10. Compare different patterns in 3. I am a number relationship that increases by the subtraction problems and plot the results on the
same amount each time. What kind of number line, noting patterns in the results as they
addition/subtraction situations involving
relationship am I? progress through the operations
decimal numbers.
Quiz: Activity
11. Create an addition/subtraction problem
Solve the problems below. Draw a picture to
represent the decimal patterns found. Show your Decimal Number Line Hop
with decimal numbers that highlights a
workings. Draw a large number line on the floor with a
specific pattern to solve the problem. chosen interval (0.1, 0.2, 0.5, etc). Have each
1. Maria saves $0.75 every day. How much will she learner pick an index card with a decimal problem,
have saved after 7 days? a)Write the pattern of such as “+0.3” or “-0.2”. The learner will start at a
12. Evaluate the effectiveness of using
daily savings. b) Calculate the total savings after specific number on the number line (e.g., 1.0) and
patterns in decimal addition/subtraction
7 days. physically hops the distance indicated by the
in real-world problems. problem on the card.
2. John runs 1.2 miles on Monday, 1.4 miles on Markers or stickers to mark the spot where the
Tuesday, and 1.6 miles on Wednesday. If he learner lands can be used.
13. Create a visual representation of the continues to increase his running distance by 0.2 Let the other learner observe and discuss the
pattern using whole numbers and decimal miles each day, how far will he run on Friday? pattern as learners perform multiple hops. Ask
a)Identify the pattern in the running distances. learners to predict future positions based on the
tenths
b) Calculate the distance for each subsequent pattern observed.
day.
3. A plant grows 2.3 cm in the first week, 2.8 cm in
the second week, and 3.3 cm in the third week.
If this pattern continues, how much will the
plant grow in the fifth week? a) Identify the
pattern in the growth increments. b) Calculate
the growth for the fifth week.
4. Emily drinks 0.5 liters of water at 8 AM, 1.0
liters at 10 AM, and 1.5 liters at noon. If she
169
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
continues to increase her water consumption by Worksheet
0.5 liters every 2 hours, how much water will she
have consumed by 6 PM? a) Identify the pattern
in the water consumption. b)Calculate the total
water consumption by 6 PM.
Video
Identifying Patterns in Decimals
Word Problems
1. Bob is a Fifth Grade learner. He grows
0.6 inches each month. We are in the
month of June and Bob is 44.2 inches tall.
How much taller will Bob grow by
October?
170
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. It is summer time and the child drinks
plenty of water. They are drinking from a
2.5 L bottle. Every hour they come and
drink 0.5L of water. If 4 hours pass, how
many water would they have left to drink?
Modeling
Demonstrate the process of adding and
subtracting decimals using patterns with a visual
aid.
Worksheet
171
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Activities
Quick Draw: Provide learners with a whiteboard
marker and have them draw a pattern using whole
numbers and decimal tenths within 2 minutes.
Encourage creativity and attention to detail.
Pattern Puzzles: Display a series of patterns on
the board using whole numbers and decimal
tenths. Challenge learners to identify the pattern
and the next element in the sequence in under 3
minutes.
Pattern Relay: Create a relay race where learners
have to run to a board, add a number or decimal
172
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
tenth to an existing pattern, and run back to tag
the next teammate. The team to complete the
pattern correctly in the shortest time wins.
Additional Resources and Materials
Geo board and rubber bands
Building blocks/ Tiles
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Once learners have modelled addition and subtraction of decimal numbers with base-ten blocks, they will likely understand that they are combining like place
values (tenths with tenths, hundredths with hundredths, etc.) without needing to memorize or be taught rules. e.g
Above the number 1.43 is modeled using base ten blocks.
173
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Above the number 24.69 is modeled using base ten blocks.
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Language Arts
Spelling & Vocabulary -Learners can use new words learned to find the definition and be able to spell them.
Summarizing- Learners can make journal entries by summarizing what they learned about patterns in adding and subtracting decimals.
Expository Writing - Learners will explain how to solve a problem that involves finding patterns in adding and subtracting decimals.
Science
Decimal patterns can be shown to display the increase or decrease when measuring volume, capacity or mass.
174
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: P 2.1. Variables and Relationships – Representing Unknowns
Grade Level Expectation:
Demonstrate an understanding of open sentences in all four operations with whole numbers.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge Quiz Provide opportunity for learners to demonstrate
1. Identify the variables and constants in an Directions: State whether the open sentence is true or the understanding of open sentences. Take them
open sentence. false. If it is false, make the sentence true by solving it outside of the classroom and let them choose a
correctly. number of items with at least two different
2. Explain how to solve an open sentence varieties. Invite them to make up their open
with each of the four operations with a. m + 13 = 48 sentences using gathered materials.
whole numbers. m = 25 Example: Use the items below to make a number
sentence
Skills b. 50 - x = 70
x = 20
3. Solve open sentences involving addition,
subtraction, multiplication and division of c. 6 x a = 24
whole numbers. a = 8
4. Apply understanding of open sentences d. 56 ÷ 8 = s
to real-world word problems. s = 5
Values
5. Compare and contrast open sentences
with different operations with whole
numbers.
175
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6. Design a set of open sentence problems Think-Pair-Share
that incorporate all four operations with Open Sentences with Different Operations
whole numbers. Step 1: Think (5 minutes) Think about the following
questions:
● How are addition open sentences different from
subtraction open sentences when working with
whole numbers?
● Can you provide an example of a multiplication
open sentence and a division open sentence
using whole numbers?
Step 2: Pair (5 minutes) Find a partner and discuss
your answers to the questions. Share your examples and Invite learner to solve one and two step open
explanations with each other. sentences with an unknown.
Step 3: Share (10 minutes) Share your partner's
Example: Represent the story problem with an
responses with the class. Discuss the similarities and
equation containing an unknown and then solve
differences between open sentences with different
operations using whole numbers. the equation.
Project: Real-life Problems
Using a poster board, the learners will create one open-
sentence word problem with each of the operations.
They will then create one two-step open-sentence word
problem. Videos
How to Solve One-Step Equations | One-Step
They should have the solution to their problem on their Equation Steps | Math with Mr. J
board. Solving Two-Step Equations | Algebra Equations
😊Solving word problems in Algebra (math
Learners can display creativity by drawing pictures to test)😊
visualize their problem. .
Algebraic Word Problems
176
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Project Rubric Worksheet
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/mat
h/2250776
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/mat
h/2013962
Games
Riddles - Have the learners solve each riddle
independently for 30 seconds, then reveal the
answer. Each learner solving all the riddles will
receive a token.
Riddle 1: I am an operation that makes numbers
smaller when I'm used. What am I?
Riddle 2: I am an operation that combines
numbers to make them bigger. What am I?
177
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Riddle 3: I am an operation that helps you figure
out how many groups you can make from a total
number. What am I?
Operation Puzzles: Create puzzle pieces with
open sentences missing the operation.
Learnerswill match the correct operation to each
sentence to complete the puzzle.
Worksheet
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/mat
h/1964427 (have learners solve the problems
after sorting)
Math Puzzle Solving
Learners will wprk in 3 groups. They will be given
a puzzle that requires solving open sentence
problems to uncover a hidden message or image.
The first group to solve all the problems correctly
wins.
Additional Resources and Materials
Interactive Notebooks
Equation Puzzles
Equation Cards
Algebra Tiles
Balance Scales
178
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Equation Solvers: Use apps that invite learners to input open sentences and solve them step-by-step.
Online Games: Engage learners with online games that focus on solving open sentences and equations.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Vocabulary
Open Sentences - Are mathematical statements with one or more variables or unknown.
Example: a + 5 = 7
Variable -is a symbol that doesn't have a fixed value. Examples of variables in Math are a,b, x, y, z, m, etc.
179
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Constants are symbols that have a fixed numerical value. All numbers are constants
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Music
Explore mathematical patterns and sequences in music. Learners can create rhythmic patterns using fractions and open sentences to describe the beats.
Technology
Use educational apps and software to practice open sentences and equations through interactive simulations and games.
180
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Physical Education
Incorporate math into physical activities and sports. Learners can solve equations related to scoring, distances, or times.
Art
Use geometric patterns and symmetry to create and solve equations. Learners can explore patterns in art and relate them to open sentences and mathematical
operations.
Language Arts
Have learners write their own word problems or stories that involve open sentences and equations. This activity integrates language arts with math by inviteing
learners to practice writing skills while solving mathematical problems.
181
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome P 2.2: Variables and Relationships - Understanding and Representing Equivalence
Grade Level Expectation:
Determine equality and inequality in measures of volume and capacity using a variety of strategies, measures of currency and angles using a variety of
strategies, expressions involving multi-digit multiplication and division, expressions involving addition and subtraction of decimals and fraction equivalence
and comparison.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge Observational Assessment: Hands-On Activities:
Measurement Stations: Set up different
1. Compare and contrast different Description: Teachers observe learners as they engage in stations with various containers and liquids.
volumes and capacities using direct measurement activities at each station. Provide measuring tools (like graduated
measurement, and the appropriate tools Implementation: cylinders, measuring cups, beakers) and instruct
and units to determine equality and ● Use a checklist or rubric to note learners’ use of learners to measure and record the volumes and
inequality measurement tools, accuracy in reading capacities.
measurements, and ability to estimate and compare
2. Show equivalence in amounts of money volumes.
using strategies such as counting and ● Pay attention to learners’ problem-solving
exchanging coins and notes. approaches and interactions with peers.
● Provide on-the-spot feedback and support as
3. Compare/measure size of angles to needed.
determine if two angles are equal or Sample Checklist
unequal. Learner Name: __________________________
4. Evaluate/compare results in two Criterion Yes No Comments
expressions involving multiplication and
Uses Measurement Tools https://mrswests3rdgrade.weebly.com/classroo
division to determine equality or
Correctly m-blog/volume-volume-more-volume
inequality (50÷5 is greater than 30÷5,
Accurately Reads Water Play: Use water or sand for practical
and 12×3=6×6).
Measurements measurement activities. Invite learners to pour,
Effectively Estimates measure, and compare volumes of substances in
Volumes the different containers. Record findings and
182
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Skills Compares Volumes discuss patterns, such as which tools provide the
Accurately most precise measurements.
5. Simplify fractions by dividing or Reflects on Estimations
generating equivalent fractions by and Measurements Real-World Connections
multiplying to show equivalence. Description: Connect learning to real-life
Self-Assessment: situations.
6. Using common denominators or visual Description: Learners assess their own understanding and Implementation:
models, compare fractions to show performance. ● Organize field trips to local stores where
inequalities. Implementation: learners can practice counting and
● Provide learners with a self-assessment checklist to exchanging money.
7. Illustrate when two expressions evaluate their own work at each station. ● Invite guest speakers, such as bank
involving addition and subtraction of ● Include questions that prompt learners to reflect on tellers or store managers, to talk about
decimals are equivalent their accuracy, use of tools, and estimation skills. money handling.
● Encourage learners to set personal goals for ● Create projects where learners manage a
improvement based on their self-assessment. small budget for a classroom event or
fundraiser.
Self-Assessment Checklist Provide a variety of containers with different
Learner Name: shapes and sizes (e.g., jars, bottles, boxes).
Date:
Activity: Instructions:
Learners use a standard measuring cup or
Use of Measurement Tools graduated cylinder to measure the capacity of
I used the measurement tools correctly. each container.
Sort containers into groups based on their
o ☐ Always
capacities (e.g., small, medium, large).
o ☐ Sometimes
Compare and contrast the capacity of containers
o ☐ Rarely in each group, discussing why some containers
Accuracy in Reading Measurements hold more or less. Discuss the differences and
I read the measurements accurately. similarities in liquid capacities and explore
o ☐ Always patterns, such as how larger containers hold
o ☐ Sometimes more liquid.
o ☐ Rarely
Use containers with volumes that follow a
Estimating Volumes
pattern (e.g., 50 mL, 100 mL, 150 mL, 200 mL).
I made accurate estimates of volumes.
Instructions:
o ☐ Always
183
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
o ☐ Sometimes Learners measure and record the volumes of
containers following the given pattern.
o ☐ Rarely
Identify and describe the pattern in the volume
Comparing Volumes
measurements (e.g., each container holds 50 mL
I compared volumes accurately.
more than the previous one).
o ☐ Always
Create a chart or graph to visualize the pattern
o ☐ Sometimes and discuss how it helps in comparing different
o ☐ Rarely volumes.
Reflection on Estimations and Measurements
I reflected on my estimations and measurements. Differentiated Instruction
o ☐ Always Description: Tailor instruction to meet diverse
learning needs.
o ☐ Sometimes
Implementation:
o ☐ Rarely
● Provide different levels of complexity in
Reflective Questions
angle comparison tasks.
1. What did you find easy or challenging about these
activities?
2. How did you make your estimates?
3. Why might there be differences between your
estimates and actual measurements?
4. What will you do differently next time?
Role-Play Activities
Description: Engage learners in role-play scenarios where https://www.dreamstime.com/illustration/types
they act as cashiers and customers in a store setting. -angles.html
Implementation:
● Assign roles where learners must calculate totals, ● Offer additional support materials (e.g.,
handle payments, and give change. step-by-step guides, visual aids) for
● Evaluate their ability to accurately count money, struggling learners.
provide correct change, and explain their ● advanced learners with more complex
calculations. angle measurement problems
● Assess their understanding of money equivalence ● Discuss patterns observed, such as
through their interactions and transactions. common angle sizes found in different
objects.
184
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Sample Activity - Angle Comparison
Differentiated Instruction Rubric Challenge
Criterion Basic Intermediate Advanced Instructions:
Level Level Level Basic Level:
Accuracy in Measures Measures angles Measures
● Provide pairs of angles and ask learners
Angle angles accurately and angles
to use a protractor to measure and
Measurement accurately classifies them accurately,
using a by type (acute, classifies compare them.
protractor. obtuse, etc.). them, and ● Identify whether each pair of angles is
solves for equal, greater than, or less than each
unknown
other.
angles.
Understanding Identifies Classifies angles Applies
of Angle if angles by type and geometric
Relationships are equal, identifies principles to
greater relationships justify
than, or within conclusions
less than geometric and solve
each shapes. complex
other. angle
problems.
Use of Support May need Uses visual aids Utilizes
Materials frequent and step-by-step support
guidance guides materials
and visual effectively to independently https://mathvox.com/geometry/basic-
aids. assist in to enhance
concepts-and-figures-of-plane-
understanding. learning and
geometry/chapter-2-angles-types-of-angles-and-
solve
challenging their-properties/the-comparison-of-angles-2nd-
problems. method/
Performance Tasks
Description: Design tasks that require learners to
demonstrate their understanding through application.
Implementation:
Problem-Solving Stations: Set up stations with different
pairs of expressions. Learners rotate through stations, solve
the problems, and write their conclusions. For example
https://classroomsecrets.co.uk/lesson/year-4-
Station 1: Plot Area Comparison
compare-and-order-angles-lesson/
185
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1. Plot A:
Length = 10 metres Intermediate Level:
Width = 8 metres ● Include angles formed by intersecting
Area of Plot A: 10×8=80 square metres lines or angles within geometric shapes
2. Plot B: (e.g., triangles, quadrilaterals).
Length = 15 metres ● Ask learners to classify angles as acute,
Width = 6 metres obtuse, right, or straight based on
Area of Plot B: 15×6=90 square metres measurements.
Station 2: Snack Pack Comparison ● Discuss patterns found, such as how
1. Store X: certain angle measures are related (e.g.,
Total cost for 5 granola bars: $10 right angles, obtuse angles).
Price per granola bar: 10/5=2 dollars
2. Store Y:
Total cost for 8 granola bars: $16
Price per granola bar: 16/8=2 dollars
Real-Life Scenarios: Present scenarios where learners must
use division and multiplication to compare quantities (e.g.,
determining which sale price is better or comparing areas of
rectangular plots).
Determining the Better Sale Price
Scenario: Two stores are having a sale on T-shirts. Store A
is selling 3 T-shirts for $18, and Store B is selling 4 T-shirts
for $24. Determine which store has the better price per T-
shirt.
Steps:
Store A:
· Total cost for 3 T-shirts: $18
· Price per T-shirt = 18/3=6 dollars
Store B:
· Total cost for 4 T-shirts: $24
· Price per T-shirt = 24/4=6 dollars
Comparison: Both stores have the same price per T-shirt,
so either store is equally good in terms of price.
186
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://cindyelkins.edublogs.org/2019/01/05/g
Interactive Digital Tools eometry-part-1-the-basics/
Fraction Comparison Games: Use educational software or
online games that focus on fraction comparison. These can
include interactive number lines, fraction bars, and pie
charts.
Fraction Fling • ABCya!
Fraction Bars | Math Playground
IXL | Compare fractions | 5th grade math
https://study.com/learn/lesson/angles-formed-
Fractions Games for 5th Grade Online
intersecting-lines.html
(splashlearn.com)
Advanced Level:
Virtual Manipulatives: Tools like the National Library of
● Introduce geometric proofs or scenarios
Virtual Manipulatives provide an interactive way for learners
where learners must solve for unknown
to engage with fractions.
angles using given angle measurements.
● Challenge learners to explain their
Differentiated Worksheets
reasoning and justify their conclusions
Provide worksheets with varying levels of difficulty.
about angle relationships.
Example:
● Analyze patterns in angle measurements
Level 1: Compare simple fractions like ½ and ¼.
using the digital tools' features.
Level 2: Compare more complex fractions like ⅗ and ⅔
using common denominators.
Level 3: Include fractions with larger denominators and
mixed numbers.
Peer Tutoring and Group Work
Pair learners for peer tutoring or small group activities to
encourage collaboration and peer learning.
Example Activity:
Have learners work in pairs to solve and verify the
equivalence of expressions. One learner can solve 2.5+3.2 https://tutors.com/lesson/how-to-find-the-
and another can solve 5.7, then they can compare their angle-of-a-triangle
results.
187
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://study.com/skill/learn/how-to-find-the-
sum-of-the-angle-measures-of-a-quadrilateral-
explanation.html
Concrete Manipulatives and Models
Description: Use physical objects and
manipulatives to represent and solve
multiplication and division problems.
Implementation:
● Provide learners with counters, cubes,
or other tangible objects to model
division problems like 50÷5 and 30÷5.
● Use arrays or grouping to demonstrate
multiplication expressions such as 12×3
and 6×6.
● Encourage learners to physically group
and count objects to verify results and
compare them.
Discuss how Patterns emerge in the array
structure, such as rows and columns forming a
grid. Learners can observe that increasing the
number of rows or columns leads to
proportional changes in the total number of
counters.
188
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Visual Representations
Fraction Bars: Use fraction bars to compare
fractions visually. Have learners color the bars to
show different fractions and compare them
directly.
Patterns emerge in how fractions of the same
denominator can be directly compared by their
sizes.
• Pattern Example: Fraction bars for
1/2, 1/4, and 1/8 show that 1/2 is
twice as large as 1/4 and four times as
large as 1/8. This demonstrates the
concept of equivalent fractions and
relationships between fractions.
Number Lines: Plot fractions on a number line
to see their relative sizes. This helps learners
understand the concept of fractions as numbers
with specific values.
189
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s423
30-023-00278-x
Ask learners to identify any patterns in the
placement of fractions on the number line.
Have them note how fractions with the same
denominator are spaced evenly, while fractions
with different denominators are placed
according to their size.
Example: Learners might notice that fractions
with the same denominator (e.g., 1/4, 2/4, 3/4)
are evenly spaced, showing a consistent pattern.
190
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Task 1: Comparing Fractions Using
Common Denominators
Scenario: Compare 2/3 and ¾ using common
denominators.
https://visualfractions.com/compare-fractions-
line/
Facilitate a discussion about the patterns learners
observed in the placement of fractions.
Discuss how these patterns help in
understanding the relative sizes of fractions and
how fractions can be compared and ordered.
Task 2: Comparing Fractions Using Visual
Models
Scenario: Compare ½ and 2/5 using visual
models.
Steps:
1. Draw two identical rectangles.
2. Shade ½ of one rectangle and 2/5 of
the other.
3. Visually compare the shaded areas.
than 2/5
191
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Visual Models and Drawings
Encourage learners to draw visual models such
as bar models or area models to represent
decimal addition and subtraction.
Example:
Bar Model:
Draw a bar to represent 2.5+3.2 and another bar
for 5.7. Compare the lengths of the bars to show
equivalence.
Pattern in Fraction Size: The visual model
reveals that 1/2 is larger than 2/5. This pattern
shows how fractions with a greater numerator or
fewer pieces of the same whole represent larger
portions.
Pattern in Division: The pattern observed is that
dividing a whole into more parts (like 5 parts)
results in smaller individual pieces than dividing
it into fewer parts (like 2 parts).
Decimal Addition and Subtraction:
Pattern in Addition: The visual model shows
that the sum of decimal numbers (2.5 + 3.2)
aligns exactly with another decimal number (5.7),
demonstrating equivalence and reinforcing the
concept of addition.
Pattern in Lengths: The pattern observed is that
equivalent sums or values can be represented by
bars of equal length, aiding in understanding the
equivalence of decimal operations.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Denomination is a proper description of a currency amount, usually for coins or banknotes
Measurement: Volume and Capacity
192
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Volume:
Definition: Understanding that volume is the amount of space occupied by a 3D object, typically measured in cubic units (e.g., cubic centimeters, cubic meters).
Calculation: Knowledge of formulas for finding the volume of common shapes (e.g.,
Volume of a rectangular prism=length×width×height).
Units of Measurement: Familiarity with different volume units, including metric (cubic meters, liters) and customary units (cubic feet, gallons).
Capacity:
Definition: Capacity refers to the maximum amount a container can hold, usually measured in liquid units (e.g., liters, milliliters, gallons).
Conversion: Understanding how to convert between units of volume and capacity (e.g., 1 liter = 1000 milliliters).
Currency
Basic Arithmetic with Currency:
Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication, and Division: Ability to perform operations with currency, including making change and calculating totals.
Conversion: Knowledge of currency exchange rates and how to apply them to convert one currency to another.
Rounding: Understanding how to round currency amounts appropriately, especially when dealing with prices and change.
Angles
Types of Angles:
Acute, Right, Obtuse, and Straight Angles: Definitions and characteristics.
Angle Measurement: Using a protractor to measure angles in degrees.
Angle Relationships: Knowledge of complementary (sum to 90°) and supplementary angles (sum to 180°), as well as angles formed by intersecting lines (e.g.,
vertical angles are equal).
Angle Construction:
Tools: Ability to use a compass, straightedge, and protractor to construct angles.
Angle Comparison: Techniques for comparing angles visually and numerically.
193
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome P2.3: Variables and Relationships - Writing Expressions and Equations
Grade Level Expectations
Create story problems using one-step variables in all four operations.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Differentiated Assessment Methods: Story Problems
Knowledge Use a variety of assessment methods, including written Clear and Structured Presentation:
responses, oral explanations, and visual representations. ● Present the problem in a clear,
1. Construct story problems based on real-life Invite learners to choose how they want to demonstrate structured manner, breaking it into
scenarios involving a single variable that their understanding. manageable parts.
requires one operation to solve ● Use bold or italics to highlight key
Sample Higher-Level Problem information.
Skill
The school is organizing a charity run to raise money for Sample Story Problems
new sports equipment. Each participant will donate $15,
2. Use various strategies to solve real-life
and 128 learners have signed up to participate. The event The learner council is organizing a school fair and has set
problems involving basic operations.
organizers want to know how much money they will raise up various booths. One booth sells both snacks and
in total. drinks. The booth earned $125 in the morning and $98
Values
Questions in the afternoon from snack sales. In addition to snacks,
. How much does each participant donate? they also sold drinks, earning $45 in the morning and
3. Explain and justify the solutions to problems
. How many learners have signed up? $55 in the afternoon. The learner council wants to
involving one-step equations.
. How much money will the school raise in total? calculate the total earnings from the booth for the entire
Solution day to plan for the next event and determine what
Multiplication: $15×128=$1920 percentage of the earnings came from drinks
Differentiated Assessment Methods Questions:
Written Response • How much money did the booth earn in
Write out the multiplication problem and solve it. Show all the morning?
your work and explain your reasoning in a short • How much money did the booth earn in
paragraph. the afternoon?
Oral Explanation
• What are the total earnings for the day?
Explain how you solved the problem to the teacher or a
The pattern is that the total number of items is
peer. Include why you chose the method you used.
distributed evenly across packs. The single
194
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Visual Representation variable represents the unknown quantity in each
Create a chart or diagram to show how the total amount of pack, and the operation used (division) helps
money raised is calculated. Use groups or an array to solve for this quantity.
represent multiplication.
Manipulatives Visual and Hands-On Learning:
Use counters, blocks, or other manipulatives to represent
the problem. Group them to show the total amount raised. Manipulatives: Use physical objects like
Group Work counters, blocks, and number lines to model
Work in a group to solve the problem. Discuss and agree problems.
on the solution, then present it to the class with a visual
aid (e.g., poster, PowerPoint). Example using Manipulatives
Problem: A farmer has 240 apples and wants to
pack them into boxes. Each box can hold 12
Performance-Based Assessments apples. How many boxes will the farmer need?
Purpose: To assess learners' ability to apply skills and Additionally, if the farmer decides to sell each
knowledge to real-world tasks. box for $15, how much money will they make in
Strategies: total?
● Role-Playing: Learners role-play scenarios where Introduction: Explain the problem to the
they need to solve problems involving basic learners. "A farmer has 240 apples and wants to
operations. pack them into boxes. Each box can hold 12
● Task-Based Assessments: Provide tasks that apples. How many boxes will the farmer need?
require learners to use manipulatives or other If each box sells for $15, how much money will
tools to solve problems. the farmer make?"
● Math Stations: Set up different stations with Modeling with Manipulatives:
various problems related to real-life scenarios. ● Give each learner (or group) 240
counters to represent the apples.
● Provide small containers to represent
Example: the boxes.
● Role-Playing: Set up a mock store where learners ● Ask learners to place 12 counters into
use play money to buy and sell items, requiring each container until all apples are
them to use addition, subtraction, multiplication, packed.
and division.
● Math Station: One station could involve
calculating the total cost of items in a shopping
195
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
cart, another could involve dividing a set number Counting and Solving:
of items equally among a group. ● Have learners count the total number of
filled containers to find the number of
Observational Assessment: boxes.
Anecdotal Record: Observe and take notes on how Calculating Revenue:
learners interact during group work and their problem- ● After determining the number of boxes,
solving process. use play money to represent the sale of
Checklist: Use a checklist to monitor if learners identified each box at $15.
the variable, performed the correct operations, and ● Multiply the number of boxes by $15 to
reached the correct solution. find the total revenue.
Discussion:
Ask learners to explain what they did and how
they found the number of boxes and total
money urgent to write the division and
multiplication equations and solve them on
paper.
The pattern in solving the equation involves
isolating the variable on one side of the equation
by performing the inverse operation of addition,
which is subtraction. This helps in finding the
value of the variable that satisfies the equation.
Scaffolded Instruction:
Step-by-Step Guidance: Break down the
process of solving one-step equations into
smaller, manageable steps.
Worked Examples: Provide worked examples
that demonstrate each step of solving an
equation and the reasoning behind it.
Connection with Patterns
Story Problems: The pattern involves using a
single variable to represent an unknown quantity
and solving it through a specific operation.
196
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Various Strategies: The pattern shows that
different methods (division and repeated
subtraction) can be applied to solve problems
involving basic operations.
One-Step Equations: The pattern is the use of
inverse operations to isolate and solve for the
unknown variable, highlighting a consistent
approach in solving algebraic equations.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
197
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome P3.3: Modelling Quantitative Relationships and Analyzing Change – Solving Problems with Functions
and Relationships
Grade Level Expectations:
- Generate two numerical patterns using two given rules.
- Identify apparent relationships between corresponding terms.
- Form ordered pairs consisting of corresponding terms from the two patterns
- Graph the ordered pairs on a coordinate plane.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge Performance Task: Real-Life Connections
Contextual Learning:
1. Generate two numerical patterns using Strategy: Assign a performance task where learners apply ● Relate patterns to real-life situations, such
two given rules. what they have learned to new rules and patterns. as daily schedules, counting money, or
Implementation: planning events.
2. Identify apparent relationships between Provide learners with two new rules (e.g., Rule 1: Start at 2, ● Example: “If you save $2 every day, how
corresponding terms. add 5 each time; Rule 2: Start at 3, add 6 each time). much will you have saved after 5 days?”
Story Problems:
3. Form ordered pairs consisting of Have them generate the first five terms for each pattern. Create story problems that involve generating and
corresponding terms from the two identifying numerical patterns.
patterns. Identify relationships between the patterns. Example: “A garden starts with 3 plants and adds
Form ordered pairs. 4 more each week. How many plants will there be
Skills after 5 weeks?”
Graph the ordered pairs on a coordinate plane.
4. Graph the ordered pairs on a coordinate
plane. Include a reflection component where learners explain the Explicit Instruction and Modeling
relationship they observed Direct Explanation:
Begin with a clear explanation of what it means to
identify relationships between corresponding
terms in two patterns. For example.
Understanding Corresponding Terms:
198
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Checklist for Summative Performance Task In two patterns, each term in one pattern has a
matching term in the other pattern. These
Objective: Learners will generate two numerical patterns matching terms are called corresponding terms.
using given rules, identify relationships between Identifying the Relationship:
corresponding terms, form ordered pairs, and graph the To identify the relationship, you observe how
ordered pairs on a coordinate plane. each term in one pattern relates to the
corresponding term in the other pattern. This
Instructions for Learners: could involve adding, subtracting, multiplying,
dividing, or some other operation.
Use this checklist to guide you through the performance Finding a Rule:
task. Make sure to complete each step and check it off as Once you’ve identified how each pair of
you go. corresponding terms is related, you can often
describe this relationship as a rule that applies to
1. Generating Numerical Patterns all pairs of terms in the patterns.
2. Identifying Relationships Application:
3. Forming Ordered Pairs Understanding these relationships helps in
4. Graphing Ordered Pairs predicting future terms in the patterns, solving
5. Reflection and Explanation problems, or even creating new patterns based on
• Write a reflection on your findings: the identified rules.
• What did you observe about the relationship
between the two patterns? ● Use simple language and concrete
examples to describe how to look for
• Was there a consistent relationship or trend?
relationships.
• Did you encounter any challenges while
Modeling:
completing the task? How did you overcome
Demonstrate how to identify relationships using
them?
specific examples.
Example:
Pattern 1: Start at 2, add 3 each time (2, 5, 8, 11,
Teacher’s Checklist for Assessment
14).
Use this checklist to evaluate learners’ performance on the
Pattern 2: Start at 1, add 4 each time (1, 5, 9, 13,
task.
17).
Show how to compare each pair: (2, 1), (5, 5), (8,
Generating Numerical Patterns
9), (11, 13), (14, 17).
Learner correctly generated the first five terms for Pattern
1.
199
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learner correctly generated the first five terms for Pattern Highlight that each term in Pattern 2 is one more
2. than the corresponding term in Pattern 1 plus a
Identifying Relationships multiple of 4.
Learner identified the correct relationships between
corresponding terms.
Learner provided a clear and accurate description of the PLOTTING ON A COORDINATE PLANE
relationship.
Forming Ordered Pairs
Learner correctly formed ordered pairs from the
corresponding terms.
Graphing Ordered Pairs
Learner accurately drew and labeled the coordinate plane.
Learner correctly plotted all ordered pairs.
Points are connected (if required) to show the trend.
Reflection and Explanation
Learner wrote a thoughtful reflection on their findings.
Learner identified observations and trends accurately. https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/articles/zvvmtv4
Learner reflected on challenges and solutions effectively. #zmttn9q
Invite learners to plot coordinates, see
instructions below
Plotting the Point (4, 1)
1. Identify the coordinates: (4, 1)
2. Locate the x-coordinate:
Start at the origin (0, 0).
Move 4 units to the right.
3. Locate the y-coordinate:
From the position (4, 0), move 1 unit up.
4. Mark the Point:
· Place a dot at the position (4, 1).
· Label the point as (4, 1).
Ordered pairs represent each term of Pattern A
with its corresponding term in Pattern B. These
200
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
pairs show a clear pattern of how each term in one
sequence relates to the term in another sequence.
The graph of the ordered pairs will show a straight
line, indicating a linear relationship between the
two patterns. This visual representation helps
learners understand how the two sequences are
related and how one pattern consistently translates
to the other.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
A line graph can be used to visually show a consistent relationship, like the one between two sequences. In order to make a line graph, you need to be able to write
ordered pairs using the corresponding terms from the two numerical sequences you are comparing
The corresponding terms from two numerical sequences can be compared, and used to write ordered pairs.
Ordered pairs can be graphed on a 4-quadrant graph.(Focus on the positive part)
The first number in an ordered pair tells how far across left or right to go on the X line.
The second number in an ordered pair tells how far up or down to go on the Y line. Each point is drawn where X and Y cross.
A line is drawn to connect the points.
201
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Inclusive Resources and Materials
String, rope
Geoboards and rubber bands
Graph paper
202
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome P 3.2: Modelling Quantitative Relationships and Analyzing Change – Representing Functions and
Relationships
Grade Level Expectation:
Use parentheses, brackets, or braces in numerical expressions, and evaluate expressions with these symbols.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Formative Assessments Think-Aloud Strategy
Knowledge Strategy: Model the think-aloud strategy by
Exit Tickets: verbalizing your thought process as you solve
1. Identify and correctly use parentheses, Description: At the end of a lesson, have learners solve a problems.
brackets, and braces in numerical problem involving grouping symbols as their "ticket" out Example: Solve 5+{3×[2+(1+1)]} out loud,
expressions to indicate the order of of class. explaining each step and why you perform
operations. Example: Solve 3+{2×[5−(2+1)]}. operations in a certain order.
Think-Pair-Share:
2. Evaluate numerical expressions with Description: Learners first solve a problem individually, Use of Visual Aids and Manipulatives
multiple grouping symbols in the then discuss their solution with a partner, and finally share Strategy: Incorporate visual aids such as color-
correct order. with the class. coded grouping symbols and physical
Example: Evaluate 4+[2×(3+1)]. manipulatives to help learners understand and
3. Write numerical expressions using organize the expressions.
parentheses, brackets, or braces based Math Journals with Reflective Prompts Implementation:
on given verbal descriptions or Strategy: Use math journals for learners to write down Provide colored markers to highlight different
scenarios. and reflect on their problem-solving processes. types of grouping symbols (e.g., parentheses in
Skills Implementation: After solving an expression, learners red, brackets in green, and braces in blue).
write a short paragraph explaining the steps they took and
4. Apply the order of operations, including why each step was necessary.
the use of parentheses, brackets, and Example Activity: Solve the expression 2×[3+(4×2)] by
braces, to solve problems accurately. performing the operations inside the parentheses first,
then inside the brackets, and finally the multiplication
5. Create their own numerical expressions outside. Use this information to write a paragraph.
using a combination of parentheses,
brackets, and braces to meet specified
criteria. Expression: 5+{3×[2+(1+1)] }
203
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Collaborative Learning: Use physical manipulatives like number and
Think-Pair-Share: Have learners think individually about operation cards that learners can arrange and
a verbal description, then pair up to discuss their thoughts, group physically to better understand the structure
and finally share with the class. of expression
For example, Think-Pair-Share
"Add 8 to the product of 2 and 6, then subtract 5." Think:
Learners write: 8+(2×6)−5 Present the verbal description: "Add 5 to the
product of 3 and 4, then subtract 2."
Give learners 2-3 minutes to write down their
individual expressions.
Pair:
Pair learners and provide 3-5 minutes to discuss
their expressions.
Encourage them to explain their thinking process
and listen to their partner’s reasoning.
Share:
Have pairs present their expressions to the class.
Facilitate a class discussion on the different
approaches and correct any misunderstandings.
Meeting a Target Value
Learners practice creating and evaluating
expressions while applying the order of
operations. This approach also reinforces their
understanding of mathematical grouping symbols
and their role in modifying the outcome of an
expression. Example
Problem: Create an expression using the numbers
2, 3, 5, and 7, along with parentheses, brackets,
and braces, to get a target value of 50.
Using Grouping Symbols: Patterns involve
structuring expressions to manage the sequence of
operations clearly.
Evaluating Expressions: The pattern of solving
from the innermost to the outermost grouping
204
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
symbols helps maintain the correct order of
operations.
Writing Expressions: Translating verbal
descriptions into expressions highlights how
grouping symbols structure mathematical
relationships.
Applying Order of Operations: Following a
consistent pattern in solving expressions shows
how grouping symbols guide the calculation
sequence.
Creating Expressions: Designing expressions with
multiple symbols helps understand how to
organize and solve complex problems
systematically.
These activities help learners recognise and
understand patterns in how grouping symbols
affects mathematical operations, ensuring they can
accurately solve and create expressions.
205
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome P3.3: Modelling Quantitative Relationships and Analyzing Change – Solving Problems with Functions and
Relationships
Grade Level Expectations:
- Write simple expressions that record calculations with numbers, and interpret numerical expressions without evaluating them. For example, express the
calculation "add 8 and 7, then multiply by 2" as 2 × (8 + 7).
- Recognise that 3 × (18932 + 921) is three times as large as 18932 + 921, without having to calculate the indicated sum or product.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge Writing Expressions from Scenarios Use Real-Life Contexts:
Description: Provide learners with various real-life Strategy: Provide real-life scenarios that require
1. Translate real-life situations to scenarios and ask them to write corresponding numerical learners to write and interpret numerical
numerical expressions. expressions. expressions.
Example Scenario: "You have 4 apples and buy 3 more. Example Activity: "If you buy 3 packs of pencils,
2. Interpret numerical expressions without Then, you give 2 to a friend. Write an expression for the each containing 5 pencils, and then get 2 more
evaluating them. total number of apples left." pencils from a friend, write an expression to
OR represent the total number of pencils."
Learners can create various real-life scenarios and write (3X5) +2
corresponding numerical expressions. The pattern involves translating real-life situations
into expressions by identifying repeated actions or
groupings. This reveals how real-life problems can
Interpreting Expressions be systematically converted into mathematical
Description: Give learners numerical expressions and ask expressions.
them to interpret the meaning without calculating. Visual Aids and Manipulatives:
Example Expression: 2×(5+3) Strategy: Use visual aids, such as diagrams,
Expected Interpretation: "Two times the sum of five number lines, and physical manipulatives to help
and three." learners understand the structure of expressions.
Example Activity: Use counters to show the
steps in the expression 4×(2+3).
To evaluate the expression 4×(2+3), follow these
steps:
206
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Identify the parts of the expression:
The expression contains a multiplication operation
4×and an addition operation inside the
parentheses (2+3).
Evaluate the expression inside the
parentheses first:
According to the order of operations
(PEMDAS/BODMAS), operations inside
parentheses/brackets should be performed first.
2+3=5.
Multiply the result by 4:
After simplifying the expression inside the
parentheses, you get 4×5.
Perform the multiplication: 4×5=20.
https://www.crestolympiads.com/topic/bodmas-
rule
207
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Interpreting expressions without evaluating them
involves recognizing the pattern of operations and
groupings. This helps in understanding the
structure and intended calculations within the
expression.
Additional Resources and Materials
Interactive Tools:
Desmos: A free online graphing calculator that can be used to model real-life problems and visualize expressions.
Desmos
2. Interpreting Numerical Expressions Without Evaluating Them
Math Playground: Offers interactive games and activities focusing on understanding and interpreting expressions without solving them.
NRICH: Provides problems and activities designed to help learners explore and understand the structure of numerical expressions.
NRICH - Understanding Expressions
Interactive Tools:
Wolfram Alpha: Learners can input and explore different expressions to understand their structure and relationships.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Parentheses, brackets, and braces are sometimes referred to as "round," "square," and "curly" brackets, respectively
Using the order of operations to solve word problems is essential because these problems apply to many real-world situations. If the order of operations is not
applied correctly, the answer will be incorrect.
Using a table to model an increasing/decreasing pattern can help learners organize
208
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
their thinking. It can also help them generalize the patterns symbolically. Two types of generalizations (rules) can be made: recursive and explicit. A recursive
generalization tells how to find a term's value given the value of the preceding term. An explicit generalization expresses the relationship between the value of
the term and the term number. For example, consider this pattern.
Term 1 2 3 4
Term Value 1 4 7 10
The recursive generalization that describes this pattern is n + 3, since the value of each term is three more than the preceding term. If the pattern were continued,
the value of the fifth term would be 13 since 10 + 3 = 13.
The explicit generalization that describes the pattern is 3n – 2.
When helping learners recognise patterns, it is important to remember that they may not see the pattern in the same way as you. Therefore, it is essential that you
ask learners to explain their thinking. Giving learners opportunities to describe their reasoning can also help them realize that, often, there is more than one way to
look at a pattern.
Inclusive Resources and Materials
Geoboards and rubber bands
Blocks
Graph paper
Counters
Match sticks
Popsicle sticks
209
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome P3:4: Learners will explore, recognise, represent, and analyze patterns and relationships that model
mathematical concepts and problems.
Grade Five Level Expectation:
Describe quantitative relationships between corresponding terms
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Group work Encourage learners to write basic expressions
Knowledge Divide the learners into two groups. Provide one that represent calculations using numbers.
1. Write simple expressions that record group with numerical expressions and the other Invite them to use mathematical terminology
calculations with numbers group with matching word phrases. Instruct learners to describe these numerical expressions. For
to circulate around the room to find the partner example, the expression 18 x 5 can be
Skills
whose word phrase matches their numerical described as "18 times 5," "18 multiplied by
2. Interpret numerical expressions
expression. For instance, a learner holding a slip that 5," or "the product of 18 and 5."
without evaluating them
says "add 19 and 17" will seek out the learner who
3. Use a pattern rule to make holds the slip with "19 + 17." - Provide opportunities for learners to
predictions about subsequent terms. understand and describe numerical
Individual work, Quizzes expressions without performing the actual
Give learners a pair of numeric expressions and ask calculations. For instance, they should be able
them to interpret them without evaluating them. E.g: to represent the instruction "add 5 and 3, then
- 4500+3010 and 4500+3001 multiply by 4" as 4 × (5 + 3). Provide multiple
- 125-99 and 126 -100 opportunities for learners to identify
- 713+810 and 731+ 810
relationships between expressions without
210
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
- 343-25 and 344-26 calculating the sum or product. For example,
- 519+31 and 520 + 31 they should recognise that 5 × (45128 + 507)
- 16 x 12 and 32 x 6
is five times greater than 45128 + 507. Start
by using concrete tools, such as base ten
Listen to learners as they make comparisons.
blocks, to help learners visualize these
relationships. For instance, demonstrate that 3
Are they using the correct vocabulary to describe the
× (100 + 20 + 1) is three times greater than
relationships?
100 + 20 + 1.
Can they explain why their comparisons are
correct/incorrect?
Year Number of persons
2013 120
2014 240
2015 480 - Encourage learners to practice extending
patterns using physical materials and
If the pattern continued, what was the attendance in drawings, and then translate the elements of
2017? these patterns into a table or T-chart. Have
them explain the process of how the pattern
Explain how you arrived at your answer. evolves and how each new step is connected
to the previous one. For example, let learners
211
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Quizzes - oral and written construct the flower pattern using hexagons.
Give learners patterns ask them to make
predictions about subsequent terms.
Ask them to state whether a specific term would be
even or odd, prime or composite, divisible by 3, etc.
Ask them to explain their reasoning.
E.g
3,6,9.. . state two properties of the 12th term
2, 6,10, 14, 18,22…what number will the 20th term
end with?
- Have learners describe, using mathematical
language (e.g., two more, five less ) and
symbolically (e.g., n + 2, p – 5), a pattern
represented concretely, pictorially, or from a
chart.
212
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Ask learners to use mathematical language to
compare the savings of two consecutive
months, e.g:
-His savings in April increased by $250 from
March.
- His savings in April grew by $250 from
March.
-His savings in April rose by $250 from
March.
Present learners with a pattern and ask them
to predict the next terms in the sequence. For
example, with the sequence 1, 3, 6, 10…, have
them identify specific terms, such as the 5th
or 10th term. Encourage learners to make
213
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
additional predictions, such as whether a
particular term will be even or odd, prime or
composite, or divisible by 3. Ask them to
explain the reasoning behind their predictions.
Have learners verify whether or not a
particular number belongs to a given pattern.
E.g
Identify the number that does not belong to
the pattern below? Explain your choice.
3,6,12,26,48
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
It's important to explain to learners that they use language every day that expresses calculations with numbers. For example, when learners ask someone for "four
more chips," they are expressing the operation "add 4".
It's important for learners to understand that not all expressions can be compared without evaluating. The teacher can encourage them to look for parts of the
expressions that are the same or equivalent. Understanding of the Commutative and Associative Properties of Addition and multiplication is important for this
outcome.
E.g: 123+ 1000=1000+ 123 (Commutative property)
(16 + 80)+23=16 + (80 + 23) (Associative property)
Below are some trategies that the learners can use to compare expressions.
214
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Without calculating answers, use <, > or = to make these statements true:
53 + 62 _____ 54 + 61 (compensation)
138 + 267 _____ 140 + 265(compensation)
673 – 428 ______ 675 –430 (constant difference)
12 x 5 ______ 6 x 10 (halving and doubling)
The ability to create, recognise and extend patterns is essential for making generalizations, seeing relationships, and understanding the order and logic of
mathematics (Burns, 2007; p.144).
Patterns can be used to model or represent a situation and to solve problems. There are several strategies that can be used to extend patterns ( concrete materials,
drawings, calculations). They can also be described using mathematical language. When discussing a pattern, learners should be encouraged to determine how each
step in the pattern is different from the preceding step.
Inclusive Resources and Materials
Hundred Chart
Counters: rocks, corks, beans, etc.
Geoboards and rubber bands
Blocks
Graph paper
Base Ten Blocks
215
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Art and Craft:
Drawing and colouring shapes
Creating shapes of plants and animals
Creating colourful hand bands, rekenreks, number lines using cut straws and beads
Weaving increasing and decreasing patterns with grass, straws, strings, etc
Creating mats, picture frames, scrap book covers showing patterns in transformation
Creating mats, picture frames, scrap book covers using polygons in various forms and orientation.
LanguageArts:
Learning adjectives to describe shapes, patterns, objects and models created
Reading stories about place values, patterns and relationships
Composing stories and poems of shapes and solids
Making concept maps using 2D shapes
Writing reports for models and projects created
Social Studies:
Relating shapes to objects/structures (or parts of them) in the environment
Creating patterns to show cultural affiliations
Making hand bands, mats projects and models to show cultural affiliations
Settlement patterns, road grids.
216
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Science:
Relating shaped to the earth, moon and moon phases
Planetary movements
HFLE:
Learning to appreciate colleagues when working in groups, irrespective of ethnicity, colour or cultural associations
Accepting challenges when making presentations
Adopting problem solving strategies
Developing rational argument and reasoning
Healthy Habits (patterns of behaviour
217
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Geometric Thinking
Introduction to the Strand:
Geometric thinking describes a learner’s understanding of the properties of geometric shapes and spatial relationships. Geometric thinking is essential to how learners
make sense of shapes and spatial relationships (where an object is in relation to another). This kind of reasoning requires learners to analyze geometric concepts and
formulate arguments based on their observations. Learners engage in deductive reasoning, problem-solving, and critical thinking while enhancing their ability to
conceptualize and utilize geometric shapes and relationships in different ways. Geometric thinking is foundational to advancement in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) in school and STEM careers.
Essential Learning Outcome G1.1: Explore and Analyse Geometric Shapes and Relationships - Developing a spatial sense
Grade Level Expectations:
Use language and gestures that describe shape, objects, and space orally and in writing to describe a picture or object in real-world contexts or an
object undergoing a transformation
Recognise a shape or object seen from various points of view and various distances (3D objects from isometric drawings)
Draw a picture or build a model from a description and vice versa (isometric drawing, 2D shapes by combining and dissecting and 3D from isometric
drawing)
Make predictions based on spatial reasoning (2D shape by combining and dissecting shapes and as a result of a single transformation)
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge Observation- to diagnose the extent learners are able Learners should be able to identify and describe
to recognise the attributes of a shape. shapes in a real-life setting.
1. Describe shapes, objects orally and in
writing, using language and gestures Conceptual Understanding
Provide opportunities for learners to develop
descriptive language skills and enhance
2. Identify specific shapes from a picture
understanding of functions and properties of
or object in world contexts
everyday objects. For example:
Each learner will be given a picture as shown above which Present a mystery bag of objects and shapes. Each
they will describe to the class. learner picks an item and without the rest of the
218
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3. Describe an object undergoing Retrieved from class seeing the item, mentions the item's primary
transformation https://ecdn.teacherspayteachers.com/thumbitem/Real- function and purpose along with characteristics,
Live-Objects-2D-3D-Shapes-Sort-2188641- texture and any other additional information.
4. Make predictions based on spatial 1466626738/original-2188641-3.jpg Learners suggest what is being described. e.g. a
reasoning (3D shape by combining and football is dipped - it is round, spherical, has
dissecting shapes and as a result of a embedded pentagonal shapes, used for kicking
single transformation) Checklist
Learners can describe using at least one property (2D) and Conceptual Understanding
5. Recognise a shape or object seen from one ability (roll, stack etc) if it is 3D. Enhance Learners’s ability to identify specific
various points of view shapes in real-world contexts and use spatial
● Yes adjectives accurately. For example:
6. Describe a shape or object seen from ● No Have learners identify the picture on the wall
various distances (e.g. 3D objects from within seen shown. Encourage learners to use
isometric drawings) spatial adjectives and pay attention to detail.
Conversation (peer assessment) - to invite learners to sample picture
share different perspectives in describing objects.
Skills
In small groups, each group will select a specific family of
7. Write a description of a picture (e.g. 3D shapes from the picture below e.g. One group will
isometric drawing, 3D shapes identify the cylinders while another the cuboids and cubes.
combining and dissecting) Groups assess each other's categorisation.
8. Draw a picture or build a model from a
picture or description
Values
9. Respect the point of view of others by Retrieved from
paying attention to specific details. Retrieved from https://i.pinimg.com/originals/5f/fb/a0/5ff
https://media.baamboozle.com/uploads/images/200839/
ba0c8439bff84fc99a2f5f315116e.jpg
1611889309_247232
219
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Checklist Discovery Learning
Each group identifies 2 or more objects in the correct
category. Provide opportunities to enhance learners' ability
● Yes to observe, describe, and understand the
● No transformation of objects, focusing on changes in
shape, size, color, and other properties. For
Observation/self assessment - to describe example
transformed objects
Provide learners with square cut-outs and ask to
Identify the finished object and describe the proceed to create a cube, or use triangles to create
transformation process. a pyramid to understand the transformation of the
shape.
Pictures such as seen below can also be given to
learners to see how the transformation of a picture
can evolve into a new image.
Learners will then describe the process paying
attention to detail
Retrieved from
https://portfolio.newschool.edu/jingxuanzhao/files/2021
/01/WechatIMG1637-1024x646.jpeg
Checklist
I can identify the object
● Yes
● No
I can write a short description of the transformed shape
Tactile Learning
including at least two shapes involved
● Yes
Provide learners with the opportunity to develop
● No
spatial awareness and ability to recognise shapes
or objects from different perspectives. For
example:
220
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product - to test learners’ ability to recognise objects Have learners stand on the opposite side of a
from different points of view (outcome 2d, 3a) number 6 and ask them what they see. ( as shown
in the picture below.
Look at each image and explain the point of view of the ask learners “Who is correct?” the person saying 9
viewer and give reasons. Create a similar collage depicting or the one saying 6. give reasons for their answer.
an image from 3 points of view. The same exercise will be done for a u. Learners
will say if they see letter ‘u’ or letter ‘n’ when they
look at the letter from where they stand.
Get learners to realise that an image /object can
be thwarted based on the point of view and this
must be appreciated.
Invite learners give other instances where point of
view can affect outcome or answers presented.
Retrieved from
https://th.bing.com/th/id/R.607de6caca95803c15a36c7e
aa0faf83?rik=BIXy2bfM%2fGj8bQ&riu=http%3a%2f%2
fwww.fairyengine.com%2farticles%2fmultiviews%2fsampl
e.jpg&ehk=MQi%2fKUbu3HQDF9akziZ0qoRNS6YJ9X
PVAW90uhgE0gw%3d&risl=&pid=ImgRaw&r=0&sres=
1&sresct=1
Retrieved from https://beyondplm.com/wp-
Checklist
content/uploads/2021/03/fff.jpg
Learner can state 1 or more reasons
Discovery Learning
● Yes
Invite learners opportunities to describe and
● No
understand how the appearance of shapes or
Learner can create a simple collage showing 3 points of
objects changes when viewed from different
view (face of object can be sketched for non artistic
distances. For example:
learners)
Have learners go into the playground and look at
● Yes
buildings and other items that are close to them
● No
and far away.
Let them explain or draw the difference between
the objects.
221
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Peer Assessment - to test learners’ ability describe Learners will come up with reasons for the
changes in the appearance of objects based on phenomena.
distance Learners can imagine then draw a bird or plane
from near and at different distances to depict the
Each learner will state one comparison between the images change as the object goes further away from view
closer, to those further away. They will then explain why (as shown on the left)
the road and trees seem to become smaller with distance.
Peers will assess each other’s response.
Retrieved from
https://i.ytimg.com/vi/64F7mNiN-UI/maxresdefault.jpg
Checklist
Learner can state one comparison
● Yes
● No
Learner can give a valid explanation
● Yes
● No
222
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
● 2D shapes and 3D Shapes geometrical shapes
● Flash cards related to geometrical shapes and properties
● 2D and 3D shapes bingo cards
● 2D and 3D shapes Charts
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Transformation: a process by which an object, expression, or shape is converted into another.
Point of view: The position from which something or someone is observed
As an object gets closer, the visual angle increases, so the object appears larger. As the object moves farther away, the visual image angle decreases, making the
object appear smaller.
https://www.twinkl.com/teaching-wiki/geometric-shapes
Top Tips for Teaching 2D Shapes
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Mathematics & Language Arts:
• Oral and Written Descriptions: Learners can practice using precise language to describe shapes, objects, and spatial transformations. This can be tied to
writing exercises in language arts, where they describe objects in detail or provide instructions for constructing or transforming shapes (e.g., descriptive
writing, technical writing).
• Vocabulary Development: Use geometry-based vocabulary (e.g., rotation, symmetry, transformation) in language lessons to enhance learners'
understanding of mathematical and linguistic concepts.
223
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Mathematics & Art:
3D Object Representation: Learners can use isometric drawings to explore shapes from different perspectives, integrating artistic skills such as sketching and
model-building. Art classes can focus on drawing 3D objects, incorporating lessons on perspective and form, while math lessons reinforce the geometric principles
behind these drawings.
Model Building: Creating 3D models from descriptions ties art and math together as learners visualize and construct objects using geometric shapes. This can also
involve hands-on projects like sculpture or design.
Mathematics & Science:
Spatial Reasoning in Physics or Engineering: In science, learners can explore spatial reasoning in real-world applications such as predicting motion or structural
stability based on transformations (e.g., rotations, translations). This can relate to engineering projects like designing simple structures or understanding molecular
models in chemistry.
Mathematics & Technology:
Technology Integration: Use digital tools or software like CAD (Computer-Aided Design) programs that invite learners to manipulate 3D objects and shapes.
This integrates mathematics with technology education, teaching learners to visualize and create complex structures using spatial reasoning and geometry.
Mathematics & Agricultural Science
- classifying leaves based on their shape.
- building seed boded and also raised garden beds
- building animal shelters
Mathematics & Sport: In different sports, disciplines require a sense of direction and angle to aim the ball to score a perfect goal. From being alert on the field to
recognizing their angles, geometry plays a vital role in daily life.
“Math is the only place where truth and beauty mean the same thing.” - Danica McKellar
224
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome G1.2: Explore and Analyze Geometric Shapes and Relationships -Sorting, patterning, and building with 2D
& 3D Shapes
Grade Level Expectations:
Represent, construct, and deconstruct shapes and objects ( pyramids, prisms, cylinders, and cones)
Sort and create patterns with shapes and objects (pyramids, prisms, cylinders, and cones)
Build objects using nets, skeletons, and isometric drawings.
Draw acute, obtuse, and right angles
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge Entrance Slip/self assessment - Learners should be Provide opportunities to develop learners' skills in
able to identify shapes based on given descriptions. representing, creating, sorting, and patterning 3D
1. Identify pyramids, prisms, cylinders and Video will be paused periodically to invite for shapes using guided discovery, independent
cones based on their attributes identification. learning, manipulatives, and critical thinking.
2. Identify three types of angles (obtuse, 3D Shapes Song (Cone and Cylinder) | Tutway Guided Discovery
acute and right) in various geometric Identifying Prisms and Pyramids | Grade 2 & 3 | Math | Guide learners to identify real world objects that
shapes 3d Shapes are examples of pyramids ,prisms , cones and
cylinders. Present a variety of 3D shapes to the
3. Explain the characteristics of right, learners and briefly explain their properties.
obtuse and acute
Discussion to test learners ability to identify solids
based on a description
Skills
A description of a shape will be read to learners and they
4. Sort objects as being pyramids,
will be asked to determine the shape.
cylinders, prisms and cones
225
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5. Create and complete patterns using e.g. I am the shape of an object that was first built in
objects Egypt . I am pointed at the top but I am not flat. My base
is never round.
6. Construct 3-d objects using nets and
skeletons Learners were able to correctly identify shapes based on
their description
7. Deconstruct 3-D objects using nets Yes No Somewhat
Retrieved from
https://shop.luckylittlelearners.com/wp-
8. Create 3D shapes from isometric
content/uploads/2023/03/Lucky-to-Learn-Math-
drawings Think, Pair, Share /Peer Assessment- to invite peers
Unit-8-Geometry-and-Fractions-Anchor-Chart-
to assess each other's ability to sort solids.
3D-Shapes-in-Real-Life.jpeg
9. Draw acute, right and obtuse angles
Learners in pairs will be given groups of sorted shapes and
Values
asked to discuss and determine whether they are correctly
Independent Learning
sorted. Toilet paper rolls, match boxes etc.
Give learners cut out shapes and ask them to stick
10. Make connections with shapes and
Invite pairs to share and justify their findings. Class will
the shapes. Use manipulatives to demonstrate
types of angles by comparing them with
critique each pair. e.g True /False. All these shapes are
how to build different shapes and explore their
actual objects in the environment
square based pyramids.
properties (e.g., number of faces, edges, vertices).
Guide learners through a series of questions to
discover these properties on their own.
(pyramid, prism ,cone or cylinder)
Retrieved from https://www.splashlearn.com/math-
vocabulary/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/Identifying-
hexagonal-pyramid-example.png
226
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Checklist Retrieved from
https://study.com/cimages/videopreview/rirubt9
Pair can discuss shapes based on their attributes efn.jpg
yes somewhat no
Critical Thinking
Pair was able to correctly identify the odd shape(s) out in a
given group 1. Invite learners to describe the rule for
given pattern for eg. (horizontally add 2
yes somewhat no Vertically add 1)
Observation and Discussion - to determine learners’
ability to complete patterns
Learners will be given a pattern involving objects. Listen as
learners discuss their observations in order to determine
the pattern rule.
e.g. Retrieved from https://l.imgt.es/resource-
preview-imgs/3629a476-5250-4747-b5ee-
eda4428d9603/cover.jpg?profile=max500x190
2. Invite learners to create a similar pattern
with their own rule.
https://nzmaths.co.nz/sites/default/files/inline-
Use pattern blocks or shape cards to create and
images/matches-10.png
extend patterns involving 3D shapes.
Ask learners to identify the rules of the patterns
and predict the next shapes in the sequence.
227
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Ask learners questions such as Pose problems that require learners to apply their
understanding of 3D shapes to solve (e.g., “If you
What do you think the next object in the pattern will be ? stack these cubes, how many different shapes can
you create?”).
Learners could determine the rule:
Encourage learners to explain their reasoning and
easily with help could not identify the solutions.
rule for a given pattern.
Independent Learning
Learners were able to determine what comes next in a
given pattern? yes no
Provide stimulus for learners to develop learners'
ability to construct and deconstruct 3D objects
using nets and skeletons, starting by explaining
Group Work- to invite learners to express their
that a net is a 2D pattern that can be folded into a
construction and deconstruction skills
3D shape. Show examples of nets and the 3D
shapes they create.
Learners in small groups will be given cut out pieces of
shapes, glue / tape and pictures of various pyramids,
For the construction activity, provide nets for
prisms, cylinders and cones. Learners will be asked to use
specific shapes (e.g., cubes, pyramids), have
the pieces to construct the nets of the given nets.
learners cut, fold, and assemble the shapes, and
discuss the correspondence between the nets and
Have groups present their constructed shapes to their
the 3D shapes, including their properties.
peers
For deconstruction, explain that it involves
Have peers identify the shapes that were used to create the
unfolding a 3D object into its 2D net form.
nets.
Provide pre-assembled 3D objects, instruct
learners to carefully unfold them into nets, and
have them draw and label the nets. Compare these
Checklist
with pre-made nets and discuss challenges and
insights.
228
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are able to correctly construct the nets of given Introduce skeletons as 3D structures made of
shapes yes somewhat no edges without faces. Provide materials for building
skeletons (e.g., straws and connectors) and guide
Learners can identify the shapes used to create the nets learners in constructing them. For deconstruction,
have learners observe and sketch their skeletons,
yes somewhat no then break them down into 2D nets. Discuss how
skeletons and nets relate, reinforcing the
connection between 2D and 3D forms.
Product - to make unique isometric creations
Also, provide worksheets to match the net to its
Learners will be given images of isometric shapes and be 3D shape.
asked to create the shape using cutouts or blocks.
Eg. Use the necessary amount of blocks to create the
rectangular prism below
Retrieved from https://encrypted- Retrieved from:
tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcRnj7M3FhwQ1a https://i.pinimg.com/736x/7d/c5/a6/7dc5a6849
JJuHTry_dhEtEaDtDBXcHWtwJ0Xm5wpKvUqk- 4b00d59137123c8a46b0e77.jpg
ULjX9_CCH_xa_Qn64zGY&usqp=CAU
Discovery through Manipulatives
Checklist
Learners were able to accurately create given 3 d shapes
from an isometric drawing. Help learners understand isometric drawings,
yes no explain that these drawings represent three
229
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Peer assessment- to determine learners’ ability to dimensions on a 2D surface, with axes drawn at
identify types of angles around them 30-degree angles. Show examples of isometric
drawings, such as cubes or pyramids, and
Have learners listen and sing along to the following demonstrate how these 3D shapes are translated
Angles Song | Acute, Obtuse, & Right Angles | 3rd & 4th into 2D drawings.
Grade
Provide learners with isometric grid paper and
Angles Hunt - Group Work guide them in drawing simple 3D shapes, like
cubes or rectangular prisms, using rulers for
Divide the class into small groups and send each group to accuracy. Once learners are familiar with creating
find as many examples of each type of angle they can, isometric drawings, transition to constructing 3D
recording where it was found. After the allotted time, shapes based on these drawings.
bring learners back together and ask each group to share
Provide materials such as building blocks, clay, or
their angles they discovered during the activity. With the
paper modeling kits, and instruct learners to build
teacher’s guidance, peers will assess accuracy of each
the shapes according to the isometric drawings.
group’s findings.
Have learners compare their constructed shapes
with the drawings and discuss any challenges
Discuss any findings that might have been unique to one
faced in the process.
particular group.
Checklist
Give isometric drawings of 3 D shapes and ask to
use blocks or cutouts to create it based on a given
Learners could identify at least 2 examples of acute angles
view
in their environment yes no
Learners could identify at least 2 examples of obtuse
angles in their environment yes no
Learners could identify at least 2 examples of right angles
in their environment yes no
230
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product (Drawing angles) - to test learners’ ability to
sketch sample angles.
Learners will be asked to use rulers to assist them to
sketch given angles and be asked to label them as being
as acute, right or obtuse
Exit Ticket
Learners will be shown pictures of two angles and be
asked to identify what type of angle each is . Learners will
then be asked to identify the larger of the two.
Rertrieved from
https://th.bing.com/th/id/R.1390a848a9222b9e9
fc8df684b5dbee9?rik=U79EreZ9SeD8aA&riu=ht
tp%3a%2f%2flmtn.weebly.com%2fuploads%2f2
%2f5%2f6%2f4%2f25647388%2f2017-11-16-11-
48-
10_orig.jpg&ehk=7JkNBG1pmZbTaMLZbd7Zr9
hoEmDiXnHDsQfEvHap6Rs%3d&risl=&pid=I
mgRaw&r=0
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/ Real Life Application
Identifying Angles:
Provide opportunities for learners to define angles
and introduce the three types: acute (less than 90
231
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
degrees), right (exactly 90 degrees), and obtuse
(greater than 90 degrees but less than 180 degree.
Use angle cards to sort angles into acute, right,
and obtuse categories. Show real-world examples
and have learners identify the angle types.
Engage learners in a whole class to discuss the
properties of each angle type and any challenges
learners face
Demonstrate how to use a protractor to measure
and draw angles, focusing on acute, right, and
obtuse angles.
Have learners practice drawing these angles on
graph paper and then independently on blank
paper, labeling each with its degree measure.
Conduct a peer review where learners measure
and check each other’s angles with a protractor.
Review the accuracy of the drawings and discuss
any difficulties encountered.
Provide tasks like drawing angles to specific
measurements or creating designs using acute,
right, and obtuse
Organize a scavenger hunt to find and
photograph angles in the environment. Then,
232
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
create a matching game in which angle cards are
paired with their definitions and measurements.
Show pictures of common objects that can be
found in their school environment and ask them
to identify as many angles as possible in them.
Critical Thinking
Have learners complete the activity using angles
to create a shape .
233
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Additional Resources and Materials
https://teach.files.bbci.co.uk/skillswise/ma343dsh-l1-w-everyday-shapes.pdf
https://teach.files.bbci.co.uk/skillswise/ma33angl-e2-w-drawing-angles.pdf
https://www.turtlediary.com/game/nets-of-3d-shapes.html
https://www.mathgames.com/skill/6.23-nets-of-3-dimensional-figures
234
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
https://www.nctm.org/Classroom-Resources/Illuminations/Interactives/Geometric-Solids/
Cereal boxes, match boxes, toilet paper rolls, party hats, dice
3D shape manipulatives (e.g., cubes, spheres, cones, pyramids).
Drawing paper and pencils.
Sorting trays or containers.
Pattern blocks or shape cards.
Nets for various 3D shapes (e.g., cubes, pyramids, prisms) printed on paper.
Scissors.
Glue or tape.
Rulers
Pre-assembled 3D objects (e.g., cubes, pyramids, prisms).
Skeletons of various 3D shapes (e.g., straws, pipe cleaners, or 3D modeling software).
Connecting materials (e.g., connectors for straws or software tools).
Isometric grid paper.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
A net is what a 3D shape would look like if unfolded. You can draw and fold nets to make 3D shapes. A 3D shape can have more than one possible net.
235
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Retrieved from https://ecdn.teacherspayteachers.com/thumbitem/3D-Shapes-and-Nets-Anchor-Chart-11143836-1708778565/original-11143836-1.jpg
An isometric drawing is a pictorial representation of a 3 D object in which all three dimensions are shown.
Retrieved from https://media.istockphoto.com/id/670498854/vector/simple-geometric-figures-isometric-vector-
illustration.jpg?s=612x612&w=0&k=20&c=MFR6U5EKsV4kFCggGwiCMG8EndKjFrQfSPPq8gNNI1U=
236
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Retrieved from https://i0.wp.com/www.abcworksheet.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/10/What-is-an-Angle.jpg?fit=1200%2C707&ssl=1
237
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Representing and constructing shapes connects geometry and measurement. Sorting and creating patterns links symmetry, tessellation, and transformations.
Building objects using nets and isometric drawings reinforces spatial reasoning and 3D geometry while drawing angles integrates trigonometry and angle properties.
These activities promote connections across math topics for deeper understanding.
Art:
Explore perspective drawing techniques and how distance affects depth and detail perception. Explore artistic designs and structures using nets and skeletons.
Incorporate isometric drawing techniques into art projects, focusing on perspective and spatial design.
Science:
Explore how scientists and engineers use models and drawings to represent objects and structures in natural and built environments. Study natural structures
and their geometric forms (e.g., crystal formations, molecular structures).
238
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome G.2.1 : Recognizing, Naming and Describing Shapes - Analysing and describing shapes
Grade Level Expectations:
Recognise and describe characteristics and attributes of triangles according to sides, angles, and symmetries (acute, obtuse, right, scalene, isosceles, equilateral)
Recognise polygons both regular and irregular, including non-convex) according to sides, angles, parallel sides, diagonals, lines of reflective symmetry, order of
rotational symmetry, perpendicular lines, bisectors of line segments and angles, and perpendicular bisectors of segments.
Recognise and describe attributes and characteristics of prisms, pyramids, cylinders and cones according to faces, edges, vertices, curved surfaces, parallel and
congruent bases and congruent faces
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge Product Entrance Slip - To determine whether Learners will be using guided discovery to
learners can identify triangles' attributes and outline the attributes and characteristics of
1. State the characteristics of triangles based characteristics triangles.
on sides, angles and symmetries
Triangle identification Game- Create flashcards with Chart Creation and Video assisted learning
2. Define acute, obtuse, Right, Scalene, different types of triangles, ( include different
Isosceles and equilateral triangles. orientations) and have learners match triangles to their Have learners review previous knowledge by
attributes creating a chart with three columns: "By Sides,"
3. Differentiate between Acute, Obtuse, "By Angles," and "By Symmetry." In each column,
Right, Scalene, Isosceles and Equilateral Checklist let learners list the characteristics and draw
triangles. Learners can accurately match all triangles examples of each type of triangle.
to attributes accurately Provide learners with sample triangles. Have them
4. Identify different types of triangles based Yes / No measure the sides using rulers and the angles using
on their properties. protractor. Based on their measurements, learners
Observation /Self assessment: To determine if classify each triangle by sides (equilateral,
5. Recognise different types of triangles based learners can recognise triangles based on properties. isosceles, scalene) and by angles (acute, right,
on their properties. obtuse).
239
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6. Describe triangles according to their side, Have learners take turns to dip triangle images from a bag. Have learners check for reflective symmetry by
lengths, angle measure, and symmetries Have them classify it based on their sides, angles and folding or using a mirror to see if the triangle can
symmetries. be divided into two equal halves.
7. a. State the characteristics of regular Learners record their findings in a table, noting
polygons. Checklist the side lengths, angle measures, and symmetry
b. Outline the attributes of regular I am able to accurately classify the triangle I dipped . properties.
polygons. Yes/ No
8. State the properties of sides in regular and Give learners the opportunity to learn the
irregular polygons. Exit Ticket/Peer Assessment attributes of different triangles. For example,
provide learning with a set of triangles, and have
9. a. Name the types of angles in regular and Match the Triangle to its description- Have one learner them sort the triangles.
irregular polygons to include non-convex. orally describe a triangle and another make a sketch of the Invite learners to tell what makes the triangles
b. Count the angles within regular and triangle being described. different. Guide learners into activities to help
irregular polygons. differentiate triangles based on sides and angles.
Learners can also identify different triangles in the e.g have them look at a video. Video can be
10. Identify parallel sides in regular and environment. paused periodically for discussion.
irregular polygons including non-convex. Retrieved from
https://youtu.be/fNFR7YWOMI4?si=VIXATNs
11. Identify diagonals in regular and irregular Observation /peer assessment - To determine hBtY3ZKC9
polygons. whether learners can identify polygons based on
properties Provide learners with the opportunity to sort
12. Identify lines of reflective symmetry in triangles based on their attributes. For example
regular and irregular polygons. provide learners with attribute cards and sample
1. Create a game where learners identify different triangles. Have learners place the attribute cards in
13. Recognise the order of rotation in regular polygons based on their properties for e.g one the correct sections of the sorting mat or paper,
and irregular polygons. learner will identify a polygon from the face of a matching them with the corresponding sample
14. a. Recognise the attributes of prisms, solid in the classroom, while another will identify triangles.
pyramids, cylinders, and cones based on which type of polygon, number and type of angles
their bases, edges, vertices, curved surfaces in it. Or
240
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
b. Identify parallel and congruent bases and Checklist Conceptual Understanding
congruent faces of prisms, pyramids, Learner can identify at least one type of polygon Discuss the different types of triangles. Have
cylinders and cones. yes/ no learners formulate a working definition for each
type of triangle based on properties
15. a. Describe the attributes of prisms, Learner can accurately count all angles
pyramids, cylinders, and cones based on yes/no
their bases, edges, vertices, curved surfaces
b. Describe parallel and congruent bases Learner can name all angles counted
and congruent faces of prisms, pyramids, yes/no
cylinders and cones.
Invite learners to classify polygons as convex and concave
Skills
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
16. Categorize triangles according to their
sides, lengths, angle measures, and lines of
Types of Triangles based on size
symmetry.
17. Solve geometric problems involving
triangular properties
18. Determine the order of rotational
symmetry in regular and irregular polygons. Learners can identify at least 4/6 polygons as convex and
concave
19. Recognise perpendicular lines within yes/ no
regular and irregular polygons.
20. Identify angles that are perpendicular to
bisectors of line segments in regular and
irregular polygons.
241
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
21. Highlight perpendicular lines within regular Product
and irregular polygons. Learners will be assessed on their ability to efficiently
mark out the diagonals in a given polygon.
22. Highlight bisectors of line segments within
Checklist
regular and irregular polygons.
Learners are able to accurately mark-off the diagonals in a
given polygon.
Values
yes / partially / no
23. Cultivate an appreciation for the beauty and
complexity of geometric shapes and
Product
patterns when categorizing triangles.
Symmetrical Attributes
24. Design a tessellation booklet that shows the Have learners complete the activity by matching
attributes of regular and irregular polygons the name and definition of each triangle to its
image. Learners will then draw lines of symmetry
on the image. This will help them to notice that
equilateral triangles have three lines of symmetry,
isosceles triangles have one and scalene triangles
have zero.
Checklist Provide additional practice, and have learners
Learners are able to correctly determine the rotational and discuss how triangles can be classified using their
reflexive lines of symmetry in polygons for at least ⅔ symmetry.
polygons.
yes ___- no __
242
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product/Discussion - to demonstrate ability or Discovery Learning
recognise perpendicularity Engage learners in introduction and class
discussion on characteristics of regular polygons
In pairs learners will identify 1 example in the classroom and group activity to identify and present
which depicts perpendicularity. For e.g. the square face of characteristics of polygons using printed examples.
tiles and /or carpet squares has 2 perpendicular lines and 4
perpendicular angles. Guide learners in discovering polygons. The
teacher presents different images of shapes. Have
Checklist learners discuss what they see in terms of the
Pair can identify at least 1 example number of sides and use it as a guide to help name
yes/no the different polygons, as well as categorize them
as regular and irregular polygons.
Pairs can outline perpendicular sides and angles.
yes/no Video-assisted learning
Present the following video
https://youtu.be/DUGkQMLowXA?si=DTLOY
XF8xYUD-C0o
Once learners can identify polygons, invite them
to state the properties of the different polygons.
From the video, invite learners to categorize
polygons based on attributes, e.g parallel sides,
reflective symmetry
Provide learners with printed templates of various
regular polygons. Using rulers and protractors, let
learners measure and record the side lengths and
angles of each polygon. Have learners compare
the attributes of different regular polygons and
243
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product- to test learners’ knowledge of the attributes note the similarities and differences. Have learners
of prisms, cylinders and cones. (outcomes 24 and 25) fold their printed polygons to find and draw the
lines of symmetry.
Learners will complete the worksheet and identify which Engage learners in a class discussion about the
ones are prisms. importance of symmetry in defining regular
polygons.
Have learners Create art projects using various
regular polygons; label polygons with their
characteristics and present and explain art projects
to the class. Conduct scavenger hunts to find
examples of regular polygons. Have learners
record and discuss findings, noting characteristics
of found polygons.
Video-assisted learning
Review the definitions and visual examples of
acute, right, and obtuse angles. Explain that
polygons can have different types of angles and
these need to be identified.
Provide learners with worksheets and printed
polygon examples. Instruct learners to count the
Retrieved from
number of angles in each polygon and record their
https://ecdn.teacherspayteachers.com/thumbitem/Proper
findings.
ties-of-3D-Shapes-Worksheets-8880051-
1670872041/original-8880051-1.jpg Have learners identify and mark the parallel sides
in each polygon using colored pencils or markers
and discuss the findings, emphasizing the presence
244
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
or absence of parallel sides in different types of
Checklist polygons.
Learner can state the properties of at least 6 /8 solids
Have learners search for regular and irregular
yes/no polygons around the classroom or school. They
will either take photos or draw the objects they
Leaner can identify all prisms find, noting the types of angles and parallel sides.
yes/no They will record these details on a worksheet and
then share their findings with the class, discussing
interesting examples and observations.
Distribute printed examples of different polygons
to each learner or group. Provide protractors for
measuring and counting angles. Instruct learners
to count the number of angles in each polygon
and record their findings on the worksheet. Have
learners compare their results and discuss any
patterns observed (e.g., the consistency between
the number of sides and angles). Review the
findings as a class, highlighting any unusual
polygons or common mistakes.
Explain what parallel sides are and how to identify
them in polygons. Parallel sides are lines that run
in the same direction and never intersect. Provide
learners with printed polygons and rulers. Have
learners use rulers to identify and mark pairs of
parallel sides in each polygon using colored
pencils or markers. Let learners complete a
worksheet where they list the polygons and note
245
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
the number of pairs of parallel sides they
identified.
Provide opportunities for learners to share their
findings with the class, discussing which polygons
had parallel sides and any challenges faced. Review
the differences between regular and irregular
polygons regarding parallel sides.
Video-assisted learning
Present a video on the Diagonals of Polygons.
Give learners cut-outs of polygons and have them
draw diagonals. Invite learners to formulate a
working definition for diagonals.
https://youtu.be/XO6t7Cqa_p4?si=dV4z460jCH
Wu9CqY
Guided learning-
Guide learners into understanding the concept of
reflective symmetry in regular and irregular
polygons. Present learners with a video on
reflective and rotational symmetry.
https://youtu.be/-
0wDI6xM3zw?si=UDMxZPux1jfvTzB2
246
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Guide learners into practical activity on:
Order of Rotational Symmetry
Provide learners with cut-out shapes like stars,
squares, and triangles. Have them rotate each
shape around a central point, noting how many
times it looks the same as its original position
before completing a full 360-degree turn. Ask
learners to record the number of times the shape
appears identical to its starting position. This
number is the shape’s order of symmetry.
Discuss with learners, “If we consider the order of
symmetry for a regular hexagon it is equal to 6
since it has 6 equal sides and is rotated with an
angle of 60 degrees”.
Conceptual Understanding
Create various examples of perpendicular lines
and guide learners in describing their spatial
relationship (e.g., intersecting at a right angle,
forming four equal angles).
247
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Present a visual with multiple examples of
perpendicular angles highlighted. Facilitate a class
discussion to elicit the definition of
perpendicularity based on the common attributes
observed in the shaded areas. Subsequently,
learners will create their own polygons, identify
and shade perpendicular angles, and visually
emphasize perpendicular lines using color coding.
Retrieved from
https://i.ytimg.com/vi/Glq51xdm2MI/maxr
esdefault.jpg
Learning through manipulation
Invite learners to collect from home at least one
item that represents a cylinder, cone, pyramid, etc.,
as shown below.
248
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from
https://i.pinimg.com/originals/41/59/e6/4159e6
c92f0c3ba5af9a5396d744dd96.png
Lead learners to manipulate similar objects to
differentiate the prisms from the pyramids and
cones
249
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
● https://thirdspacelearning.com/gcse-maths/geometry-and-measure/types-of-triangles/https://byjus.com/maths/types-of-angles/
● https://www.splashlearn.com/math-vocabulary/geometry/regular-polygon
● https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/guides/zshb97h/revision/6
Cutouts, matchsticks, popsicle sticks, rulers
Additional Content Knowledge for the Teacher
What is Reflective symmetry?
Reflective symmetry is where a shape or pattern is reflected in a mirror line or a line of symmetry. The shape that has been reflected will be the same as the original, it
should also be the same size and it will be the same distance away from the mirror.
What is Rotational symmetry?
The act of rotational symmetry is where a shape or pattern can be turned or 'rotated' around a central point and remain the same. Certain shapes have rotational
symmetry of order X - this means that certain shapes can be rotated around a point and remain the same consistently, like a circle.
Perpendicular lines are two lines that meet or intersect at right angles (90 degrees)
Perpendicular bisector is a line ray or segment that divides the given segment into two congruent segments
A pyramid in geometry is a three-dimensional shape with the following characteristics:
● It has a flat polygon base.
● All other faces are triangles and are called lateral faces.
● The point above the base is called the apex.
● The edges are formed by connecting the base to the apex
250
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
A prism is a solid figure that has two parallel congruent sides that are called bases that are connected by the lateral faces that are parallelograms. There are both
rectangular and triangular prisms.
Retrieved from https://i.ytimg.com/vi/NEyh9POuUxk/hqdefault.jpg
251
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Retrieved from https://th.bing.com/th/id/OIP.3rqNdlbxvU-ltJagODRjfAAAAA?rs=1&pid=ImgDetMain
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Within Other Areas of Mathematics:
Identifying angles when reading time on an analog clock
Useful in Spatial Reasoning
Geometry - Tessellation patterns of 2D shapes
Patterns and sequences
Art:
Incorporate geometric shapes into design and artistic projects.
Science:
Explore the role of geometric shapes in natural formations and engineering designs.
252
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Language Arts:
Reading Passages: Incorporate passages or short texts that describe various geometric concepts. Follow up with comprehension questions related to the shapes
and their attributes.
Text Analysis: Analyze texts that use geometric shapes in metaphors or symbolism. Discuss how shapes might be used to represent different ideas or themes in
literature.
Create role-playing activities where learners act out scenarios involving different shapes. For instance, a scene where characters represent different triangles or
polygons and have to work together to solve a problem.
Social Studies:
Architectural Analysis: Study famous architectural structures like the Pyramids of Egypt, the Parthenon in Greece, or the Great Wall of China. Analyze the
geometric shapes and properties of these structures.
Have learners create presentations or reports on how geometric principles were used in the design and construction of these landmarks.
Building Models: Construct models of historical buildings using geometric shapes. For example, recreate the pyramids using triangular prisms or the Parthenon
using columns and rectangles.
Historical Architecture Project:
Prompt: “Research the geometric design of the Colosseum in Rome. Create a model and describe how the geometric shapes and principles were used in its
construction.”
Cultural Artifacts Report:
Prompt: “Investigate geometric patterns in African textiles. Write a report on how these patterns are used in cultural designs and their significance.”
Map Creation Assignment:
Prompt: “Design a fictional map of a newly discovered land. Use different geometric shapes to represent landmarks and natural features, and explain your choices.”
253
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome G2.2: Recognizing, Naming and Describing Shapes - Naming 2D & 3D shapes
Grade Level Expectations:
Recognise, name and classify:
- 3D shapes based on their properties.
- triangles by their side lengths and angle measures.
- polygons based on their properties.
- types of angles.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Product: Entrance Slip- To diagnose to what extent Learners will be guided into recognizing
Knowledge learners are able to recognise different 3D shapes. various 3d shapes, triangles, polygons and
angles in different spaces and orientations.
1. Recognise prisms, pyramids, cylinders,
and cones based on their bases, edges,
vertices, curved surfaces, parallel and Discovering through manipulatives
congruent bases, and congruent faces. Use manipulatives to invite learners to discover
the properties of the different solids as well as sort
2. Name prisms, pyramids, cylinders, and them based on their attributes For example: Use
cones based on their bases, edges, physical models or images and attribute cards to
vertices, curved surfaces, parallel and classify prisms, pyramids, cylinders, and cones on
congruent bases, and congruent faces. sorting mats. Discuss and explain the
distinguishing attributes.
3. Recognise angles as acute, obtuse and Measure and count the bases, edges, vertices, and
right. Retrieved from surfaces of physical models. Let learners fill out
https://www.cgpplus.co.uk/primary/ks1/maths/m1whc attribute recording sheets and compare findings
4. Name angles as acute, obtuse and right. 8966-3d-shapes-stretch-year-2 with classmates..
254
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5. Recognise triangles by their side lengths Checklist: The learner is able to correctly match the 3D
as isosceles, scalene, and equilateral. shapes.
6. Name triangles by their side lengths as ● All
isosceles, scalene, and equilateral. ● 3-5
● Less than 3
7. Recognise triangles by their angle
measures as acute, obtuse, right, or Observation: To determine whether learners can sort
both, e.g., right scalene, right isosceles. everyday 3D shapes
Retrieved from
Tape pictures of various everyday 3D shapes on the
https://tunstallsteachingtidbits.com/2016/01/82
8. Name triangles by their angle measures board and call on random learners to sort these 3D
39.html
as acute, obtuse, right, or both, e.g., shapes into the categories written on the board.
right scalene, right isosceles.
Video-assisted learning
Invite learners to view videos classifying 3D
9. Recognise polygons based on their
shapes based on their attributes (see example
number and length of sides, number
below). Ask questions such as what properties do
and type of angles, lines of reflective
the cube and cuboid have in common? Sorting 3D
symmetry, and order of rotational
Shapes based on their attributes
symmetry.
Use templates to construct prisms, pyramids,
10. Name polygons based on their number
cylinders, and cones from construction paper.
and length of sides, number and type of
Label the attributes and present the shapes to the
angles, lines of reflective symmetry, and Retrieved from
class.
order of rotational symmetry. https://primarylearning.org/worksheet/sorting-activity-
Conduct a shape hunt around the classroom or
for-3d-shapes/
school, recording findings on a worksheet. Share
Skills
and discuss the results.
Checklist: Learners are correctly able to sort 3D shapes
Use games to help learners differentiate between
11. Classify prisms, pyramids, cylinders, and into given categories.
attributes of 3D shapes. For example, use bingo
cones based on their bases, edges, ● Yes
cards with attributes of the shapes. Show images
● Somewhat
or models and call out attributes, covering the
255
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
vertices, curved surfaces, parallel and ● No corresponding squares on the cards. Discuss the
congruent bases, and congruent faces. matching shapes when a learner wins.
Conversation: To discuss the types of triangles and
12. Classify triangles by their side lengths as
their attribute
isosceles, scalene, and equilateral.
Ask learners to identify the angle or triangle being
described.
13. Classify triangles by their angle
measures as acute, obtuse, right, or
both, e.g., right scalene, right isosceles.
14. Classify angles as acute, obtuse and
right.
15. Classify triangles by their side lengths as
Math Wheel
isosceles, scalene, and equilateral.
Use the math wheel to review the types of angles
and triangles. Create a math wheel with your class
16. Classify triangles by their angle
on the types of angles and triangles and their
measures as acute, obtuse, right, or
attributes, including their angle measures.
both, e.g., right scalene, right isosceles.
17. Classify angles as acute, obtuse and
right.
18. Classify polygons based on their
number and length of sides, number
Retrieved from https://thirdspacelearning.com/gcse-
and type of angles, lines of reflective
maths/geometry-and-measure/types-of-triangles/
symmetry, and order of rotational
symmetry.
Checklist: Learners are correctly able to identify the
various types of triangles based on their descriptions.
256
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Values ● All
● Some
19. Write a class journal on the properties ● None
of using triangles and 3D shapes in our
environment. Product: Peer activity- To check that learners can
classify triangles by their sides and angles.
20. Recognise the importance of various
types of angles (acute, right, obtuse) and
triangles (equilateral, isosceles, scalene,
acute, right, obtuse) through
the completion of different exercises.
21. Appreciate the use of polygons on
buildings and objects in the
environment Retrieved from
https://cognitivecardiomath.com/cognitive-
cardio-blog/types-of-triangles-math-doodle-
notes/
Video-assisted learning and note-taking
Show learners this video on how to identify types
of triangles by their angles.
Different Types of Triangles, Classifying Triangles
based on Sides and Angles
Retrieved from https://mathmonks.com/wp-
Invite learners to copy a table classifying triangles
content/uploads/2020/12/Classifying-Triangles-by-Sides-
based on their attributes.
and-Angles-Worksheet.jpg
257
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Checklist: Learners are correctly able to classify triangles
by their sides and angles.
● All
● More than half
● Less than half
Product: To determine whether learners are able to
identify polygons based on their attributes.
Retrieved from
https://www.crestolympiads.com/topic/class-9-
triangles-and-its-properties
Triangle construction with matchsticks
Place learners in small groups and give each group
a set of matchsticks. Instruct groups to construct
various types of triangles based on their side
lengths and angles, e.g., obtuse, acute, right
scalene, and right isosceles. Learners should label
each triangle based on its attributes.
258
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from https://mathmonks.com/wp-
content/uploads/2021/03/Properties-of-Polygons-
Worksheet.jpg
Checklist: Learners are correctly able to identify polygons
based on their attributes.
● All
● Some
● None
Retrieved from
Observation: To observe learners using GeoGebra to
https://hussellvs.best/product_details/52141428.
discover the order of rotational symmetry of various
html
polygons.
Invite learners to work in small groups using Geogebra to
discover the rotational symmetry of polygons. The teacher
must familiarize themselves with the activity to give
instruction to learners.
Symmetries of Regular Polygons - Rotational Symmetry –
GeoGebra
Checklist: Learners are correctly able to identify the order
of rotational symmetry of the polygons.
● All
● Some
● None
259
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Polygon Chart- Review types of polygons and
their attributes using charts
Retrieved from https://mathmonks.com/polygon
260
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from https://pango.education/maths-
resource/9755/max-maths-year-5-learn-together-
261
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
reflective-and-rotational-symmetry-in-regular-
polygons-1
Video-assisted learning: Use this video to invite
learners to differentiate between reflectional and
rotational symmetry.
Reflectional Symmetry and Rotational Symmetry
| Don't Memorise
Additional Resources and Materials
Manila paper, match sticks, popsicle sticks, markers, 3D manipulatives
Additional Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Reflectional symmetry means that an object will look exactly the same if it's reflected across a line of symmetry. Rotational symmetry means that an object will look
exactly the same if it's rotated the right amount.
Retrieved from https://www.expii.com/t/symmetry-of-an-object-
1059#:~:text=Reflectional%20symmetry%20means%20that%20an,it's%20rotated%20the%20right%20amount.
262
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: G2:3 Recognizing, Naming, and Describing Shapes – Describing relationships between and among shapes
Grade Level Expectations:
Recognise, describe, and compare attributes and characteristics of prisms, pyramids, cylinders, and cones.
Make and test conjectures about the properties of some 2D and 3D shapes.
Predict which nets will form a prism or pyramid and which 2D shapes can be made by slicing them.
Recognise and compare the characteristics of various types of triangles and their symmetries.
Classify polygons based on their properties and compare properties within them.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge Product: Entrance Slip- To diagnose to what extent Learners will be guided into recognizing the
learners are able to recognise the attributes of 3D attributes of 3D shapes, triangles, polygons
1. Recognise the attributes of prisms, shapes. and angles in different spaces and
pyramids, cylinders, and cones. orientations.
2. Describe the attributes of prisms, Discovering 3D Shapes around us
pyramids, cylinders, and cones Ask learners to identify 3D shapes in their
environment (eg. cupboards, toilet paper roll, tent)
3. Recognise the attributes of various and classify them as prisms, pyramids, cylinders,
triangles (acute, obtuse, right, scalene, and cones based on their attributes.
isosceles, and equilateral)
Comparing 3D shapes
4. Describe the attributes of various Place learners in groups. Give each group a set of
triangles (acute, obtuse, right, scalene, 3D manipulatives and have them compare their
isosceles, and equilateral). attributes. E.g.,
Retrieved from
https://www.cgpplus.co.uk/primary/ks1/maths/m1wac
5. Recognise the rotational and reflective ● pyramids vs prisms
8938-3d-shape-match-up-year-2
symmetry of triangles. ● cones vs cylinders
263
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6. Describe the rotational and reflective Checklist: The learner is able to correctly match the 3D ● cylinders vs prisms
symmetry of triangles. shapes to their attributes. ● cones vs pyramids
Skills
● All
● 4-7
1. Compare the attributes of prisms,
● Less than 4
pyramids, cylinders, and cones.
Product: To check that learners can compare 3D
2. Make conjectures about which nets will
shapes.
or will not form a given prism or
pyramid.
3. Test conjectures about which nets will
or will not form a given prism or
pyramid.
4. Make conjectures about which 2D faces
can be seen by slicing a given prism or
pyramid.
5. Test conjectures about which 2D faces
can be made by slicing a given prism or
Retrieved from https://www.tes.com/teaching-
pyramid.
resource/properties-of-3d-shapes-coloring-and-
comparing-faces-edges-and-vertices-12740297
Skills
Checklist: The learner correctly compared the 3D shapes
6. Compare the attributes of various
● Yes
triangles (acute, obtuse, right, scalene,
● Somewhat 3D nets using GeoGebra
isosceles, and equilateral).
● No Invite learners to test conjectures on 3D nets on
Conversation: To invite learners to make conjectures GeoGebra.
on nets of prisms and pyramids
264
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
7. Compare the rotational and reflective Place a chart on the board showing different nets of Geometry B: Folding Nets of 3D Shapes –
symmetry of triangles. pyramids and prisms. Discuss with learners which prism GeoGebra
or pyramid each net will form. In small groups, invite
8. Compare polygons based on these learners to fold given nets to determine the accuracy of Discovering through testing
properties: number of sides, angles, their conjectures. Place learners in groups and give each group a
rotational and reflective symmetry. firm cheese triangle (pyramid). Ask learners to
form conjectures on which 2D shape can be made
9. Make conjectures about the properties if it is sliced vertically. Invite learners to slice the
of triangles and polygons. cheese using a disposable knife to test their
conjecture. Use manipulatives of other prisms and
10. Test conjectures about the properties of pyramids and ask learners to make conjectures
triangles and polygons. about them. Learners should recognise that when you
slice a prism or pyramid, the 2D shape you see depends on
Values how you cut it.
11. Show an appreciation for the properties
of various triangles and polygons by
making creative posters
12. Make and test conjectures about the
Retrieved from https://www.math-
attributes of various 3D shapes, such as
salamanders.com/image-files/math-nets-worksheets-
edges, vertices, and faces."
match-the-nets-1.gif
Retrieved from
https://depositphotos.com/photo/cheese-
Checklist: The learner made accurate conjectures on
triangles-on-white-67013391.html
which prisms and pyramids the nets would form.
● Yes
● Somewhat
● No
265
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product: To determine if learners are able to guess Learning by doing Draw the three types of
the 2D shape that is formed from slicing the 3D shape triangles on a cardboard chart (equilateral, scalene
-focus on prisms & pyramids and isosceles). Place an exact cut-out of each
triangular face over its drawing, fastened with a
thumb tack in the middle. Have different learners
come to the board to turn the cut-out over the
drawing to find the order of rotational symmetry
of each triangular face.
Retrieved from
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/quick-line-and-
rotational-symmetry-project-this-home-school--
298996862774251492/
Retrieved from:
https://www.mathworksheets4kids.com/solid-
Give learners cut-outs of the different types of
shapes/cross-section/identify-3d-shapes.pdf
triangles and have them fold them in different
ways to find the lines of reflective symmetry.
Checklist: The learner was able to accurately determine
which 2D shapes will be made by slicing the prisms and
pyramids.
● All
● Some
● None
266
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Observation: Peer practice- To invite learners to
work online together to recognise types of triangles
based on their attributes.
Interactive Math Lesson | Classifying Triangles
(Equilateral, Isosceles, or Scalene)
Interactive Math Lesson | Classifying Triangles
(Right, Acute, Obtuse)
Checklist: The learners correctly identified the different
types of triangles based on the given attributes.
● Yes
● Somewhat
● No
Observation: To discover if learners are able to fill in
an empty table such as this one with the correct
attributes for each polygon.
267
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/39195459240836472
/
Checklist: The learners correctly completely at east ⅝
rows.
● Yes
● No
268
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Manila paper, thumbtacks/fasteners, cheese wedges, 3D shapes manipulatives
Additional Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Website for additional information on slicing 3D shapes:
https://www.pbslearningmedia.org/resource/muen-math-g-slicing3dfigures/slicing-three-dimensional-figures/
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Geometry & Measurement: Compare and calculate the surface area and volume of 3D shapes like prisms and cones.
Algebra & Geometry: Test conjectures about shape properties, exploring relationships between sides, angles, and dimensions.
Spatial Reasoning: Predict nets and 2D cross-sections of 3D shapes to enhance visualization skills.
Symmetry & Transformations: Compare triangles and explore transformations like reflections and rotations.
Classification: Classify polygons based on properties using diagrams to explore relationships.
Mathematics & Art: Recognise and describe attributes of prisms, pyramids, and other shapes, then create artistic models or drawings, blending geometry with
creative design.
Mathematics & Science: Make and test conjectures about 2D and 3D shapes, tying into physics or engineering by exploring how shapes impact structures or
stability in real-world applications.
Mathematics & Technology: Predict which nets will form prisms or pyramids using technology like 3D modeling software to experiment with shape construction
and transformations.
Mathematics & Physical Education: Compare characteristics of triangles and their symmetries, applying this knowledge in sports or movement analysis where
angles and symmetry affect performance.
269
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Mathematics & Language Arts: Classify polygons and compare properties, encouraging learners to use precise mathematical language to describe and explain their
reasoning in written or oral presentations.
270
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome G 3.1: Composing, Decomposing and Transforming Shapes - Combining Shapes
Grade Level Expectations:
Construct composite objects (various prisms, pyramids, cylinders and cones) from other shapes
Construct composite shapes (various polygons including triangles) from other polygons.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge Product Entrance Slip Learners will use real life application,
technology, play and independent learning to
1. Recognise polygons and non-polygons To determine whether learners can correctly identify identify and construct composite shapes
polygons using various 3d shapes and polygons
2. Name polygons
Learners sing along to the polygons song Guided discovery using real-life application
3. Identify prisms, pyramids, cylinders and The Polygon Song | Polygons for Kids | Polygons
cones with further accuracy Geometry | Silly School Songs Give pictures of everyday items and be asked to
determine what polygon their faces most look like
4. Describe composite shapes and objects, Learners will then be shown images of shapes and be
including how they are formed by combining asked to determine whether they are polygons or not
simpler geometric shapes.
5. Identify shapes making up the composite
shapes or objects
Skills
Observation /Self Assessment
6. Draw polygons to create composite shapes
To determine whether learners can name polygons
that are other polygons( including triangles)
based on their sides
271
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
7. Create composite shapes such as various Observe learners as they count the sides of given Retrieved from Google Images
prisms, pyramids, cylinders and cones using polygons . They will then determine the name of each
other shapes polygon based on the number of its sides.
Values
8. Write a reflection on the importance of
different shapes in their environment
9. Display the value of simpler shapes in
constructing compound geometrical figures.
Retrieved from
https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F
%2Fwww.liveworksheets.com%2Fw%2Fen%2Fmath%2
F2289186&psig=AOvVaw2NHzd7Igd_oFC2Eci6FAFM
&ust=1717537423135000&source=images&cd=vfe&opi
=89978449&ved=0CBAQjRxqFwoTCIDXydKzwIYDF
QAAAAAdAAAAABAE
Checklist
Discovery through Play
I able to name
Shapes Bingo
all most some none
of the shown polygons correctly ?
272
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Talking Circles
To diagnose to what extent learners can recognise
various 3D shapes and their attributes
Learners will be seated in a circle, a bag will be passed
with images of prisms , pyramids , cones and cylinders.
Learners will select an image. Teacher will listen to
learners as they explain the object in their picture based
on its attributes ( faces , base, vertices, edges)
Learners can identify and describe objects as
cones,pyramids, prism and cylinders) using their
attributes
Yes No Somewhat
Retrieved from
ttps://bingobaker.com/image/1928065/800/1/3
Think, Pair , Share /Peer Assessment
d-shapes.png
To identify the make up of given composite shapes
In pairs learners will look at images of some composite
shapes or objects and be asked to identify the shapes used
Independent Learning
to create them ..
Learners will be given a worksheet and asked to
match shapes to the composite they could be used
to create
273
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from https://i.ytimg.com/vi/G_X5FrYOe-
Y/maxresdefault.jpg
Checklist
Learners will be asked to circle the appropriate
answer.
Retrieved from
https://www.liveworksheets.com/sites/default/fi
les/styles/worksheet/public/def_files/2022/4/26
Think, Pair, Share /20426111315526786/20426111315526786001.jp
g?itok=deuaJ4Ue
Composite Polygon Construction
In pairs learners will be asked to draw and shade varying Learning through play and using technology -
sizes of composite polygon shapes. Learners will be asked Online game activity
to identify their created composite shape, note the
different types of shapes as well as the number of each Learners will drag, add and rotate various
shape used to create them. polygons to create composite shapes
Eg.
274
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from
https://apps.mathlearningcenter.org/pattern-
shapes/
a hexagon created from 6 triangles
a triangle made up of 3 triangles
and a hexagon
Independent Learning
Retrieved from
https://shop.luckylittlelearners.com/wp-
content/uploads/2022/04/Small-Group-and- Learners will be given a worksheet where they are
Intervention-Math-Kit-Instructional-Resources- to draw the shapes they would use to compose
Geometry-Composing-Shapes-Cover.jpg given 3d shapes then fill out information based
on their attributes.
Checklist
Learners were able to use given pieces to accurately create
composite shapes that are polygons
yes somewhat no
Group Work /peer assessment
Creating Composite Shapes
275
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be given cut outs to represent faces of
circles, triangles, rectangles squares etc and glue/ tape,
paper containing descriptions of various shapes In their
groups learners are to read the description given and use
the cut outs to create the 3 D shape being described then
name them
Eg. I am a shape with 5 faces , 8 edges and 5 vertices ,
I am made up of four triangles and one rectangle
rectangular based pyramid .
Retrieved from
https://study.com/cimages/multimages/16/square_pyra
mid1989337697368088437.png
Groups will share their shapes and discuss their answers
with the class.
Checklist
Learners were able to accurately construct polygons using
shapes based given descriptions
yes somewhat no
276
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
https://www.khanacademy.org/math/cc-fifth-grade-math/properties-of-shapes/properties-shapes/a/polygons-review
https://teach.files.bbci.co.uk/skillswise/ma343dsh-e1-w-shape-bingo.pdf
https://www.matific.com/co/en-us/home/maths/episode/tile-a-shape-create-composite-shapes-simple/
Additional Content Knowledge for the Teacher
A composite shape can be defined as a shape created with two or more basic shapes. We often refer to composite shapes as compound and complex shapes as well.
A Polygon is a closed figure made up of line segments (not curves) in a two-dimensional plane. Polygon is the combination of two words, i.e. poly (means many)
and gon (means sides). A minimum of three-line segments is required to connect end to end, to make a closed figure.
Real Life Examples Composite Figures
https://i.pinimg.com/736x/4d/6d/3e/4d6d3ef1fa9554347513b5ddd7bf8e34.jpg
277
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Geometry & Algebra: Examine how combining shapes influences algebraic expressions for areas and perimeters.
Geometry & Measurement: Decompose complex shapes to calculate surface areas and volumes.
Geometry & Spatial Reasoning: Use transformations to understand shape composition and decomposition.
Geometry & Problem-Solving: Apply shape composition and decomposition to real-world design and optimization problems.
Geometry & Technology: Use digital tools to manipulate shapes and explore their properties.
278
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: G3.2 - Composing, Decomposing and Transforming Shapes - Deconstructing Shapes
Grade Level Expectations:
Deconstruct objects into nets of specific prisms, pyramids, cylinders and cones and by slicing.
Deconstruct shapes using symmetry and folding to determine if a triangle is equilateral, isosceles or scalene.
Use symmetry and folding to subdivide polygons into congruent parts.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge Entrance Slip/self assessment - to test learners’ Through manipulation, learners will
ability to identify solids as real life objects deconstruct real life objects, divide faces of
1. Identify prisms, pyramids, cylinders and polygons to show congruency and use
cones as everyday objects. symmetry to determine types of triangles.
2. Differentiate between the nets of solid
shapes Learning through manipulation
3. Differentiate among isosceles, Have learners bring as many objects from home
equilateral and scalene triangles. as possible that are easy to deconstruct such as
toilet paper roll, party hat and matchbox. A bank
Skills of objects can be created for future activities. In
pairs invite learners to deconstruct their shape and
4. a. Fold shapes accurately and with Retrieved from record the faces of the shapes seen.
precision. https://th.bing.com/th/id/OIP.Baau7wPuKssL7GE8Psa
tDQAAAA?rs=1&pid=ImgDetMain
b. Use the ruler properly to draw lines
of symmetry. Discovery Learning
Checklist
c. Sort triangles into isosceles, I can name each shape correctly Have learners use solid shapes from the bank as
equilateral and scalene yes/no well as those supplied that can be deconstructed.
Discussion - to determine learners’ ability to match a Have them deconstruct the shapes where they
net to its shape were stuck together and trace out the outline.
State the shape for each net.
279
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Values Learners experiment by deconstructing a number
of similar shapes to see if there can be more than
5. Recognise the accuracy derived when one net of the shapes.
using a ruler to show lines of symmetry
in a shape
6. Use the concept of folding to show
congruence. Video-assisted Learning
Expose learners to the three types of triangles
7. Deconstruct 3D shapes. through the faces of cut outs. Invite learners to
Observation/self assessment - to test learners’ ability
measure the sides and make generalizations about
to differentiate between types of triangles
the characteristics.
State the name of each type of triangle
Present the video to learners
https://youtu.be/qdgcbhC0F-c
The triangles are then categorized.
Conceptual understanding
Place learners in groups with varied triangle
cutouts. Provide learners with examples of the
three types of triangles. Have learners fold cutouts
Retrieved from to derive equal parts. Generate a discussion on
https://i.pinimg.com/236x/fb/f0/71/fbf0719ea1e11792d what is meant by symmetry.
9b5582bba808c9f.jpg
Checklist Invite learners to sort triangles by type and then
I can name at least 6/10 triangles fold the shapes in an attempt to create lines of
yes/no symmetry. Learners will record how many
Product - to determine learners’ ability to show lines different ways they can be folded to form equal
of symmetry parts. They record their observations to present to
class.
280
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Draw the line(s) of symmetry on each triangle and state
the number of lines of symmetry in each.
Discovery Learning
Have learners fold shapes to get congruent parts.
Discuss the results and the lines of symmetry
created.
Checklist
Video-assisted learning
Learner can accurately draw all lines of symmetry
Present this video to learners for discussion. Pause
yes/somewhat/no using discretion to ask how many particular 2D
shapes were derived. For example in the square
based pyramid, ask them to name the number
triangles (4) and squares (1).
Peer Assessment - to determine learners ability to
identify congruence. Retrieved from https://youtu.be/GqXT808Sa3k
Each learner will dip a shape by letter. They will say if the
shape can be folded to form congruent parts. Class will
determine accuracy and justify each response as correct or
incorrect.
281
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from
https://www.open.edu/openlearncreate/pluginfile.php/4
72017/mod_oucontent/oucontent/58762/1dacbd98/828
43013/tessa_enrw_numeracy_m2s5_f32.jpg
Checklist
Learner was able to recognise congruence
yes/no
Product/Observation - to test learners ability to
recognise 2 shapes formed from deconstructing
solids.
Learners will choose any two of these solids to
deconstruct, then fill in the spaces below. Teacher will
provide the solids which can be deconstructed.
Retrieved from
https://ecdn.teacherspayteachers.com/thumbitem/3D-
Shape-Deconstruction-Worksheet-5967869-
1598640655/original-5967869-2.jpg
Checklist
Learner is able to deconstruct shape
yes/no
282
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Leaner is able to identify the number 2d shapes from
deconstruction
yes /no
Additional Resources and Materials
● 2D shapes and 3D Shapes geometrical shapes
● Flash cards related to geometrical shapes and properties
● 2D and 3D shapes bingo cards
● 2D and 3D shapes Charts
● Grid paper
● Geoboard
● Protractor
Additional Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Lines of symmetry are straight lines that divide a shape into two equal parts, where one part is an exact reflection or mirror image of the other.
Congruent: identical in form when superimposed.
https://elementarynest.com/how-to-teach-2d-and-3d-shapes/
https://teachingperks.com/teaching-shapes-2d-and-3d/
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
● Geometry - Tessellation patterns of 2D shapes
● Measurement - Perimeter, Area and Volume
283
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome G3.3: Composing, Decomposing and Transforming Shapes - Transforming Shapes
Grade Level Expectations:
Recognise, name, perform, and draw transformations (reflections, rotations, translations).
Predict, describe and justify the image of a shape under a given transformation.
Use a pair of perpendicular number lines, called axes (x-axis and, y-axis), to define a coordinate system, with the intersection of the lines (the origin)
arranged to coincide with the 0 on each line and a given point in the plane located by using an ordered pair ( x-coordinate and y-coordinate)
Plot points on the first quadrant of the Cartesian plane.
Use a coordinate system to represent transformation in a coordinate plane.
Transform 3D objects and 2D shapes using concrete and pictorial materials (geoboards, tangrams, square dot paper, etc.) to represent various polygons
including triangles.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge Discussion /self assessment - to orient learners on Learners will use technology to explore the
the nature of and types of transformations transformation of shapes
1. Differentiate among the terms
reflections, rotation and translation in 3 Types of Transformations *Translations Reflections & Video Assisted learning
relation to shapes Rotations *Math For Kids* 3 Types of Transformations *Translations
(video can be paused periodically based on discretion Reflections & Rotations *Math For Kids*
2. Describe pairs of shapes that show during discussion) (video can be paused periodically based on
transformations: 1. After watching the video learners will discretion during discussion)
a. reflections have a discussion on the different types of Have learners look at the video and discuss the
b. rotations transformation. Ask learners to identify three transformations. Let learners demonstrate
c. translations. similarities and differences. an example of a real life scenario which depicts
3. Determine the composition of a single Eg. The size of the object and its angles remains each one. Eg. The image formed when looking
transformation. constant, however, the orientation changes. into a mirror is an example of a reflection. Eg.
2. After watching the video learners will complete Sliding some spaces on the classroom floor.
Skills the worksheet below.
Conceptual Understanding
4. Given a shape, make predictions then Provide worksheets with a shape and three
create the reflection, translation and possible outcomes based on transformation. using
the type as a cue, learners predict which shape
rotation of the said shape.
284
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5. Draw shapes to show reflection, from the alternative will be the match for the
translation and rotation and justify. original shape.
6. Locate x and y axis on a graph
7. a. Plot coordinates on the graph Conceptual Understanding
b. write ordered pairs from coordinate
graph Present learners with work cards with different
8. Use a coordinate system to represent types of transformation. Learners will look at the
transformation in a coordinate plane. characteristics displayed by the set and sort the
cards into the three types giving reasons for their
9. Use geoboards and tangrams to
placements.
represent various polygons to reflect
translations, rotations and reflections.
Video - Assisted Learning
Values
Coordinates In Maths
10. Showcase skills by creating class posters
(video will be stopped at 1:38 to exclude irrelevant
with transformations.
content)
Present the video. Learners will then walk along a
grid drawn on the floor to locate the coordinates
of a point.
Retrieved from worksheets on reflection, rotation and
translation identification for kids - Search Images
1. After modeling, learners take turns in
(bing.com)
plotting points on a graph GeoGebra
software, verbalizing the reason why
Checklist
decisions are taken.
I can transform at least ⅝ objects accurately
yes/somewhat / no
2. Using graph paper and provided
coordinates, have learners name points
Observation- to observe learners’ ability to determine
using letters on the graph to match the
how an image was formed
coordinates.
Have learners work in pairs to formulate transformations
of rotation, reflection and translation using 2 D shapes.
Learners should be able to state what is to be done to
form the various transformations before performing the
task. They can also perform this activity using tangrams
and geoboards.
285
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Checklist Video assisted learning
Learner can state 1 or more observation Present the video
yes/no https://youtu.be/vQ2-o2Oj3WQ
Product /Peer Assessment - to test accuracy in (teacher will use discretion in pausing video to
plotting point on the cartesian plane exclude irrelevant content)
Pause to discuss how each shape is transformed.
Write the coordinates of each picture on the line below.
Peers will exchange worksheet for assessment Using Manipulatives
Present learners in groups with geoboards and
tangrams along with a picture with shapes and
rubber band. Invite learners to discover
transformation by creating shapes of their choice
and representing them using any of the three types
of transformation. Learners present their work to
class at the end of the exercise.
Retrieved from
https://i.pinimg.com/originals/06/5a/0e/065a0e2bc5f28
95830a179a06942f0a1.jpg
Checklist
Learner can state at least 6/10 ordered pairs or more
observation
yes/no
286
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product/- to test learners’ ability to accurately plot
coordinates
Have learners plot the points A, B C of a triangle on graph
paper (object). Learners will plot the points of the image
of the triangle when reflected, translated and rotated
(shaded differently). Learners will then determine by
labeling which image represents each transformation.
Eg. Learners will plot D (object). Image F and A (also
plotted) represents a rotation and reflection respectively.
Retrieved from Google Images
Checklist
Learner can accurately plot points
yes/somewhat /no
Learner can identify the images under the respective
transformation
yes/no
287
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
GeoGebra Software
Wolfram software
Graph paper, squared paper
Additional Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
An ordered pair consists of two values that are written in a fixed order (x, y).There are three main types of transformations:
● translations (moving by sliding across the shape),
● rotations (turning the shape),
● reflections (flipping the shape like a mirror image).
● Rigid transformations keep the same size and angles of the shape.
The shape in the original position (before transformation) is called the object and the object in the new position (after transformation) is called the image.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Geometry & Algebra: Recognise, name, and perform transformations (reflections, rotations, translations) and use algebraic methods to describe their effects on
shapes.
Geometry & Coordinate Systems: Use coordinate systems with axes to define points, plot them on the Cartesian plane, and explore transformations within this
system.
288
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Measurement
Introduction to Strand
Measurement is a crucial part of the curriculum across different educational levels. It is introduced to learners to develop their understanding of quantifying various
physical attributes accurately. The curriculum typically measures length, mass, capacity, and volume. Competence in measurement concepts help learners in various
subjects like mathematics, science, and even in everyday life. It lays the foundation for more advanced topics in geometry, physics, and chemistry. By mastering
measurement concepts, learners develop critical thinking skills, problem-solving abilities, and a practical understanding of the physical world around them.
Essential Learning Outcome M 1.1: Understanding What and How We Measure - Developing an understanding of measurable attributes.
Grade Level Expectation:
Develop and apply language relating to measurement terms (surface area, money, time and angles);
Recognise angles as geometric shapes formed wherever two rays share a common endpoint and understand concepts of angle measurement.
Understand measurement as the number that indicates a comparison between the object's attribute and the same attribute of a given unit of measure.
Understand that 'to measure' means to fill, cover, or match the attribute being measured with a unit of measure for that attribute.
Measure length, area, mass, and capacity using the appropriate metric units,
Solve problems that require converting smaller units to larger ones and vice versa
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Product Entrance Slip /self assessment - to test Learners will be led to determine appropriate units
Knowledge learners ability to identify appropriate units of in measurement and their application to real-life
measurement situations.
1 a. Identify volume and capacity. those related to capacity selecting best units for measuring
Conceptual Understanding : To determine
whether learners can differentiate between
1 b. Use measurement terms accurately in
terms related to volume and capacity.
relation to volume and capacity
1. In small groups, provide 3-4 containers of
2 a. identify the appropriate metric
varied sizes to learners. Have them fill
units for measuring length, area and
some containers with water and pour only
mass
289
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
some water in others. Use this activity to
2 b. Estimate length, area, mass, and introduce the concepts of volume and
capacity using metric units capacity.
2. Give scenarios which invite learners to
2 c. measure length, area, mass, and say whether volume or capacity is being
capacity using metric units referred to. Eg. A carton of milk has the
capacity of 1 litre.
3. Identify the appropriate metric units The volume of milk left in the carton is 500 ml.
for measuring mass and capacity. Discuss terms related to volume and capacity
(space, solid, hollow, units etc.
4 Use metric prefixes to describe the
relative size of different metric units.
Skills:
Retrieved from metric units worksheet volume and
5. select appropriate units and tools for capacity with a dog and a book - Search Images (bing.com)
measuring length, mass, and capacity.
Checklist
6. Estimate costs involving multiple items I circed all units accurately
with sales tax Yes /no
Retrieved from https://math-
7. calculate costs involving multiple items I was able to select at least 6/10 appropriate units media.byjusfutureschool.com/bfs-
with sales tax priced in dollars and cents yes/no math/2022/11/07112512/image-1-4.png
Guide learners into developing a working
Values Observation/Discussion/Peer Assessment: - To test
definition for volume and capacity using the image
learners ability to use estimate using appropriate
above.
8. Pay attention to detail in creating a units of measurement Volume is called the amount of the total space
booklet on measurement to include that is taken up by an object, while capacity is
length, mass capacity, volume and Learners will estimate and measure the area of different known as the measure of an object's ability to hold
money spaces. Peers will critique each estimate. Have learners any given substance.
measure the area of different spaces in the school (e.g., the
library, the gym, their classroom, the basketball court, the
school community garden).
290
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Guided learning (length)
Invite learners to estimate and measure the mass of
everyday objects based on the mass of a benchmark Guide learners into identifying the units for
measuring length. Discuss with learners, and ask,”
object. For example, a bag of potatoes has a mass of 5 kg.
If I want to measure my desk or the board, what
Does the chair have more or less mass than the bag of
would I use? What unit of measurement would we
potatoes?
find on these measuring tools?
Have learners estimate and measure the capacity of Millimeter (mili), Decimeter (deci),
everyday objects based on the capacity of a benchmark Centimeter(centi), Meter (m), and Kilometer
container. For example, a container holds 1 liter. Can you (kilo). They are used to measure how long or wide
think of a container that holds less than 1 L? How much or tall an object is.
less?
Interactive Learning Invite learners to choose an
Checklist
object in the classroom that is "very small" and
Learner can provide a reasonable estimate for area , mass, one object that is "very large"
capacity ( 1 each) Eg. a stone holding the door or an empty
yes/no cardboard box.
In pairs, they could determine which units
should be used to measure these
attributes and determine which
measurable characteristics these objects
have, such as length, mass, capacity, or
area.
1. Help learners to realise that there are
other considerations besides object size
that go into choosing the appropriate unit
of measurement. After selecting a suitable
unit, instruct learners to estimate these
attributes using benchmarks.
2. Next, measure the object's various
attributes as precisely as needed for a
291
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product - to test learners’ competence in estimating, given purpose, keeping in mind that some
calculating sales tax and total cost of an item after attributes might be too difficult to
sales tax measure (though some might find
inventive ways to approximate).
1. Calculate total cost
Retrieved from
https://www.splashlearn.com/math-
vocabulary/geometry/metric-system
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Hands- on Learning- Present currency used in
country, and have learners identify and compare
the notes and coins
1. Have learners set up classroom shops
with labeled empty containers from home
(cereal boxes, milk tins etc). Add tax tags
depicting additional tax on the price of
goods. Guide learners into shopping for
individual or multiple items . Invite
learners to determine the cost of the
292
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. Calculate the cost of each item including the sales items before and after tax. In peers,
tax in dollars learners operate a shop, buying and selling
to each other.
Retrieved from
https://www.mathworksheets4kids.com/sales-tax/tax-
1.pdf
Additional Resources and Materials
4 Best Ways for Teaching Volume and Capacity - That One Cheerful Classroom
Metrics System of Measurement -Metric System of Measurement (mathsisfun.com)
Shop make believe items (cereal boxes, milk cartons, biscuit wrappers, box juice, butter bowls, deodorants, soap boxes, liquid detergent cans) etc.)
293
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Retrieved from https://math-media.byjusfutureschool.com/bfs-math/2022/11/07113146/image-4-2.png
Retrieved from metric prefix table length - Search Images (bing.com)
294
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Mathematics & Language Arts: Develop and apply measurement terminology (e.g., surface area, angles, time) in both written and verbal descriptions to enhance
communication skills.
Mathematics & Geometry: Recognise and understand angles as geometric shapes and apply angle measurement concepts in geometric problems.
Mathematics & Science: Understand measurement as a comparison between attributes and units, and explore how this concept applies in scientific contexts.
Mathematics & Practical Application: Measure length, area, mass, and capacity using metric units, applying these skills to real-world scenarios.
Mathematics & Problem-Solving: Solve problems involving the conversion of units (smaller to larger and vice versa), reinforcing the practical use of measurement in
various contexts.
295
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcomes: M 1.2 Understanding What and How We Measure – Comparing and ordering based on measurable
attributes
Grade Level Expectations:
Compare and order a variety of solids and containers (long, thin, short, wide) based on the space they occupy, the amount of space that can be filled, their
estimated volume, and capacity.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Invite students to make conjectures about the
Knowledge Product/Discussion/Self assessment: -To determine properties of the shapes (e.g., "All shapes with 4
whether learners can apply the concept of visualizing sides are squares or rectangles," "All 3D shapes
1. Identify and explain basic geometric principles
how objects occupy space have vertices").
related to the properties of shapes and their
dimensions, including recognizing different types
Ask learners to create diagrams, draw, describe or show After making conjectures, have students to work
of shapes.
how different shapes fit into containers. in groups to test their ideas by examining the
shapes and discussing as a group whether their
2. Identify the attributes of different shapes and
conjectures hold true. Have students presents
explain how dimensions affect their properties.
their findings.
Skills
Invite learners to use UDL, Hands-on activities,
Video assisted and differentiated learning to aid
3. Use of spatial reasoning to analyze how objects
in comparing and ordering of containers based
occupy space.
on volume and capacity.
4. Order solids and containers based on their
dimensions and capacity.
5. Visualize how different shapes fit within Retrieved from
containers and utilize space efficiently. https://www.easypacelearning.com/design/images/foodc
ontainers.jpg
296
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6. Select appropriate containers for various solids Checklist Universal Design for Learning
to optimize storage space.
I can sketch, describe or show at least 2 objects fitting into
(UDL)
a suitable container
yes/no Teacher guides learners into using and
Values demonstrating understanding through visual
Observation - to determine learners ability to sort
aids, physical models, and digital tools to
containers based on size and capacity
7. Demonstrate the need for the appropriate represent geometric concepts.
placements in creating a Math Corner.
Assign group projects where learners work together to
Hands-on Activity
compare and order solids and containers from the class
shop based on dimensions and capacity. For example, one
Offer hands-on activities where learners
group will work in the body care products, while another
physically manipulate solids and containers to
in the canned goods.
understand how shapes occupy space. Have
learners engage with concepts using containers
Checklist
and solid shapes. Make reference to class shops
Learners can sort at least ⅗ items correctly from previous lessons and invite learners to
yes/no package items such as rice, flour, fruits and
water using appropriate containers.
Observation To evaluate learners' application of
capacity principles Video assisted learning:
Provide learners with real-life scenarios where they need https://youtu.be/dtCM56EBeBo?si=JJpkSxtgT
to select appropriate containers for given solids to
_ZSGgZu - Volume and capacity explained
optimize storage space.
Discuss how different solids in the classroom fit
into containers to illustrate space optimization.
Eg the class cupboards, draws, stationery spaces
etc.
Differentiated learning/Discussion
Encourage learners to explore different
combinations of solids and containers to foster
297
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
creativity. Have them compare. Eg. How eggs
are stored in multiple appropriate ways and why
other containers which would be unsuitable for
storing eggs.
Retrieved from
https://i5.walmartimages.com/asr/bc2a3ffa-
8561-43a2-ab78-
ef24bc0c4a11.89e9de07acd6646e06268c99299b
Retrieved from
b7fd.jpeg
https://www.eslprintables.com/previews/589482_1-
CONTAINERS.jpg
Checklist
Learners can match at least 10/15 objects to containers.
yes/no
Product/Authentic Assessment - show learners’
application of geometric principles and spatial
reasoning
298
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Assessments: Learners will create that can store multiple
objects for home, school or otherwise (be mindful of age
appropriateness). Learners will each work with a partner
to merge ideas and design the container before sharing
with the class for critique.
Retrieved from
https://ae01.alicdn.com/kf/HTB1D3kKs7OW
BuNjSsppq6xPgpXaq/Portable-Egg-Container-
Fresh-Holder-Storage-Box-Hiking-Outdoor-
Camping-Carrier-For-Egg-Case-Kitchen-
Convenient.jpg
299
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Comparing Volume and Capacity: Comparing Volume Worksheet / Worksheet Pack (teacher made) (twinkl.co.za)
Volume and Capacity Explained: https://youtu.be/dtCM56EBeBo?si=yA9UW_oRYnQOCG8c
Manilla, cardboard
Additional Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Multiple Means of Engagement: Incorporate interactive activities like building shapes with manipulatives or using geometry software
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Solving Word Problems
Patterns and relations in ordering items
300
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome M1.3 Understanding What and How We Measure - Developing and applying non-standard units of measure
Grade Level Expectations:
Measure volume and capacity by counting cubic units from improvised units, concrete materials and personal measurement tools (E.g., multi-link cubes,
cubic cm cubes, liquids, containers).
Compare angles and determine their relative size by matching them and by measuring them using appropriate non-standard units
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge Entrance Slip/self assessment: To evaluate learners' Learners will use Video Assisted Learning
understanding of volume and capacity. (VAL), guided discovery, and discussions to
1. Differentiate between volume and define, differentiate, and compare volume and
capacity Look at the videos and discuss with the teacher and peers capacity.
to share two notes about the terms volume and capacity.
2. Differentiate between the terms volume
and capacity by counting cubic units Volume For Kids | Introduction to Volume | Measuring Using guided discovery
Volume using Unit Cubes |Applications of Volume Have learners demonstrate the ability to
3. Compare volume and capacity Intro to Volume Counting (Unit Cubes) differentiate between volume and capacity by
Capacity for kids! Education Cartoon for Kids. Maths for completing the provided worksheet.
4. Define and identify various angles. Children
5. State the characteristics of the different I can state one note linked to volume and one different
types of angles note linked to capacity
● Yes
Skills ● No
● Somewhat
6. Measure volume and capacity by counting
cubic units from improvised units
301
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
7. Calculate the volume of a rectangular Discussion and observation (outcome 2-3): To assess
prism by using unit cubes. learners' ability to differentiate between volume and
capacity.
8. Identify and describe examples of angles
found in everyday surroundings
Values
9. Show a deep appreciation for space and
its capability to store by exploring its
importance within the environment
1. The teacher places six (6) measuring cups of
different sizes or similar sizes on a desk in front
of the class. Each measuring cup has different
amounts of water. (Teacher can use food coloring
to differentiate). Learners will discuss the amount
each measuring cup can hold using the unit vs the Retrieved from
actual amount in each measuring cup. https://urbrainy.com/get/6460/measuring-
volume-and-capacity
302
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Use guided discovery through hands-on
theory
Draw a line on the glass to represent the capacity
of the glass and shade the volume.
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Match/Peer Assessment - to compare volume and
capacity
Probe learners to discuss the following:
1. When the volume and the capacity are the same
2. When the volume is half the capacity
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
3. When there is no capacity
Peers will assess each others findings
303
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Guided discovery using real-life application
Use a large jug of water in the center of your
tables to measure various volumes. Record your
result in the table
Checklist
Learners can differentiate between volume and capacity
● Yes
● No
● Somewhat
Group work
Using a variety of items such as those seen below, invites
learners to compare capacity and volume using the >,<, =
signs
Also, learners can arrange the items in ascending or
descending order using capacity or volume.
304
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from
https://classroomsecrets.co.uk/compare-
capacity-and-volume-extension/
Checklist
Learners can compare volume and capacity
● Yes
● No
● Somewhat
Group Work - to develop learners’ skills in
measuring capacity
Play a game of 'Fill the Container'.
Break the class into groups and provide each group with a
container (be sure to vary the sizes). Instruct the learners
305
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
to fill their container with an informal unit chosen by the
teacher e.g. small cubes, marbles, or counters. This could
be turned into a race to see which group can fill their
container the fastest. Afterward, invite the groups to share
how many of the chosen informal units they could fit into
their containers. Initiate a discussion on the game. Lead
the learners to the idea that the different containers could Discovery through technology and play
hold different amounts of the chosen units, depending on Play the game provided on the link below as
their size. groups. First group to complete correctly wins.
Retrieved from
https://htmlgames.mathsbuilder.com.au/?id=17
9
Guided discovery using real-life application
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Checklist
Learners can measure volume and capacity by counting
Complete the table below
cubic units from improvised units
306
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Yes
● No
● Somewhat
Product/- to assess learners’ ability to identify
various angles
1. Identify five types of angles in the painting.
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Using guided discovery
Find the volume by counting the cubes
Guided Discovery through Exploration
2. Identify at least two of each angle in the diagram
below. Draw an arrow to label the angle.
307
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
.
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
3. You are given this pizza to share in different
parts. Your baby brother gets an acute slice, your
aunt gets a right angle, and mum gets an obtuse
slice. What will your share be? Draw lines on the
diagram to depict the problem.
Retrieved from
https://www.cgpplus.co.uk/primary/ks2/maths
/m2wft15022-find-the-volume-by-counting-
cubes
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Discovery through Game-Based Learning
Play the game in pairs provided on the link
below to find the volume using cubes.
Retrieved from
https://www.nctm.org/Classroom-
Resources/Illuminations/Interactives/Cubes/
308
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Guided Discovery through abstract
conceptualisation
Learners will use hands to demonstrate different
angles. Invite the incorporation of both left and
right arms to show that the angles can be formed
from the left or right vertex. The hands on a
clock will be used to teach as a guide.
Mental Game /Observation - to express the Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
characteristics of different types of angles
1. Invite learners to look around their
The class will be divided into two groups, teams A and B.
environment and identify as many
Team A will give the angle size to a chosen person from
angles as possible, then draw them on
Team B and he or she will state the type of angle. The
their books.
same will continue in reverse. Learners will be given 10
seconds to respond.
Example:
1. John, team A, says 62 degrees to one learner from
team B who will state if it's acute, obtuse, reflex,
right, or a complete turn.
2. Mary, Team B, says obtuse angle, and the learner Checklist
from Team A will state an angle degree that Learners can draw or describe at least 3 different
corresponds. angles represented
3. Alternate roles so that each team gets to do both Yes No
activities.
309
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The teacher will record the scores and treat the winning Guided Discovery using reflective
team with whatever extrinsic motivational tools are observation and estimation
available at the school.
Complete the worksheet by circling the correct
Checklist answer.
Learners can state the characteristics of at least 3 different
types of angles
● Yes
● No
● Somewhat
Product - to test learners’ ability to show the
application of angles around us
Eg. Draw or sketch two pictures to mark-off angles. Retrieved from
Pictures can include how airplanes land or take-off, a https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/math
parked vehicle, how wide a laptop is opened, or how wide /grade-5-geometry-estimate-angles-a.pdf
a shark mouth is opened.
Use reflective observation and guided
discovery
Learners will complete the worksheet
Retrieved from airplane drawing taking off at angle -
Search Images (bing.com)
310
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Checklist
Learner can outline angle in drawing
● Yes
● No
● Somewhat
Retrieved from https://www.math-
aids.com/cgi/pdf_viewer_4.cgi?script_name=an
gles_classifying.pl&language=0&memo=&answe
r=1&x=158&y=21
Use reflective observation and guided
discovery
311
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. Compare the angles found in the Y- Y-
intersection with the Ramp merge.
Retrieved from
https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Different-
types-of-intersections_fig1_352523373
Additional Resources and Materials
https://year4withmissa.weebly.com/volume-and-capacity.html
https://pbskids.org/cyberchase/games/can-you-fill-it
https://youtu.be/r9emftGfpjQ?si=RCVg-Tc2oaXVOLq9
312
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Text: Caribbean Primary Mathematics 6th Edition- Morrison Paizee or any other text recommended by your Ministry.
Additional Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Difference Between Volume and Capacity:
Volume is the total amount of space that is covered by an object. Capacity is the ability of an object to contain a substance that is either solid, liquid, or gas.
The corner point of an angle is called the vertex. The two straight sides are called arms. The angle is the amount of turn between each arm.
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Mathematics & Science: Measure volume and capacity using cubic units and improvised materials (e.g., multi-link cubes, liquids) to understand concepts of space
and volume in scientific experiments.
Mathematics & Art: Use personal measurement tools to measure and compare volumes of materials for art projects, integrating practical measurement skills with
creative design.
Mathematics & Engineering: Compare angles by measuring with non-standard units in engineering or construction projects, applying geometric concepts to
practical problem-solving.
Mathematics & Environmental Studies: Measure and compare volumes of natural resources or materials in environmental projects, linking measurement skills to
real-world applications.
313
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: M1. 4 Understanding What and How We Measure - Developing and applying standard units of measure
Grade Level Expectations:
Measure volume using standard units (cubic cm, cubic dm, and cubic m) and capacity using standard units of mL and L.
Solve problems involving converting larger metric units into smaller ones and describe the base ten relationships among metric units.
Explain how the protractor works, use it to measure and construct angles up to 180°, and benchmark angles to estimate the size of other angles.
Show that two-dimensional shapes with the same area can have different perimeters and solve related problems.
o Calculate unit rates for various goods and services and identify which rates offer the best value.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge: Entrance Slip /self assessment : To evaluate Learners will use Video Assisted Learning
learners' understanding of volume and capacity (VAL), guided discovery, and discussions to
1. Identify the capacity within a hollow space using standard units compare volume and capacity and calculate
using standard units (milliliter and liter) volume using standard units.
2. Describe base-ten relationships among Measuring cups are placed on a desk for learners to
metric units observe. The teacher pours unequal amounts into each Discovery using Guided/Independent
cup. Learners are to then make two observations from Learning
3. Define the terms (i)complementary angle discussion. Record the capacity and volume of each
and (ii) supplementary angles 1. The amount of liquid the cup can hold ___
2. The actual amount of water in each cup ____
4. Calculate the missing angles in a right
angle (complementary angles)
5. Calculate the missing angle on a straight
line (supplementary angles)
6. Differentiate between area and perimeter
314
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
7. Recognise how rectangles can have the Retrieved from
same area but different perimeters https://urbrainy.com/get/6460/measuring-volume-
and-capacity
Skills:
I can identify the capacity of 4/6 within a hollow space
8. Calculate the difference between the
using standard units (milliliter and liter)
volume and capacity.
● Yes
● No
9. Measure volume using standard units
(cubic cm, cubic dm, and cubic m)
Peer Assessment Retrieved from
Look at the capacity of the measuring cup below in the https://urbrainy.com/get/6460/measuring-
10. a. Recognise volume as an attribute of first cup and the volume in the second cup. Invite each volume-and-capacity
solid figures and understand concepts of learner on paper to find the difference between the
volume measurement volume and the capacity. Have them exchange solutions
b. Calculate the volume of solids with a partner for critique..
11. Convert larger metric units into smaller
ones.
12. Measure angles up to 180 degrees
Using guided discovery
accurately.
Retrieved from Calculate how much more liquid the cup needs
https://urbrainy.com/get/6460/measuring-volume- to reach its capacity.
13. Use a protractor and ruler to accurately
and-capacity
draw angles up to 180 degrees.
Learners can calculate the difference between the volume
14. Calculate unit rates for various goods and
and capacity.
services.
● Yes
● No
● Somewhat
315
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
15. Determine best buy practices by Listening and Discussion
comparing the unit rates to the value of
several goods and services. Listen to the video and discuss two notes/steps involved
in how to measure volume using standard units.
Values
Volume Song | Measuring Volume For Kids | 4th Grade
16. Make smart/relevant decisions using unit
- 5th Grade
rates when making purchases
Measuring Volume in Cubic Units
Retrieved from
https://urbrainy.com/get/6460/measuring-
volume-and-capacity
Retrieved from
https://www.skillsyouneed.com/num/volume.html
(Note volume is not area)
Guided Discovery using critical thinking
Checklist
Learner can outline at least one note /step.
Using the connecting cubes given, construct a
yes/no
replica of each diagram below. Use the replica to
find the volume of each diagram where each
Observation
cube represents 1 cubic cm.
Present the diagram below to learners, physically or as an
image. Using connecting cubes, invite the learners to
build a replica of the diagram presented. Learners will
316
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
discuss the shape dimensions and count the number of
cubes used to make the replica.
Retrieved from
https://brainly.ph/question/16113377
Learners can measure volume using standard units (cubic
cm, cubic dm, and cubic m)
● Yes
● No
● Somewhat Guided discovery using critical thinking
Group Discussion
1. Look at the video to discuss. Discussion
should entail terms such as base, height,
length, and width.
Product - to calculator volume of a real life object Volume of Rectangular Prisms | Math with Mr.
J
1. Calculate the volume for each real-life
object below
317
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from
2. Calculate the volume of the shape below
https://www.skillsyouneed.com/num/volume.h
tml
(Note volume is not area)
1. Calculate the volume of the
pool
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/ Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
318
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Group Discussion
1. Present a measuring cup and a glass to the class.
Fill the measuring cup with water. Discuss with
learners your intention to pour all the water in
the glass. Invite learners to provide solutions for
your problem.
Learners should make the connection of dividing the
content into multiple glasses.
2. Learners listen to the video and discuss their
understanding on conversion of units.
A beginners guide to the Metric System
Conversion of Metric Measurements | Mathematics
Grade 5 | Periwinkle
Learners can convert larger metric units into smaller ones
Use reflective observation and guided
discovery
● Yes
319
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● No
● Somewhat Estimate the number of bottles of mineral water
will fill your water bottle?
Product /Peer assessment- to draw angles
1. Place learners in pairs. Learners will work
together to draw any five angles of their choice
accurately. Invite teams to switch drawings and
measure for accuracy. Learners will critique other
learners’ work at the end of the class by
discussing whether the angles are accurate,
encouraging healthy discussion.
Learners can use a protractor and a ruler to construct
angles up to 180 degrees accurately
● Yes
● No
● Somewhat
Retrieved from
2. Provide learners with a worksheet on measuring https://www.google.com/search?q=200+ml+w
angles and observe them. Guide learners ater+in+bottle&udm=2&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2a
accordingly in the proper use of the protractor. hUKEwjCtYS4w4iHAxW0AHkGHb-
Invite learners who are more versed to assist KAAkQrNwCegUIgAEQAA&biw=1920&bih=
945&dpr=1&safe=active&ssui=on#vhid=tIUM
yelFHh5OFM&vssid=mosaic
320
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
those who are lagging. Game Metric Ladder
Using a flight of stairs to convert units. Using
meter, liter and gram as the base unit. Learners
will either climb up the stairs where the units get
smaller or walk down the stairs where the units
gets bigger.
Teacher will demonstrate with one then give
each learners a number from 2-9 for conversion.
Teacher will demonstrate with one then give
each learners a number from 2-9 for conversion.
Retrieved from
https://www.mathworksheets4kids.com/angles/measure
/inner-scale-1.pdf
Learners can measure angles up to 180 degrees accurately.
● Yes
● No
● Somewhat
Game / Self Assessment
1. Complementary Angles Memory Game
Place learners in groups of four Ensure learners understand once they are walking down
the stairs, they will be multiplying by 10 on each stair.
Create 12 cards with angles when combined in pairs will
form complementary angles.
321
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Use reflective observation and guided
Place cards face down and learners are to pick two cards, discovery
if they do not add up to 90 degrees they are to place them
face down. Other persons in the group can only see the 1. Provide learners with protractors or
cards each person has chosen if they add up to 90 invite them to purchase one before the
degrees. lesson. Have them observe the
markings and manipulate them.
Sample Cards 2. Have learners look at the video on how
to use a protractor accurately. During
the video, pause to invite learners time
to understand the process involving
using a protractor.
(Highlight that angles can be drawn
from both vertices of the straight
line)
Retrieved from https://www.mathsisfun.com/geometry/protrac
https://matchthememory.com/gl1station2 tor-using.html
How to Use a Protractor
Learners are given printing sheets to construct
angles up to 180 degrees.
322
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Checklist
I can calculate the missing angles in a right angle
(complementary angles)
Games - Drawing Angles: Hot and Cold
Activity
● Yes
● No
● Somewhat Develop learners' ability to independently
construct angles using hot and cold hints in this
Product - to calculate supplementary angles activity. Draw angles accurately to improve their
angle sense in this interactive game.
Use the link below, and complete the quiz by clicking on
the correct answer. Make reference to the sum of the Retrieved from
angles in a triangle. https://www.geogebra.org/m/scavsujt
Retrieved from
https://quizizz.com/admin/quiz/5f50ed0fb82e88001ea5
e5a0/supplementary-angles?fromSearch=true&source= Use reflective observation and guided
discovery
Checklist Invite learners to add angles adding to 90
degrees and 180 degrees. Let them discuss their
Leaner scored at least 6/10 findings. Using their findings, introduce the
yes/no learners to complementary and supplementary
angles.
Video-Assisted Learning
Complementary Angles Video - Learn How to
Calculate Missing Complementary Angles
Find the missing angle
Observation - to differentiate between area and
perimeter
323
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1. Have learners stand on the perimeter of the class,
then invite them to move in the area of the class.
Learners discuss the difference between the
perimeter and the area.
Which of the following is a pair of
complementary angles
Retrieved from
https://beyondtraditionalmath.com/2023/01/28/3-tips-
to-help-learners-tell-the-difference-between-area-and-
perimeter/
2. Learners are given a scenario where they are to
consider their desks as being their home. Learners would
324
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
like to fence their homes because home invasion is on the
rise.
Learners are asked to draw an outline that will be
considered the fence for their homes. Colored chalk will
be used to draw the border. Using a ruler learners will
measure the length of each side and then calculate its
perimeter.
Learners then calculate their area. Learners compare their
perimeter and area.
Discovery through technology
Learners are to pick two cards, if they do not add
up to 90 degrees they are to place them face
down. Other persons in the group can only see
the cards each person has chosen if they add up
to 90 degrees.
Use the link to play or where technology is
absent cards can be made
Retrieved from
https://www.bing.com/ck/a?!&&p=8e8de2d29d5bf219J
mltdHM9MTcyMjM4NDAwMCZpZ3VpZD0xNjQwZT
IwYi01OWNhLTZkZDktMmY3NS1mNjg5NThlNDZj
MzkmaW5zaWQ9NTE5Mg&ptn=3&ver=2&hsh=3&fcli
d=1640e20b-59ca-6dd9-2f75-
f68958e46c39&psq=google+images&u=a1aHR0cHM6Ly
9pbWFnZXMuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&ntb=1
S.T.E.M Challenge
3. The learners are given a piece of grid paper as their
base. Then they will decide on the area of their garden.
325
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Next, they are given index cards, Popsicle sticks, and Retrieved from
some tape to create their fence/ Perimeter around their https://matchthememory.com/gl1station2
garden. This challenge can be done individually where
each learner makes a fence or it can be done in groups. Independent Learning
It's totally up to the teacher. 1. Invite half the class to walk around the
classroom. Then, have the other half
walk through the entire space of the
classroom. Learners will count their
steps in each instance. Groups will
then compare the results.
2.Draw a perimeter person and label it
as “My Perimeter Person”
Retrieved from
https://www.bing.com/ck/a?!&&p=8e8de2d29d5bf219J
mltdHM9MTcyMjM4NDAwMCZpZ3VpZD0xNjQwZT
IwYi01OWNhLTZkZDktMmY3NS1mNjg5NThlNDZj
MzkmaW5zaWQ9NTE5Mg&ptn=3&ver=2&hsh=3&fcli
d=1640e20b-59ca-6dd9-2f75-
f68958e46c39&psq=google+images&u=a1aHR0cHM6Ly
9pbWFnZXMuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&ntb=1
Learners can differentiate between area and perimeter in
⅔ observations
● Yes
● No
● Somewhat Retrieved from 28 Creative Area and Perimeter
Activities for the Classroom
Think Pair and Share
326
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Give learners a plain grid sheet. Given the area, learners
will shade the amount. Learners will use the shaded
region to find the perimeter of the shape.
Invite learners to present and share their findings.
Discovery using creative arts
Learners draw their names on grid paper. They
get to decide how large or small they go. Then,
they calculate the area and perimeter. Is the
name too long? Use initials instead.)
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Product/Problem Solving - Give learners problems
involving areas and invite them to find the perimeter.
Learners should be able to give reasons for their answers.
Example
The area of Mr. John’s pigsty is 24 meters square. He
Retrieved from 28 Creative Area and Perimeter
wants to fence the pigsty to prevent the neighbor’s dog
Activities for the Classroom
from entering and killing his pigs.
How many different ways can the pigsty be fenced and
what's the perimeter of Mr.John’s pigsty?
Project Based Learning
327
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Give learners the area of a polygon. Using the
given area, have learners create various polygons
with different perimeters to create designs.
Retrieved from 28 Creative Area and Perimeter
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/ Activities for the Classroom
Learners can give 1 reason or show working which
explains how rectangles can have the same area but Guided Discovery using critical thinking
different perimeters. The rectangle below has dimensions 4×10.
● Yes Create rectangles with the same area, but a
● No different perimeter.
● Somewhat
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
328
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Observation/ Discussion Create rectangles with an area of 36 meters
squared, but a different perimeter.
How many rectangles could you make?
Use reflective observation
How many of these do I need to obtain $1, $10
Checklist
and $100
Learner can answer accurately at aleast ⅗ questions.
329
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product - to solve simple problems involving unit
rate
1.
How many ten cents will give you $1?
How many $1 will give you $10?
How many 10c will give you $10?
Let’s assume the 10 cent is a millimeters, $1 is a
centimeter, $100 is a meter
2. Calculate the cost of one bottle of soda.
Guided discovery, real-life applications.
Learners will use field trips, and discussions
to make deductions by applying unit rates.
Think and Share
Invite learners to think and share their thoughts on which
item is a better buy. Use many daily items used by learners
or at home to create smart shopping awareness.
330
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Give learners an everyday scenario and observe
their reasoning skills toward the problem (make
use of class shop)
Example: There are 35 books in 5 boxes. How
many books are in 1 box?
Ask the learners to explain how they derived the
answer.
Example 2. You spend $15 on bus fare for
school for the week. How much did you pay the
bus driver per day?
Use examples the learners can relate to, such as
Learners can justify purchase of each good. purchasing snacks, buying bread, speed and time
.
● Yes Listening/ Discussion
● No Have the learners listen and follow with the
● Somewhat video. Pause and invite learners to attempt
Product - (outcomes 14,15,16) solving the problem before. Continue the video,
and discuss their answers with the learners after
A school carnival ticket booth posts the following sign: it has been revealed.
Unit Rates | Solving Unit Rate Problems
331
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
a. Which number of tickets offers the best deal?
Explain.
b. How would you suggest the learners running the
ticket booth modify the list of prices?
Explain
Checklist
Retrieved from
https://www.education.com/download/worksh
Learner identifies a deal
eet/175678/finding-unit-rates-maze.pdf
yes/no
Learner can justify best deal
yes/no
332
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Guided Discovery using critical thinking
Retrieved from Better Buy 2 | CK-12
Foundation
1. Which store sells 1 sack of oranges
for less?
2. How did you decide?
3. How much would it cost to buy 4
sacks of oranges at Mac's?
4. How much would it cost to buy 4
sacks of oranges at Zac's?
Field Trip
Take the learners to a supermarket nearby. In the
supermarket, they are to look at at least 5 items.
For each item, learners should record the name
of the item and the cost of two different
quantities of each item.
Upon return to the class, learners will discuss the
item chosen and the better buy.
333
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
https://www.geogebra.org/m/crgtvj5s
Measuring Angles Using a Protractor – GeoGebra
www.quizziz.com
www.splashlearn.com
cubes/ blocks
money
Related Mathematics text
Additional Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Complementary angles add up to 90 degrees.
Supplementary angles add up to 180 degrees.
https://youtu.be/6-48sZLy4E8
The volume of a unit cube whose length, width, and height are 1 unit each is 1 cubic unit.
Cubic units symbol can be given as unit3. For example, ‘cubic centimeter’ can be represented as cm3.
When converting a larger unit to a smaller one, you multiply; when you convert a smaller unit to a larger one, you divide.
334
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Money- Unit rate requires the knowledge and concept of money
Number Operations- all operations are used by all the ELOs
Geometry- Utilizing the use of shapes to find area and perimeter and the understanding of dimensions for volume and capacity.
335
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome M 2.1: Applying Techniques, Tools and Formulae for Measuring - Developing personal referents for
measuring attributes
Grade Level Expectations:
Recognise volume as an attribute of solid figures and understand concepts of volume measurement
a: A cube with side length 1 unit, called a 'unit cube" is said to have "one cubic unit" of volume, and can be used to measure volume,
b: A solid figure which can be packed without gaps or overlaps using n unit cubes is said to have a volume of n cubic units;
Recognise capacity as an attribute of solids that can be filled with liquid and understand concepts of capacity measurement.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Observation
Knowledge
The teacher will observe learners as they look at Provide opportunities for learners to gather
1. Recognise volume as an attribute of solid containers with solids and liquids. The teacher will look evidence to develop the concept volume. For
figures and describe concepts of volume to see what the learners are doing to determine the example, show learners two empty boxes of
measurement volume. Are they looking at it from the stand point of different shapes (e.g., a rectangular box and a
cubic measures. triangular prism). Then ask the learners, "Imagine
2. Identify the cube as the most efficient you have a bunch of small identical cubes. Which
unit for measuring volume and explain Observation Checklist box would take more cubes to fill it completely?
why. How can we be certain about our answer?"
Observe learners to determine whether they can do the
3. Identify the referent for a cubic following: Provide opportunities for learners to be engaged
centimeter and explain the choice. in investigation and collaborative work to
i) measure the volume of the box correctly (e.g.,
understand the concept volume: for example,
completely fill the box with a unit and count the
4. Identify a referent for a cubic metre and divide learners into groups and provide each
number of units used)
explain the choice group with a box and three different objects:
cubes, another 3D shape (like triangular prisms),
ii) record both the number and the unit of measure
5. Determine which standard cubic unit is and something round (like marbles).
represented by a given referent.
336
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6. Explain the term Capacity iii)recognise that the cube is the most efficient unit for Investigating Volume:
measuring volume and explain why
7. Estimate the capacity of solids Explain that the groups will be detectives
Conversion figuring out the best way to measure the
8. Distinguish between volume and capacity "spaciousness" inside their box, which is called
Learners are correctly expressing their understanding of volume.
Skills why volume is considered with three measurements and
not two. Check for them pointing out the three The Three Trials: Each group will measure the
9. Estimate the volume of 3 D shape using different measurements as they may speak to each other volume of their box three times, using each of the
personal referent or the teacher. provided objects once. Instruct them to carefully
fill the box with one type of object at a time,
10. Create a model building (rectangular Product making a single layer at the bottom first. Ask
prism) using cubes or Legos them to count the number of objects used for
Learners record the length, width, height, and volume
each layer and record the total used for the entire
Values of self-built rectangular prisms on a record sheet.
box. Encourage them to note any difficulties they
encounter while filling the box with each object.
11. Discuss the importance of volume and
capacity in daily life (e.g., cooking,
Sharing Findings: After each group has completed
packaging).
the challenge, have them share their observations
about using different objects to measure volume.
Facilitate a discussion to help them understand
why the cubes were the most efficient unit. You
can ask questions like:
● Did any of the objects create empty
spaces inside the box? Why?
● Which object was easiest to use for filling
the box completely?
337
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners complete given worksheet on capacity ● Why do you think cubes might be the
best unit for measuring volume in
general?
Also, To further illustrate the inefficiency of using
round objects like marbles, demonstrate "filling" a
box with marbles and then carefully pouring sand
on top. This will visually show the leftover space
between the marbles compared to a cube-filled
box.
Display two images ( a rectangle and a cube).
Learners view the images of a rectangle and a
rectangular prism (cube) and are asked what the
dimensions of each shape are.
(Concrete manipulatives)
Building rectangular prisms using cubes
unitary-metric-large.png (442×633) (mathworksheets4kids.com)
Present learners with a set of small unfixed cubes
in groups to build a rectangular prism. Learners
338
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
will write down the dimensions of their built
rectangular prism.
Provide rectangular prisms (e.g., boxes). Have
learners measure dimensions (length, width,
height) and calculate the volume using the
formula (Volume = length × width × height).
Create a “volume station” where learners rotate
through different stations measuring various
objects and recording their volumes.
The concept of Capacity
Engage learners in a whole class discussion about
the concept of capacity leading to the
generalization that capaacity is the amount of
liquid or solid a container can hold. Further,
discuss the importance of measuring capacity in
everyday life (e.g., cooking, mixing paints).
339
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Provide learners with the opportunity to estimate
the among of water in a container and are
questioned as the amount of water inside the jug.
They are most likely to give the amount of liquid
in terms of the number of cups it can hold instead
of litres. If not given, ask learners what unit is
used for measuring liquid inside of a container or
jug.
Have learners conduct experiment where learners
predict and then measure the capacity of different
containers (e.g., how many milliliters fit into a liter
bottle).
Comparing capacity (Capacity sort)
Provide learners with a variety of containers, with
a marked target. Invite learners to sort the
collection into those that hold more than, less
than, or about the same amount as the target
container.
Exploring litres and millilitres
Provide learners with a 1 litre container and a
combination of smaller containers measured in
millilitres. They will fill a 1 litre container using a
combination of smaller containers (measured in
millilitres)
Invite learners to engage in a game activity.
Learners estimate and then measure the amount
340
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
(capacity) of rice/beans different containers can
hold. They compare their estimates to the actual
amount, discuss how container shape affects
capacity, and explore the importance of using
standard units (like cups) for clear
communication.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Volume is the amount of space an object occupies or, if the object is hollow, the amount of space inside the object. Volume is measured in cubic centimetres
(cm3 ) or cubic metres (m3 ).
Capacity is the maximum amount of liquid a container can hold. Capacity is measured in litres (L) and millilitres (mL).
Standard units of capacity include gallons. Quarts, litres and millimetres.
Standard units of volume of solid figures are expressed in terms of cubic units such as cubic metres, cubic centimetres or cubic inches.
Additional Resources and Materials
Measuring tools (rulers, measuring cups, graduated cylinders).
Various containers and objects for measurement.
Worksheets and practice problems.
Online simulations and interactive math websites.
341
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Science:
Measure the capacity of containers using measuring cylinders or cups. Measuring capacity can help you explore recipes and provide opportunities
for learners to use different units of capacity
Language Arts –
Listen to or read the story of ‘ Area, Perimeter and Volume’ by David A Alder
H.F.L.E –
Measure the capacity of the amount of water needed per day to keep the body hydrated.
Compare volume of alcoholic drinks and discuss possible effects on body based on volume
Art –
Drawings involving rectangular prisms and cubes
342
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome M 2.2: Applying Techniques, Tools and Formulae for Measuring - Use tools to measure attributes
Grade Level Expectation:
Measure volumes by counting unit cubes, using cubic cm, cubic m, and improvised units.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge
Observation Concrete manipulatives (constructivism)
1. Determine the volume of 3D objects by
visualizing and counting the number of Learners are observed as they work in pairs to Provide learners with a specific number of cubes
cubic units they contain. construct/build different types of regular and irregular in pairs. Learners use cubes of eight to form as
rectangular prisms (as many as possible). many different shapes of rectangular prisms as
2. Find the volume of a rectangular prism possible (regular or irregular).
Conversion
by counting the number of unit cubes.
Group work
Skills
3. Create a model building (rectangular
prism) using cubes or Legos
Values
4. Recognise the relationship between
dimensions and volume by designing and
solving practical problems involving Learners are presented with a scenario where they are
volume measurements." given a large box of a certain dimension and a cube also
Concrete manipulatives
of a certain dimension. They will discuss with their
group members as to how many of the small cube
boxes can fit into the larger box. (each group is given a
343
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
different dimension). They will then report their Provide learners with built legos structures of
findings. rectangular prisms in pairs and learners are asked
to give the volume of each without
Scenario separating/dismantling the structures.
Learners are presented with a rectangular prism and are
asked to say how many layers of cubes are on the prism
and also the total number of cubes in each layer
Product
Worksheet
Learners complete a worksheet on finding the volume
of regular and irregular rectangular prisms.
344
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.tes.com/teaching-resource/year-6-
volume-of-cubes-and-cuboids-3-day-unit-of-work-
11540135
345
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Content Knowledge for the Teacher
The amount of space the contents occupy is called volume. A unit cube is a cube with sides of length 1 unit
The metric system relies on understanding the relative size of units and the multiplicative relationships in the place-value system. Both are based on a system of
tens, so metric conversions can be visualized as shifting digits left or right of the decimal point, depending on the unit sizes. For example, converting 28.5 km to
meters involves shifting the digits three places left, resulting in 28,500 m. There's also an inverse relationship between unit size and count: smaller units result in
higher counts, which is crucial for estimating conversions.
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Science: Exploring Volume in the Natural World
Hands-On Experiment:
Activity: Learners measure the volume of objects like rocks or small containers by submerging them in water and calculating the water displacement, then
comparing it to volume measured with unit cubes.
Density Exploration:
Activity: Compare the volume and weight of different objects (e.g., a wooden block and a metal cube). Learners calculate volume using unit cubes and discuss
why some objects float while others sink.
Social Studies: Building and Space in History
Activity: Study the volume of simple ancient structures (e.g., an Egyptian pyramid or a log cabin). Learners can build small-scale models using unit cubes and
calculate their volume.
Community Planning:
Activity: Design a simple model of a community with buildings and parks using unit cubes. Learners calculate the volume of each building and compare them.
Art: Creating and Measuring 3D Shapes
Sculpture Making:
Activity: Create sculptures using clay or building blocks and measure their volume using unit cubes.
Perspective Drawing:
Activity: Draw 3D objects and estimate their volume, then calculate the volume of a real-life object, like a box, and draw it to scale.
346
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Physical Education: Understanding Volume in Sports Equipment
Gym Equipment:
Activity: Using unit cubes, measure and calculate the volume of various sports equipment (e.g., a stack of gym mats or a storage box).
Field Space:
Activity: Measure and calculate the volume of different sections of a sports field or the court area marked by cones, using simple geometric shapes and unit
cubes.
Technology: Designing in 3D
3D Modeling with Simple Tools:
Activity: Use simple modeling software or online tools that invite learners to design objects and calculate their volume virtually.
Virtual Blocks:
Activity: Use a program like Minecraft or another block-building game to create structures and calculate their volume by counting the blocks used.
Language Arts: Writing and Discussing Volume
Descriptive Writing:
Activity: Write a descriptive paragraph about a classroom object, including its volume. For example, “The storage box is large enough to hold 500 cubic
centimeters of markers.”
Math Journals:
Activity: Keep a journal where learners record experiences with measuring volume, reflecting on how this skill applies across different subjects.
347
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: M2.3 : Applying Techniques, Tools and Formulae for Measuring - Developing and applying formulae for
measuring
Grade Level Expectations:
Relate volume and capacity to the operations of multiplication and addition and solve real world and mathematical problems involving volume (cubic
cm, cubic dm, cubic m) and capacity (mL, L).
Use the area relationships among rectangles, parallelograms, and triangles to develop the formulas for the area of a parallelogram and the area of a
triangle and solve related problems.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Observation Review what “volume and capacity” means
Knowledge
Observe learners as they manipulate objects to Provide learners with the opportunity to find
1. Recognise the concepts of volume and determine volume and capacity. Watch learners as they volume and capacity, for example: Show learners
capacity and their relationship to measure objects to calculate area and volume. Note a small box and invite them to develop a
multiplication and addition. learners' ability to identify and explain the relationships description for the makeup of the box.
between shapes and their areas. Observe learners' use of
2. Convert between units of volume (cubic mathematical language and vocabulary when discussing Fill different containers with water or cubes.
cm, cubic dm, cubic m) and capacity (mL, concepts. Assess learners' ability to work collaboratively Discuss the amount of space occupied by the
L). in group activities. water or cubes. Introduce the concept of volume
as the amount of space an object occupies. Relate
Skills it to capacity, which is the amount a container can
Checklist for Observing and Assessing Learners
hold.
3. Calculate the volume of rectangular
1. Observation of Manipulating Objects to
prisms using multiplication. Have learners build rectangular prisms using unit
Determine Volume and Capacity
cubes. Count the number of cubes to determine
4. Solve real-world problems involving
the volume. Introduce the formula for volume
volume and capacity. • Does the learner handle the objects properly
(length x width x height)
and with care Does the learner accurately
determine the volume and capacity of the
objects?
348
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Can the learner explain the process of Explain to learners the process of using the
5. Derive the formulas for the area of a determining volume and capacity? lengths for the dimensions to calculate the
parallelogram and a triangle based on the • Does the learner show problem-solving skills volume of the box .
area of a rectangle. when faced with challenges in manipulation?
• Does the learner apply prior knowledge to
6. Calculate the area of parallelograms and determine volume and capacity?
triangles using the appropriate formulas.
2. Measuring Objects to Calculate Area and
7. Solve real-world problems involving the Volume
area of parallelograms and triangles.
• : Does the learner measure objects accurately
Values (length, width, height)?
• : Can the learner correctly calculate the area
8. Visualize how the area of a parallelogram and volume from the measurements?
and a triangle relate to the area of a • Does the learner correctly use appropriate tools
Volume= (2 x 4) x 3
(ruler, measuring tape, etc.)?
rectangle.
• Is the learner able to use and convert units of
measurement correctly? = 8 x 3
• Can the learner explain how they arrived at
their calculations? = 24 cubic cm
3. Identification and Explanation of Relationships Hence formula for a volume of a rectangular
Between Shapes and Their Areas prism is L x W x H
Weaker learners can use the technique of
• Can the learner correctly identify different
geometric shapes? counting, to determine the number of squares at
• Can the learner explain the relationships the base (floor/bottom) of the box. Then
between the shapes and their areas? encourage learners to recognise that the number
• Does the learner use the correct formulas to of squares at the base is repeated several times
calculate the areas of different shapes?
depending on the height of the box
• Does the learner show a deep understanding of
the concepts behind the formulas?
349
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Can the learner apply their understanding to
solve complex problems involving area?
4. Use of Mathematical Language and Vocabulary
• : Does the learner use correct mathematical
terminology (e.g., "area," "volume," "capacity,"
etc.)?
• Is the learner clear and precise in their use of
mathematical language?
• : Can the learner effectively explain 10 unit squares at the base
mathematical concepts using appropriate
vocabulary?
Assume the height is 3 units
• Does the learner use mathematical language
when communicating with peers?
Total cubes is 10 +10 +10= 30 cubic units
• Is the learner consistent in using mathematical
terms correctly across different contexts?
Have learners measure the dimensions of real-
world objects and calculate their volume. Discuss
5. Collaborative Work in Group Activities
the capacity of containers and how it relates to
volume.
• : Does the learner actively participate in group
activities?
Conversion activities
• Does the learner contribute meaningful ideas
and solutions during group discussions?
Fill containers with water or rice/sand and discuss
• Is the learner attentive and respectful when
others in the group are speaking? the capacity in liters (L) or milliliters (mL).
• Does the learner cooperate with others and Introduce the relationship between liters and
work well as part of a team? milliliters (1 L = 1000 mL). Have learners
• Can the learner resolve conflicts within the estimate and then measure the capacity of
group effectively and constructively?
different containers. Discuss the concept of
volume as the amount of space an object occupies
and its connection to capacity. Introduce the
cubic units of measurement (cubic centimeters,
350
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Conversion cubic decimeters, cubic meters). Explain the
relationship between linear units and cubic units
Conduct class discussions about real-world applications (e.g., 1 dm = 10 cm, so 1 cubic dm = 1000 cubic
of volume and area. Ask learners to explain their cm). Provide learners with conversion charts and
reasoning when solving problems. Encourage learners practice problems to convert between cubic units.
to share different strategies for solving problems. Discuss real-world examples of volume
Facilitate debates about the most efficient methods for measurements (e.g., aquarium, shipping boxes).
calculating volume and area. Conduct interviews with
individual learners to assess their understanding of Group activity
concepts.
Divide learners into small groups and provide
Product each group with different containers and
measuring tools (eg. measuring cups).
Have learners create models or diagrams to represent
volume and area concepts. Collect learner work samples
Have learners measure the dimensions of the
(e.g., worksheets, projects, assessments) to evaluate
containers and calculate the volume using a
their understanding. Use rubrics to assess the quality of
multiplication approach.
learners' work. Create portfolios to document learner
growth over time. Develop projects that require
Then, they will fill the containers with water using
learners to apply their knowledge to real-world
the measuring cups
problems.
Have learners compare the results for both
Group work
methods used above.
Learners work in groups and are given various size
containers that are in the shape of a regular rectangular
prism. Learners need to measure the dimensions of the
containers then determine its volume using the formula Independent Practice
(L x W x H) and the use of a measuring cup.
Invite learners to draw a rectangle on grid paper.
Cut the rectangle along a diagonal to form two
triangles. Rearrange the triangles to form a
351
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Scenario parallelogram. Discuss the relationship between
the area of the rectangle, parallelogram, and
triangles. Have learners create different
Present learners with a picture of a fish tank or a bathtub in the
parallelograms and triangles on the geoboard.
shape of a regular rectangular prism. eg.
Count the unit squares to find the area. Introduce
the formulas for the area of a parallelogram (base
x height) and a triangle (base x height ÷ 2).
Have learners measure the dimensions of real-
world shapes (doors, windows, floors) and
calculate their area. Engage learners in discussions
on how to solve real-world problems involving
the area.
https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2Fb
rainly.com%2Fquestion%2F29133942&psig=AOvVaw1IbIu
Invite learners to practice estimating volume and
GTs6Ws2Yq3yQ8lyhJ&ust=1717923683639000&source=
capacity before measuring. Collect data on the
images&cd=vfe&opi=89978449&ved=0CBcQjhxqFwoTCK
dimensions of various objects and create graphs
DpycjSy4YDFQAAAAAdAAAAABAZ
to represent the data.
Learners are asked to calculate the volume of water in the fish
tank when it is at full capacity and half tank. Then ask learners
Invite learners to create word problems involving
to determine what possible adjustments must be made to the length
volume, capacity, and area of parallelograms and
of one dimension for the tank to be at half of its capacity.
triangles. Have learners work in groups to solve
problems and share their findings. Have them use
online tools or software to visualize and calculate
volume and area.
352
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Encourage learners to visualise that the fish tank is too wide to
fit in a specific space in the house. Hence the size of the
dimensions needs to be adjusted. Asked learners to explore
possible changes to the dimensions of the tank whilst maintaining
the same capacity as the original tank.
Worksheets
Learners complete a worksheet on finding the volume
of regular rectangular prisms using the formula (L x W
x H).
353
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.google.com/search?q=worksheets+on+finding+the+capac
ity+of+a+regular+rectangular+prism&rlz=1CAYJDV_enVC107
6VC1076&oq=worksheets+on+finding+the+capacity+of+a+regula
r+rectangular+prism&gs_lcrp=EgZjaHJvbWUyBggAEEUYOTII
CAEQABgWGB7SAQoyNTQ4OWowajE1qAIIsAIB&sourceid
=chrome&ie=UTF-
8#vhid=Ye1tNo_tJV2naM&vssid=l:~:text=volume%20word-
,5th%20Grade%20Volume%20Worksheets,Math%20Salamanders,-
Volume%20of%20Right
354
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome
Heights of two dimensional figures are not always measured along an edge.
Any side of a figure/shape can be called a base and for each base a figure has there is a corresponding height.
The base times the height area formulas can be generalised to all parallelograms (not just rectangles) and can be used to develop the area of triangles
formula.
Inclusive Resources and Materials
Various containers (boxes, jugs, measuring cups), water, rice or sand.
Metric conversion charts, worksheets with conversion problems. Dice, conversion charts, game board. various objects with different volumes (e.g., boxes, balls,
books), measuring tools (rulers, measuring cups). Geoboards, rubber bands. Measurement tools (rulers, tape measures) Grid paper, scissors, rulers
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Language Arts
Writing: Write persuasive essays about the importance of accurate measurements.
Reading: Analyze texts for information about volume and capacity.
Vocabulary: Expand vocabulary related to measurement and geometry.
Arts
Visual Arts: Create sculptures or models involving geometric shapes and volume.
Music: Explore the relationship between the volume of sound and its intensity.
Science
Explore the concept of density, which relates to mass, volume, and capacity.
Discuss the measurement of liquids in experiments and the importance of accuracy.
Investigate the volume of different biological specimens or the capacity of organs.
355
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Data Handling
Introduction to the Strand:
Data is everywhere around us— in the numbers we encounter in sports scores, the information we see in weather forecasts, and the stats we read in news
articles. Understanding how to handle and interpret this data is a crucial skill in our modern, information-driven world. Incorporating data handling into the
curriculum equips learners with essential life skills, prepares them for future academic and career success, and fosters informed and engaged citizenship.
Throughout this strand, we will use real-world examples and hands-on activities to make data handling come alive to learners.
Essential Learning Outcome D 1.1 : Collecting, Organising and Displaying Data - Formulating questions that can be answered with
data
Grade Level Expectations:
Formulate a question that can best be answered using first-hand data and explain why.
Formulate a question that can best be answered using second-hand data and explain why
Take steps to reduce bias in questioning.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Conversation Introduction:
Knowledge
Create a scenario where learners need information to plan a school Give learners opportunities to learn how to
1. List and explain different ways of event and have them develop questions accordingly. formulate questions based on a topic through
collecting data. games.
Think Pair Share:
Skills
Learners work in pairs and find a graph, chart, or
2. Ask suitable questions for collecting infographic online, then write 3 new questions they
relevant data. could answer using the data presented.
Observation
356
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3. Accurately record and document The Teacher presents graphs to learners and asks them
information received. to formulate questions so that they can derive answers
from the graphs.
Values
Product
4. Engage in an iterative process of refining
questions based on feedback, data Learners design a simple survey to ask their classmates
exploration, and preliminary analysis to about their interests, then write 4 questions they could
ensure alignment with research objectives answer with the survey results.
and data availability.
For example:
source:https://alexwallselt.com/wp-
content/uploads/2018/04/Guess-the-question-
1024x1024.jpg
Quiz question challenge
A quiz game based on recent topics covered in
class.
Source:https://i.pinimg.com/236x/79/58/9b/7958 • The Teacher reads aloud the answers
9be8c3bb7af633ff4dd0e67717da.jpg from your quiz cards.
Question 1: How many male learners completed the • In teams, learners must guess what the
survey? question is. Teacher invites conferring between
team members to guess the question.
357
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Question 2: Which food is the favourite in Grade 5? • Teacher awards two points for getting
the question exactly right and one point for
providing a question which makes sense and gets
the answer, e.g. if the answer is '21', the questions
could be 'How many learners are there in this
class? (two points) and 'How old is the assistant?'
(one point).
Learners look at a video reminding them about
Data Collection.
Link: Describe ways on how to collect and
organize data
Source:https://blog.brookespublishing.com/
wp-content/uploads/2020/06/data-detective-
header-scaled.jpg
Data Detectives
358
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will find a news article that uses data,
then write 2-3 questions that they could answer
using that data.
Learners will make a prediction about something
in their life, then collect data to see if their
prediction was correct and write 2 new questions
about their findings.
Learners will think of something they are curious
about, then research to find data that could help
answer their questions. Learners will then write 3
questions they discovered along the way.
Content Knowledge for the Teacher
When formulating questions to collect data, learners should be aware of several key considerations to ensure the effectiveness and relevance of their inquiries.
1. The purpose for collecting the data - the purpose will guide the formulation of appropriate questions.
2. Know the audience – questions should be tailored to the participants’ level of expertise, interests, and information needs to ensure relevance and
usefulness.
3. Data Collection Method – select appropriate methods based on the nature of the research question, the target population, and resource limitations.
4. Avoid leading questions – Ensure that questions are neutral and unbiased to elicit honest responses from participants.
5. Ethical considerations – Ensure that questions respect respondents' rights and minimise potential harm or discomfort.
By considering these factors, learners can formulate questions that effectively collect data to address research objectives while ensuring clarity, relevance, and
ethical conduct throughout the data collection process.
First-Hand Data:
First-hand data is data that is collected directly from the original source. This type of data is firsthand information obtained through experiments, surveys,
observations, or interviews. It is considered more reliable and accurate as it comes directly from the primary source.
359
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Second-Hand Data:
Second-hand data, on the other hand, is data that has been collected by someone else and is being used by the researcher. This data is obtained from sources like
books, articles, websites, or other publications. Second-hand data may not always be as reliable as first-hand data, as it has already been interpreted or analysed by
others before reaching the researcher.
Additional Resources and Materials
Learn about first-hand and second-hand data First-Hand Data and Second-Hand Data
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Language:
Learners answer questions correctly for question and answer relationships.
Mathematics:
Learners ask questions on the topic of money.
Science:
Learners create hypotheses for science projects.
Social Studies:
Learners form questions to conduct research on topics they present in Social Studies. For example: What are the cultural activities done in my country? When do
these activities occur?
Health:
Learners form questions that health workers would ask. For example: How old are you? What is your sex? Where do you live?
360
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome D 1.2: Collecting, Organising and Displaying Data - Collecting, organising, displaying and
communicating data.
Grade Level Expectations:
Collect data, using appropriate sampling techniques as needed, to answer questions of interest about a population, and organize the data in relative-
frequency tables
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Conversation Learners look at a video talking about data
Knowledge collection. Learners and teacher have a discussion
Learners give a 2-minute presentation to the class about data collection.
1. Identify appropriate research questions to sharing what they have learned from the teacher about
guide data collection. data collection and analysis. Link: Data Collection Methods | Mathematics
Grade 1 | Periwinkle
2. Select and apply suitable sampling
techniques to gather data from a target Learners create a survey to collect data from their
population. Observation classmates (e.g., favorite subject, preferred lunch,
number of siblings). Example of survey on their
Skills Learners are graded by their teacher demonstrating their favourite snacks.
ability to conduct data collection and represent the
3. Organize collected data into relative information collected. Teachers would use a rubric to For example:
frequency tables. guide their scoring.
4. Analyze the collected data to draw
preliminary conclusions.
5. Communicate findings derived from
relative-frequency tables effectively, using
Source:
visual aids such as charts, graphs, or
https://cdn.shortpixel.ai/spai3/q_lossy+ret_img+to_webp/
diagrams.
https://media.madebyteachers.com/wp-
content/uploads/2023/01/20192546/snack-food-
Values month1.jpg
361
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6. Determine the most suitable sampling Example of a rubric: Learners administer the survey to the entire class,
method based on the research questions, collect and tally the data, and create a relative
available resources, and constraints. frequency table to display the results. Analyze the
data to identify trends or patterns.
School-Wide Survey
Learners develop a survey question relevant to the
entire school (e.g., favorite school activity,
preferred mode of transportation). Determine an
appropriate sample size and sampling method
(random, stratified, etc.). Collect data from the
selected sample. Organize the data into a relative
frequency table. Analyze the data and draw
conclusions about the entire school population.
Real-World Data Analysis
Source:https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:960/1*i Provide learners with real-world data sets (e.g.,
3Y31iXJj5jhPUxvyMy_6g.png weather data, sports statistics, economic
indicators). Learners identify the population and
Product
sample used in the data collection. Analyze the
data presented in relative frequency tables. Draw
Learners make a chart that compares the snack
conclusions and make predictions based on the
preferences of boys and girls in their class.
data.
Learners create a short story that incorporates the data
Data Presentation
they collected on favourite snacks.
Learners choose a data set they have collected or
analyzed. Based on the relative frequency table,
create a visual representation of the data (e.g., bar
graph, pie chart). Present findings to the class,
362
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
explaining the data collection process, analysis,
and conclusions. Incorporate technology tools
(e.g., spreadsheets, online survey tools) to
enhance data collection and analysis. Emphasize
the importance of accurate data collection and
ethical considerations. Encourage critical thinking
and problem-solving skills throughout the
activities. Provide opportunities for learners to
collaborate and share their findings.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Data collection involves gathering information to analyze and make decisions. It's fundamental for scientific research and everyday problem-solving.
Methods:
● Surveys and Questionnaires: Structured sets of questions to gather specific information.
● Observations: Recording information based on what is seen or experienced.
● Experiments: Controlled procedures to test hypotheses.
● Interviews: Directly asking people questions to gather qualitative data.
Best Practices:
● Ensure questions are clear and unbiased.
● Use a representative sample to generalise findings.
● Record data accurately and consistently.
Organising data helps in making sense of raw data, enabling easy analysis and interpretation.
Categorization: Grouping data into categories (e.g., age groups, income levels).
363
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Sorting: Arranging data in a specific order (e.g., ascending, descending).
Tabulation: Creating tables to systematically display data.
Displaying Data
Visual representation of data makes it easier to understand patterns, trends, and outliers.
Types of Graphs and Charts:
● Bar Graphs: Compare quantities across categories.
● Line Graphs: Show trends over time.
● Pie Charts: Display parts of a whole.
● Histograms: Show frequency distributions.
Components of a Good Graph:
● Clear title.
● Labelled axes with units.
● Legend if necessary.
● Appropriate scale to accurately represent data.
Inclusive Resources and Materials
Graph Paper and Templates: Provide graph paper for creating frequency and relative-frequency tables.
Survey Templates: Provide templates for learners to design their surveys.
Online Tools: Use tools like Google Forms for survey creation and Excel or Google Sheets for organizing data and calculating relative frequencies.
Visual Aids: Create posters or handouts summarizing the steps for creating relative-frequency tables and explaining the different sampling techniques.
Additional Resources and Materials
Lesson on data collection and organising data: COLLECTING AND ORGANIZING DATA
364
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Language:
Learners can present words that begin with different diagraphs they collected.
Mathematics:
Learners can collect data on shapes and group them based on their characteristics.
Science:
Learners present information based on their research topic. For example, They Might Give a report on the weather based on the information they collected
during the week.
Social Studies:
Based on their research, learners can present a graph showing the different ethnic groups in St. Vincent and the Grenadines.
Health:
Learners can create a graph to show the healthy living practices done by their peers.
Elements from Local Culture
Learners can look at data collected on the population of the country done by census. This will teach them the importance of data collection.
Learners can look for articles in newspapers that show data collection.
Resources for a learner who is struggling
365
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Online games: https://toytheater.com-fall/
Online games: Fishing Pictograph Game | Toy Theater
Resources for a learner who needs challenge
Online games: https://mathsframe.co.uk/en/resources/resource/51/bar_charts
Online games: https://www.topmarks.co.uk/carroll-diagrams/2d-shapes
366
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome D2.1: Using Statistical Methods to Analyse Data - Describing data sets
Grade Level Expectations:
Explain the difference between first-hand and second-hand data.
Select from among a variety of graphs, including stacked-bar graphs, the type of graph best suited to represent various sets of data; display the data in the
graphs with proper sources, titles, and labels, and appropriate scales; and justify their choice of graphs.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Conversation Let learners watch a video (link below) about the
Knowledge types of data.
Learners are given a set of data sources to group as Primary
1. Distinguish between first-hand and /first hand and secondary/second hand in their small group. https://youtu.be/t1JTa97SFwk Have learners
second-hand data, providing examples of Each group will share their answers and explain their choice. explain in their own words and give examples for
each.
the types of data. Provide the opportunity for
Focus groups, magazines,, Personal investigation , learners to look at the graph (link below). Give
2. Select the appropriate graph type
Telephone calls,diary, photograph, Questionnaires the parts on the graph by name or description.
(including stacked-bar graphs) to
Research journals and newspapers Talk about the graph in the link and reasons why
represent a given data set visually.
it was used
Observation
Skills
https://g.co/about/rmu3w2 Teacher displays
3. Construct clear and accurate graphs, Learners are given data to construct graphs using a scale other graphs for learners to identify by names and
including appropriate titles, labels, scales, of their choice. Teacher observes learners at work to
states when it’s best to use each.
and data points. check for correctness. Teacher will also question
learners to make clarification. Divide learners into groups.
4. Justify the choice of graph type based on
the nature of the data and the
Product: Assign one group to collect first-hand data (e.g.,
information to be conveyed.
the number of learners wearing blue shirts).
Assign another group to find second-hand data
(e.g., average rainfall in their city). Have learners
367
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Values Select one set of data from the given sets. Say whether discuss the differences between the two types of
it’s first hand or second hand. Use the data to construct data.
5. Acquire a strong sense of academic
the most appropriate graph for the data.
honesty and integrity by consistently Have learners create a chart or table to compare
citing data sources to support the and contrast first-hand and second-hand data.
credibility and transparency of their
work. Graph Selection and Creation
Provide learners with different sets of data (e.g.,
the number of learners who like different ice
cream flavors and the number of hours spent on
different activities). Have learners decide which
type of graph would best represent the data (bar
graph, pictograph, stacked bar graph).
Guide learners in creating the chosen graph,
emphasizing the importance of titles, labels, and
scales. Have learners discuss the effectiveness of
different graph types for displaying the data.
Data Analysis and Justification
Present learners with various graphs (including
stacked bar graphs) from newspapers, magazines,
or online sources. Ask learners to identify the
type of graph used and explain why they think
that graph was chosen.
Have learners create their own data set and
choose the most appropriate graph to represent it.
368
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Encourage learners to justify their choice of graph
based on the type of data and the information
they want to convey.
Discuss with learners the importance of citing
data sources. Provide learners with examples of
credible and non-credible sources. Have learners
find data on a specific topic (e.g., population
growth) from different sources. Ask learners to
evaluate the credibility of each source and explain
their reasoning. Teach learners how to properly
cite sources (e.g., author, title, publication date).
Use real-world data whenever possible to make
the learning more engaging. Encourage learners
to work collaboratively on projects. Provide
opportunities for learners to present their work to
the class. Use technology to create graphs and
analyze data.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
First hand data is information collected directly from the source. For example carrying out a survey to find out how many males are in your school, white second
hand data is data collected by someone else other than the user. This data can be sourced from newspapers and other sources. For example, the National Census.
Types of Graphs
Bar Graphs
Use: Comparing different categories of data.
Structure: Rectangular bars represent different categories, with the length of each bar proportional to the value it represents.
369
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Example: Comparing the number of learners who like different ice cream flavors.
Pictographs
Use: Similar to bar graphs but uses pictures or symbols to represent data.
Structure: Each picture or symbol represents a specific quantity.
Example: Using pictures of cars to represent the number of cars sold by different dealerships.
Stacked Bar Graphs
Use: Comparing different parts of a whole within different categories.
Structure: Each bar represents a whole, divided into segments representing different parts.
Example: Showing the number of boys and girls in different grades.
Key differences:
Bar graphs and pictographs are used to compare different categories of data, while stacked bar graphs are used to compare parts of a whole within different
categories.
Pictographs use pictures instead of bars to represent data.
Stacked bar graphs combine information about multiple categories within a single bar.
Inclusive Resources and Materials
• Graph paper: For learners to practice creating graphs.
• Markers or colored pencils: For creating visual representations.
• Rulers: For drawing straight lines and measuring accurately.
• Whiteboard or chart paper: For whole-class demonstrations and discussions.
• Real-world data sets: Examples from newspapers, magazines, or online sources.
• Graphing templates: Pre-made templates to save time.
• Manipulatives: Blocks, counters, or other objects to represent data.
• Technology: Computers with graphing software or online tools.
370
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Visual Aids:
• Posters or charts: Examples of different graph types.
• Flashcards: With key terms and definitions.
Additional Resources and Materials
https://youtu.be/t1JTa97SFwk
https://youtu.be/opWkRvGtwf8
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Language Arts:
write a descriptive paragraph on a data set provided
Social Studies:
Collect firsthand data about different situations in the school. For example, the number of learners absent on Fridays from the different grades.
Science:
Use secondhand data to construct appropriate graphs. For example, days for germination of different seedlings
Elements from Local Culture
Use of secondhand data of carnival shows results for the past 5 years.
Second hand data from the yearly labour day fisherman competition. Make an appropriate graph and determin the total catch each year.
371
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Resources for a learner who is struggling
Source: https://images.app.goo.gl/WvYYQ9wiCyMQX1Jn8
Resources for a learner who needs challenge
Source: https://www.twinkl.com.mt/sign-up
372
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: D2.2: Using Statistical Methods to Analyse Data - Developing and applying methods to analyse data sets
Grade Level Expectations:
Find examples of second-hand data in print and electronic media, such as newspapers, magazines, and the Internet for analysis.
Analyse different sets of data presented in various ways, including in stacked-bar graphs and in misleading graphs, by asking and answering questions
about the data, challenging preconceived notions, and drawing conclusions, then make convincing arguments and informed decisions.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Observation: Present learners with different articles with
Knowledge: information. Learners examine one at a time and
Present learners with the different data materials. Ask identify the secondhand data.
learners to divide them into two groups. Teachers
1. Identify examples of second-hand data from
observe different learners to see their approach to the Learners identified areas in which they will like to
print and electronic media
information. Listen to them talking as they try to decide collect first hand data. Collect the data then
how to group them and why. construct graphs
Skills:
Think, pair, share.
2. Analyze data in different ways
3. Ask questions about data
Learners work in pairs to identify secondhand data in Learners are given graphs to analyze and answer
4. Answer questions about data
different materials. Each pair can report to the whole questions about the graph.
5. Draw conclusions to make informed decisions
class because they make their choices. Learners are
given the opportunity to write two examples of
Values secondhand data on their own.
6. Willingly participate in answering questions Conversation:
about data
Learners in groups are given materials to group data as
first and second hand Teacher converses with each
group to discuss their grouping and why the items are
placed in each group.
373
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product:
Learners are given data to represent in a graph
Source:
https://images.app.goo.gl/7pgKxTcKrbwiPYH48
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Interpreting results requires reasoning and analysis, which teachers should nurture through varied activities and open-ended questions encouraging learners to
engage deeply with data. Gal (2002) suggests interpreting data from both the investigator's and reader's perspectives. As investigators, learners analyze their own
collected data, while as readers, they examine externally sourced data from subjects like science or social studies. Teachers should invite time for learners to
reflect on data, discuss it in groups, and answer open-ended questions to express their observations and draw conclusions.
Comprehending data involves three levels:
Reading the Data: Identifying essential elements like titles, axes, and specific data points.
374
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Example Questions: "What is this graph about?" "How many categories are there?"
I am reading Between the Data: Comparing and analyzing relationships between data sets.
Example Questions: "What is the most popular category?" "How many more of X than Y?"
Reading Beyond the Data: Making inferences, predictions, and concluding.
Example Questions: "What other questions can this data answer?" "How could the data be organized differently?"
Teachers should guide learners through all three levels to develop their ability to conclude, formulate arguments, and make informed decisions based on data.
This process is critical in inquiry, helping learners connect data relationships, derive meaning, and make decisions informed by their conclusions.
Inclusive Resources and Materials
Graph Paper and Templates: Provide learners with graph paper or templates for creating graphs.
Interactive Tools: Use online graphing tools like Create A Graph from the National Center for Education Statistics, which is simple enough for Grade 5 learners.
Books and Articles: Include age-appropriate books that present data in fun ways, like "The Great Graph Contest" by Loreen Leedy or "Lemonade for Sale" by
Stuart J. Murphy.
Visual Aids: Posters that show different types of graphs and key terms like “x-axis,” “y-axis,” “scale,” etc., can be helpful for reference.
Additional Resources and Materials
Source: https://images.app.goo.gl/7pLyzVWoLuAjaeo39
375
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts:
Write a paragraph to explain to your friends what is second hand data and where we can get them.
Social Studies:
Collect second hand data about a current issue and construct a graph to show that information.
Science:
Use the graph from the second hand data constructed to make generalisation about the weather in the Caribbean
HFLE:
collect second hand data about the different unhealthy habits and determine which is most popular among our people.
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
Source:https://images.app.goo.gl/69WvrErC85cUjw9T7
376
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome D3.1: Evaluating Inferences and Making Predictions Based on Data - Making inferences with data sets
Grade Level Expectation:
Read, explain patterns, and make predictions from data represented in stem-and-leaf plots and histograms.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Conversation: Briefly review the concepts of stem-and-leaf plots
Knowledge and histograms. Discuss the purpose of these
Review previous knowledge by oral questioning. graphs: to organize and visualize data. Introduce
1. Read and interpret data presented in the idea of patterns in data.
stem-and-leaf plots and histograms. Video presentation:
Skills How to Make a Stem-and-Leaf Plot (2-Digits) | Math
with Mr. J
2. Identify and explain patterns within data
sets represented in stem-and-leaf plots
Histograms Explained! | How to Make a Histogram |
and histograms.
Math Defined with Mrs. C
3. Make predictions about data trends based
Learners view videos as they are questioned
on the information presented in stem-
and-leaf plots and histograms. intermittently to ensure understanding of concept
presented
https://www.wikihow.com/Read-a-Stem-and-
Values
Leaf-Plot
Observation:
4. Use predictions from data represented in
Learners view videos. They are paired and
Learners are observed as they work on given tasks.
stem-and-leaf plots and histograms to
encouraged to share their understanding of stem
make informed decisions
and leaf plots/ histograms.
How to interpret a histogram | Data and statistics
| 6th grade | Khan Academy
377
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Checklist is used to assess learners, behaviour, ability, How to Read a Stem-and-Leaf Plot (2-Digits) |
skills and understanding as they perform the tasks Math with Mr. J
given.
Present learners with a stem-and-leaf plot. Ask
Tasks: learners to observe the data and identify any
patterns they notice.
Learners are given stem-and-leaf plots, and histogram
o Are there clusters of data?
worksheet complete.
o Are there any gaps in the data?
o Is the data spread out evenly or
Product:
clumped together?
o Are there any outliers?
Worksheet
Repeat the process with a histogram. Discuss the
https://www.mathworksheets4kids.com/stem-
similarities and differences in the patterns
leaf/read-level1-1.pdf
observed in both graphs.
Pattern Descriptions:
Introduce vocabulary related to data patterns:
symmetric, skewed, bimodal, uniform, clustered,
and outliers. Provide learners with a variety of
stem-and-leaf plots and histograms. In pairs or
small groups, learners analyze the graphs and
describe the patterns using the vocabulary.
Share findings as a class and discuss the reasoning
behind their observations.
Real-World Application:
Present real-world data sets (e.g., class test scores,
heights of learners, weather data).
378
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.commoncoresheets.com/worksheets/157 Learners observe stem-and-leaf plots and
/english/thumb.png histograms for the data. Analyze the patterns in
the data and discuss what the patterns might
indicate. For example, if a histogram of test
scores is skewed to the left, what does this
suggest about the class's performance?
Have learners create their own data sets based on
a given pattern (e.g., create a data set that would
result in a symmetric histogram).
Challenge learners to find examples of stem-and-
leaf plots or histograms in newspapers,
magazines, or online sources and describe the
patterns they observe.
379
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Interpreting a Stem-and-Leaf Plot
Step 1: Read any text present with the plot to help determine the overall context.
Step 2: Determine the minimum, median, maximum values, as well as the range of the data represented in the stem-and-leaf plot.
Step 3: State whether the distribution is skewed toward lower values, symmetric, or skewed toward larger values.
Step 4: Interpret the stem-and-leaf plot by summarising what you have found in the previous steps.
Vocabulary and Formula
Stem-and-leaf plot: A stem-and-leaf plot is a graphical display of quantitative data that separates all but the last digit to form the stem and uses the last digit to
be a leaf.
Minimum: The minimum value of a data set is the smallest value.
Maximum: The maximum value of a data set is the largest value.
Range: Range = Maximum - Minimum The range measures how spread out the data values are.
Median: The median of the data set is the centre value.
How to Interpret a Histogram.
Step 1 : Identify the independent and dependent variable.
Step 2: List the frequency in each bin.
Step 3 : Interpret the data and describe the histogram's shape. Use the interpretation to answer any questions posed about the data.
Histogram Distributions
Analysing the pattern of variation.
The 4 most common Distributions are:
●
Normal Distribution - data is evenly distributed and centred around your Mean value.
●
Double-Peaked (Bi-Modal) Distribution - there are 2 independent sources of Variation that result in Peaks within the data.
●
Plateaued (Multimodal) Distribution - there are multiple sources of variation that are affecting the outcome.
●
Skewed Distribution - can be skewed in either the Left or Right direction.
380
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Describing Histograms
Additional Resources and Materials
Reading stem-and-leaf plot
Representing Data - Stem-and-leaf plot
Effective use of Histograms
Opportunities for Subject Integration
● Social studies - when studying the population, money budget
● Science - measure plant growth, studying weather pattern, weather prediction
● Language Arts - reading comprehension, vocabulary and spelling of terms/concepts
Resources for a learner who is struggling
Online interactive quiz which invites them to read the stem-and-leaf plot for scenarios and interpret the two-digit data to answer questions. Explanations to
incorrect responses and steps are given to solve the problems.
Interpret stem-and-leaf plots | 8th grade math
Interpreting Histogram online game
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
Online interactive quiz which invites them to read the stem-and-leaf plot for scenarios and interpret the three-digit data to answer questions on mode, range,
maximum and minimum values. Explanations to incorrect responses and steps are given to solve the problems.
Reading stem-and-leaf plot
Analyse stem-and -leaf plot
STEM AND LEAF DIAGRAMS – PRACTICE QUESTIONS
Reading and Interpreting Histogram
381
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome D3.2: Evaluating Inferences and Making Predictions Based on Data - Making and testing conjectures
based on data sets
Grade Level Expectation:
Analyze stem-and-leaf plots and histograms to answer specific questions.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Formal Assessments
Knowledge Create Stem-and-Leaf Plots and Histograms
• Quizzes and Tests: Include questions that
1. Answer specific questions about the data • Have learners collect data on a topic of
require learners to:
based on the information presented in their choice, such as their heights, shoe
o Read and interpret data from given
the plots. sizes, or favourite pencil numbers. Then,
plots.
2. Compare and contrast information from have them create a stem-and-leaf plot
o Create stem-and-leaf plots and
stem-and-leaf plots and histograms. histograms based on data sets. and a histogram to represent the data.
This will help them understand how
o Compare and contrast different data
Skills displays. these displays are constructed.
o Solve problems using information
3. Create stem and leave and histogram from the plots.
charts • Projects: Assign projects where learners collect
data, create both types of plots, and analyze the
Values results. They can present their findings to the
class.
4. Recognised the advantages of both a stem-
and-leaf plot and a histogram. Informal Assessments
• Observations: Observe learners as they work
in groups or individually. Look for their ability
https://thirdspacelearning.com/us/math-
to:
resources/topic-guides/statistics-and-
o Understand the concepts of stem-and-
probability/stem-and-leaf-plot/
leaf plots and histograms.
o Use the plots to answer questions.
o Explain their reasoning.
382
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Exit Tickets: To assess learners' understanding the Data Displays
understanding, ask them a brief question or
problem related to the day's lesson.
Have Learners collect data (e.g., heights, test
• Class Discussions: Facilitate discussions
scores, number of siblings) and create both a
about the data displays, encouraging learners to
stem-and-leaf plot and a histogram to represent
share their thoughts and interpretations.
the data. Provide learners with pre-made stem-
• Portfolios: Collect learner work samples over
and-leaf plots and histograms. Ask them to
time to track their progress and growth.
describe the shape of the data (symmetrical,
skewed, uniform), identify outliers, and find the
Performance-Based Assessments range, median, and mode.
• Data Analysis Tasks: Provide learners with
real-world data sets and ask them to choose the
appropriate display (stem-and-leaf plot or
histogram), create it, and analyze the results.
• Group Presentations: Have learners work in
groups to analyze a data set, create both plots,
and present their findings to the class.
https://www.cuemath.com/data/histograms/
Use real-world data sets (e.g., weather data, sports
statistics) and have learners create both a stem-
and-leaf plot and a histogram. Discuss the
advantages of each display for different types of
data.
Provide learners with two different data sets (e.g.,
boys' heights vs. girls' heights, test scores for two
classes). Have them create a stem-and-leaf plot
383
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
and a histogram for each set. Compare and
contrast the data using the displays.
https://study.com/learn/lesson/stem-and-leaf-
plot.html
https://study.com/academy/lesson/video/d
ouble-bar-graph-definition-examples.html
Have learners debate which display (stem-and-
leaf plot or histogram) is better suited for a
particular data set, justifying their choices with
reasons.
384
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Answering Questions
• Data Dilemma: Provide learners with a
stem-and-leaf plot or histogram and a
series of questions about the data.
Questions should range from simple
(e.g., what is the most frequent value?) to
more complex (e.g., what percentage of
the data falls within a certain range?).
• Real-World Problem Solving: Present
real-world scenarios involving data (e.g.,
analyzing sales figures, studying plant
growth). Learners use stem-and-leaf plots
or histograms to answer questions related
to the scenario.
Technology Integration
• Online Tools: Use online tools or
software to create interactive stem-and-
leaf plots and histograms. Learners can
manipulate the data and observe the
changes in the displays.
• Data Analysis Software: Introduce
learners to statistical software (e.g., Excel,
Google Sheets) to create and analyze
larger data sets.
385
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Stem-and-leaf plots are a simple way to organize and visualize data. Here’s how to create one:
1. Order your data: Arrange your numbers in ascending order.
2. Identify the stem: This is the leading digit(s) of each number.
3. Identify the leaves: The remaining digit(s) are the leaves.
4. Create the plot: Draw a vertical line. To the left, list the stems. To the right of the line, list the leaves for each stem in ascending order.
Example: Data: 23, 45, 32, 48, 37, 29, 41
• Stems: 2, 3, 4
• Leaves: 3, 2, 7, 9, 5, 8, 1
Stem-and-Leaf Plot:
2 | 3 9
3 | 2 7
4 | 1 5 8
Creating a Histogram
A histogram is a bar graph that shows the frequency of data within specific intervals.
1. Determine the range: Find the difference between the highest and lowest values in your data.
2. Choose intervals: Divide the range into equal-sized intervals (called bins or classes).
3. Count the frequency: Determine how many data points fall into each interval.
4. Create the histogram: Draw a horizontal axis to represent the intervals and a vertical axis to represent the frequency. Draw bars for each interval, with the height of
each bar corresponding to the frequency.
Example: Data: 23, 45, 32, 48, 37, 29, 41
• Intervals: 20-29, 30-39, 40-49
• Frequencies: 2, 2, 3
Inclusive Resources and Materials
Analysing stem and leaf plots
Whiteboard or chalkboard: For demonstrations and learner participation.
Markers or chalk: For writing and drawing on the board.
Graph paper: For learners to practice creating histograms.
386
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Rulers: For drawing axes and bars on graph paper.
Data sets: A variety of data sets, both real-world and fictional, for practice.
Additional Resources and Materials
• Manipulatives: Blocks, counters, or cards to represent data points can be helpful for visual learners.
• Technology: Computers with statistical software or online tools for creating and analyzing data.
• Worksheets: Pre-prepared worksheets with practice problems and data sets.
• Real-world examples: Newspapers, magazines, or online resources with data to analyze.
• Posters or charts: Visual representations of stem-and-leaf plots and histograms.
• Examples: Real-world examples of these plots and histograms to show their applications.
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Science:
Learners can collect data on plant growth over time, create a stem-and-leaf plot to show height variations, and then use a histogram to visualize the
distribution of heights.
Social Studies:
Learners can analyze census data to create a histogram showing population distribution by age group.
Language Arts:
Learners can count the number of words in each sentence of a text, create a stem-and-leaf plot, and then analyze the data to determine sentence length
patterns.
387
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome D 3.3: Evaluating Inferences and Making Predictions Based on Data - Evaluating data descriptions and
reports
Grade Level Expectations:
Find examples of second-hand data in print and electronic media, such as newspapers, magazines, and the Internet.
Determine the mean and the median and identify the mode(s), if any, for various data sets involving whole numbers and decimal numbers, and explain
what each of these measures indicates about the data.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Product
Knowledge Learners complete the worksheet on calculating the mean for given
Provide learners with explanation of second-
data sets.
1. Explain what is meant by second-hand hand data. Present examples of data from school
data records, books, magazines, books, internet etc.
2. Identify examples of secondary data Elicit other sources of first data from learners.
3. Differentiate between the terms ‘mean’
Invite learners to discover the diffrence between
and ‘median’
primary and secondary data through a video
Skills presentation on youtube to explain the difference
between primary data and secondary data
4. Use data sets to calculate the mean and (second-hand data. Using Primary & Secondary
median Sources
Values
5. Recognise the importance of knowing Provide learners with explanations of the
how to calculate the mean and median of difference between the terms ‘mean’ and
data sets ‘median’. Invite learners to use real life data sets
to demonstrate how to calculate the mean and
Source: https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/math/data-
median of a data set. For example, learners will be
graphing/grade-5-mean-a.pdf
presented with a data set showing the scores of 5
388
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
randomly selected learners in a particular subject.
Invite learners to use the data to demonstrate
how to calculate the mean (average). Invite
learner the opportunity to engage in discussions
about means.
Invite learners to use the same or a similar data
sat to demonstrate how to calculate the median.
Have learners practise rearranging the terms in
ascending order to determine/calculate the
median.
Have learners look at the video clip to learners to
help reinforce the concepts.
Mean, Median and Mode Song
Source: https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/math/data-
graphing/grade-5-mean-c.pdf
Peer Assessment
Have learners work in pairs to calculate the mean and
median of given data sets. Have learners take turns to
explain to each other the steps the followed in
calculating the mean/median.
389
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Primary data refers to that which is collected first hand. Such data can be collected via interviews, observation, questionnaire and surveys.
Second-hand data is such that has been collected and organised to be used for a particular purpose. Such data can be obtained in books, magazines, newspapers,
health records, school records, internet etc.
Video link: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dU8Tr6JChqY
Examples of second-hand data
A table showing the number of males and females in various grades in a school.
390
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
A bar graph showing the breakdown of ages among members of the population.
Source: https://www.britannica.com/place/Saint-Vincent-and-the-Grenadines/Economy
The mean of a data set is also called the average. It can be found by grinding the sum of all the numbers in a data set then dividing by the number of terms in the set.
Eg. The scores of 5 learners on a Math test: 75 , 80 , 50 , 95 , 80
To calculate the mean : 75 + 80 +50 + 95 + 80 = 380 = 76
5 5
This shows that the average score of the 5 learners is 76. Most of the scores lie around this number.
Eg. #2: The shoe sizes of 5 learners in Grade 5: 7 , 6.5 , 8 , 7.5 , 5
To calculate the mean : 7 + 6.5 + 8 + 7.5 +5 = 34 = 6.8
5 5
This shows that the average shoe size of the 5 learners is 6.8.
The median refers to that number that lies in the middle of a data set when the terms are organised in sequence ( smallest to largest).
Eg. Data set : 75 , 80 , 50 , 95 , 80
Data set arranged in ascending order: 50 , 75, 80 , 80 , 95
The middle number is now 80.
In cases where there is an even number of terms , eg. 35, 60, 20 , 80
391
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Data set arranged in ascending order: 20 , 30 , 60 , 80
30+60 90
Two (2) numbers lie in the middle of the arranged data set. Hence, we calculate the average of the two (2) numbers : = = 45
2 2
Additional Resources and Materials
How to calculate the mean and median: Math Antics - Mean, Median and Mode
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Language .Arts -
Writing a poem using the words ‘mean’ and ‘median.’
Science –
Calculating the average height of selected learners in the class
Social .Studies –
Determining the mean and median of data sets about the population of various communities/countries
Resources for a learner who is struggling
Video Clip: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jqbd8enkkC0
Resources for a learner who needs challenge
Worksheet: https://www.mathworksheets4kids.com/mean/decimal-type1-1.pdf
392
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome D4.1 : Understanding and Applying Concepts of Probability - Predicting and describing the likelihood of
events
Grade Level Expectations:
Explore simple, one-step events; Make and test predictions;
Classify the likelihood of a single outcome occurring in a probability experiment as impossible, possible, or certain.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Observation: Provide the opportunity for learners to discover the
Knowledge meaning of the term ‘one-step events’ to learners.
Observe learners as they work in groups to discuss and Invite learners to engage with examples of events
1. Explain what is meant by one-step events make a list of one-step events. to help learners the meaning of the concept.
2. Identify real life examples of one-step Examples of activities include rolling a 5 on a die
events , getting a tail with a single toss of a coin ,
3. Classify events in terms of ‘impossible, selecting numeral 5 out of a bag with numbers
possible, certain’ between 0 and 10 etc.
Skills
4. Classify the likelihood of a single Gallery walk
outcome in a probability event as being
impossible, possible, or certain. Have learners work in groups to make a list of
Source: https://www.teacherkit.net/10-great-ideas-for-
real life events that can be categorized as ‘one-
group-work/
Values step events’ or ‘single events’ Learners will then
be instructed to post their lists on the walls of the
Conversation
5. Willingly assist their peers who
classroom. Groups of learners walk around the
experience difficulty understanding the
Divide learners into groups of three. Present each group room to observe and discuss each other’s lists.
concepts taught
with a list of events. Have learners discuss each event to
determine whether or not it can be classified as a single
event. Learners take turns sharing their answers with
the rest of the class.
393
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6. Participate in class/group activities
involving classifying given events as
impossible, possible, and certain
Source: https://www.freepik.com/premium-
vector/group-learners-talking-cartoon-
Source: https://ctlonline.org/gallery-walk/
illustration_37084949.htm
Video
Product
Invite learners to observe a video clipping to.
Learners complete a worksheet which requires the
discuss the meanings of the terms ‘possible’,
classification of given events as possible, impossible and
‘impossible’ and ‘certain’. Elicit from learners a
certain.
list of events that can be classified as possible,
impossible, and certain.
Sample of worksheet
Video clip: Probability - Impossible Events and
Correctly identify each of the following as certain,
Certain Events | Don't Memorise
possible or impossible
1. It will get dark tonight ._________
2. It will rain tomorrow. ___________
Cooperative Learning
3. I will laugh today. ____________
4. A pig will fly past my window .________ Present models of the Chance Colour Wheels to
5. I will get something wrong today. ______ groups of learners. Instruct the learners in each
6. If I jump up, I will come back down again group to take turns predicting the probability of
._________ getting selected colors by spinning the wheel.
7. If a throw a regular dice, I will get a 7 Have learners use the terms (possible, impossible,
.___________ certain) to describe the outcomes. Group leaders
share their answers with the class.
394
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Adopted from The Chance Colour Wheel
http://www.firstschoolyears.com/numeracy/data/wor
ksheets/probability
Source:https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/
sccstatistics/chapter/terminology/
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
An event in probability refers to a set of outcomes that result from a particular situation or experiment. Such outcomes can be classified as being possible,
impossible, and/or certain.
Possible Outcomes - All the possible results of an experiment. (The probability is usually ½ or 0.5)
Example #1 - When a die is rolled, all the possible outcomes are 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. (There are 6 possible outcomes.)
Example #2 - When a coin is tossed, the possible outcomes are head and tail. (There are 2 possible outcomes.)
Impossible Outcome - If the possibility of an event occurring is zero.
Example #1 - When I go outside, candy will rain from the sky.
Example #2 - Selecting a yellow ball from a box containing white balls
Certain Outcome - When the outcome or result of an event is sure; it will always happen in an event. (The probability is usually 1)
Example #1 - Selecting a blue marble from a jar of containing blue marbles
Example #2 - Selecting a blank sheet of paper from a ream of blank print paper
395
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Books and Literature:
"Probably Pistachio" by Stuart J. Murphy: A story that introduces basic probability concepts through a relatable narrative.
"If You Hopped Like a Frog" by David M. Schwartz: A fun book that uses real-life analogies to explain the likelihood and probability of different events.
Online Resources and Videos:
Khan Academy: Probability and Statistics: Videos and interactive exercises on basic probability concepts.
YouTube Channels: Channels like "Math Antics" offer clear and engaging explanations of basic probability.
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Language Arts –
Writing short story or summary of events that are certain, possible or impossible. Write to justify why an event can be possible, impossible or certain.
Science –
Making predictions about the possibility of events occurring eg. Rain falling on the first day of the new week; a seed sprouting 5 hours after being planted
Social Studies –
Learners can create posters of events with the headings certain, possible and impossible. They can name activities that will fall under these headings or use
pictures.
396
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome D4.2: Understanding and Applying Concepts of Probability - Calculating Probabilities
Grade Level Expectation:
Identify all possible outcomes of a probability experiment; Calculate probabilities for one-step events.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge
Conversation Constructivist/Discovery Learning
1. Identify possible outcomes of a probability
experiment Dice vs crayons (Making connections) Provide each learner will the given a dice to roll
once. They will be asked to consider the
Skills probability/chance of a six occurring on that one
roll. Learners will roll the dice and they will note
2. Determine the probability of single events. all the outcomes or possible outcomes. The idea
of one roll taking place is reinforced as one event
Values
and the different possible answers that can be
derived as the outcomes. So for this probability,
Learners will respond to questions such as ‘What is the number of
3. Apply probability concepts to real-world
learners will observe that they are taking only one
event taking place?’ ‘What are the total number of
situations by identifying potential outcomes and
roll but they can have six possible outcomes
answers/outcomes you can get if you are to roll the dice once?’
calculating their chances of occurring in single-
(1,2,3,4,5,6). It therefore means that the
‘What do you look for with the colours to be able to calculate the
step events.
probability?’ ‘What is the difference in the way you have to do the probability of this event occurring is ⅙.
calculation for the dice as opposed to the crayons?’ The teacher
Learners will try for the probability of other
pays attention to learners' reasoning and questions or guides
numbers occurring in one event wih the dice.
learners’ thinking.
Experiments
Observation
Invite learners to experiment with dice> For
Learners are given a box of crayon with a variety of colours but
example, have learners throw a dice ten times
there can be multiple crayons of the same colour. Learners can
397
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
calculate the probability of pulling a blue out of the box. The and record the results. Each throw is seen as a
teacher will observe learners as they work through this activity in single event.
pairs. Listen to learners reasoning on how they calculate their
answers and where learning is transferred from one concept to
another. Anecdotal notes are taken by the teacher.
‘Bottle cap prob’
Have learner engage in a probability game.
For example, learners will be given the bottle
caps below in a bag to make one draw to find
https://encrypted- single event probability such as
tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcQjxmqEwPDYc4jUb
5qJObx23J01FktjozR- Getting a black bottle cap
magOxZD4gHVjunSJcH0FlmsnfA&s
Getting a red bottle cap
What is the probability of getting a blue? _______________
What is the probability of getting an orange?
________________
What is the probability of getting a green?
________________
https://m.media-
amazon.com/images/I/61K6MReOmJL._AC_U
Product
F1000,1000_QL80_.jpg
Learners in pairs can use any of the suite of a pack of cards as in
the picture below and create questions on their own for single event
probabilities. They must also supply the answers.
Provide opportunities for learners to engage in
coin-flipping activities. For example: Flip a coin
20 times and record the results, then calculate the
398
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
chance of getting heads or tails based on your
results. This is experimental probability, which
may differ from the theoretical 50/50 chance for
a fair coin.
Have learners create probability trees for simple
experiments (e.g., flipping two coins). Then, have
learners calculate probabilities based on the tree
diagram.
Source:https://qph.cf2.quoracdn.net/main-qimg-
ce003f7c775c95592689063dd5e624e7-lq
Create a number line from 0 to 1. Let learners
Label key points (impossible, unlikely, equally
likely, likely, certain) and place events on the
number line based on their probability.
Have learners engage in a class project. For
example, collect weather data for a week and
identify the possible weather outcomes (sunny,
cloudy, rainy, etc.). Have the learners calculate the
probability of each weather outcome and discuss
how weather predictions are made based on
probability.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Probability = Number of favorable outcomes / Total number of outcome
P(A) = f / N =
● P(A) = Probability of an event (event A) occurring
● f = Number of ways an event can occur (frequency)
● N = Total number of outcomes possible
399
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Inclusive Resources and Materials
Coins, Spinners with different sections (e.g., colors, numbers), Weather data, newspapers, or online resources, dice, cards, or other game materials, whiteboard or
paper and number line, markers.
Additional Resources and Materials
Coin Toss & Dice Roll Chart: Have learners create a chart for flipping two coins or rolling two dice. They can list all possible outcomes (e.g., HH, HT, TH, TT
for two coins).
Card Draw Simulation: Learners use a deck of cards to explore outcomes. When drawing one card, they can identify all possible outcomes (e.g., suits and ranks).
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Math: Link to fractions, decimals, and percentages. Learners' probabilities can be expressed as percentages or decimals.
Science: From a given number of items in a box containing solids, liquids, and gases, the probability of selecting a type of matter can be calculated. For example,
1. what is the probability of selecting a picture representing liquid?
2. What is the probability of selecting a gas?
Source: https://i.ytimg.com/vi/E3jrKH2pXUg/maxresdefault.jpg
400
Grade 5 Mathematics Curriculum
Elements from Local Culture
The Mardi Gras/junior calypso/steal band competition has 10 competitors. Learners can calculate the probability of a competitor winning or placing in the top
three.
Resources for a learner who is struggling
Make sure to use concrete materials that are familiar to learners.
Have them make observations and identify possible outcomes based on the materials to which they are exposed (dice, coins, cards, spinners). Materials based on
real activities such as sports, games, weather or current events are great to help learners understand the need for probability.
Example of a spinner below. Learners can observe then make predictions given a single chance to spin what the answer could be.
Example of the dice: This can be used to start the process so that the learner can identify all the possible answers at first then they are able to carry out the
experiment and note the result.
https://spinthewheel.app/assets/images/preview/fractions.png https://thumbs.dreamstime.com/b/dice-18514485.jpg
Resources for a learner who needs challenge
Exemplary learners can roll two dies to calculate the probability of a single event.
401
