June 2024
OHCP GRADE 4 SCIENCE
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
INTRODUCTION
The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of caring not only for
themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision-making will be enhanced by a systematic study of the structure and
behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from leveraging and evaluating
available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it.
The following Innovation Configuration Map is designed to assist teachers as they continue to develop the pedagogy that supports the curriculum. It
illustrates the key features of research informed best practices that might serve as a guide to teachers as they seek to engage with the curriculum with the
goal of having “Every Learner Succeed”.
Stages of Pedagogical Practice
Practice Area No Implementation Beginning Implementation Moderate Strong Implementation
Implementation
Constructivist Teacher-centered Evidence of hands-on activities Evidence of teacher-scaffolded Active lessons that begin with questions
Pedagogy delivery of lessons investigations that necessarily involve about the world (and inherent
teacher-student & student-student discussions) that are socially relevant &
discussions. Minds-on learning. invoke cultural perspectives.
Building Lessons that rely Students are involved in The processes of science & 21st Evidence that the lesson, within active
Process Skills solely on the recall of experiments century skills are highlighted in authentic learning contexts (real world
knowledge student-centered activities. (e.g., questions) involves tracking &
observing, inferring, hypothesizing, evaluating student growth in the
measuring, graphing etc. & processes of science & 21st century
researching, critical thinking, skills.
communicating)
Integrating Attention to subject Reading about science topics & Emphasizing literacy (Reading Science Investigations that begin with
Subjects focused topics rather collecting/tabulating data. anchor texts, researching, listening, socially relevant questions that require
than student outcomes writing & communicating). numerical analysis &, in
Emphasizing science studies that communication of results, invoke
invoke social concern & discussion. quality discussions that develop literacy
Emphasizing the collection, skills.
interpretation & communication of
numbers as an account of science
investigation
Empowering No technology tools Use of simple technologies to Use of technologies to access Use of digital pictures, video,
learning with evident. Teacher-led motivate learners. These may or enhanced types of learning that place simulations & probes to pose authentic
2
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Practice Area No Implementation Beginning Implementation Moderate Strong Implementation
Implementation
Instructional instruction accessing may not activate new ways of the student at the center of real-world questions as a basis for
Technology traditional resources; learning. constructing knowledge. (e.g. discussions & developing process skills.
primarily textbook- student-led simulation activities, use
based instruction of computer probes to collect data,
logic exercises with coding)
Integrating No evidence of Simple activities that challenge Activities that emphasize design Lessons that invoke problem solving to
Technology as problem solving in any students to think about the challenges that rely on careful design solutions in response to
“a way of context problem solving that has led to planning, prototyping & testing. community problems.
adapting” human adaptation in the world.
This necessarily involves
developing an awareness of
technology around us
Progression of Students’ Knowledge Skills & Values P-6
3
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Grade Level Expectations for Skills and Attitudes1:
A Summary of Skills to be Demonstrated by Learners at the End of Grade 4
In the development of inquiry; problem identification, design and solution; learners should demonstrate the following:
A Summary of Attitudes to be Developed by Learners at the End of Grade 4
In the activities throughout Grade 4, learners are encouraged to develop the attitudes required for positively interacting with scientific and technological
ideas and concepts. At the end of the Grade, these are some of the attitudes that should be evident:
1 The skills and attitudes have been taken verbatim from the OECS Learning Standards
4
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Energy
Introduction to the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of caring not only for
themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision-making will be enhanced by a systematic study of the structure and behavior of the physical and
natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from leveraging and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore
understand the world and their relationship to it.
Strand (Topic): Energy
The study of energy is most relevant given the increasing demands humans put on natural resources to power our technological needs. The knowledge of potential energy sources
and how we interconvert energy positions our students to be innovative as they look to a comfortable sustainable future.
Essential Learning Outcome 1: Use evidence to construct an explanation relating the speed of an object to the energy of that object.
[Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include quantitative measures of changes in the speed of an object or on any precise or quantitative definition of energy.]
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners are expected to: Energy is Used Everywhere What is Energy?
Students should make a poster showing all the uses of
Knowledge energy in society. The poster should also include pictures Let us examine the following pictures that show everyday activities that
● Define the terms: of the different types of renewable energy (solar, are done at home and at school. What is needed to perform these
o Energy geothermal, hydro, wind, tidal) and some description of activities?
o Hydropower why we need to move from traditional fossil fuels to
alternate sources of energy. This should include a table of
o Turbine
consumption of energy from their country.
o Water wheel
Rubric
o Potential Energy
Examples of Energy use – 5 marks
o Kinetic Energy
Examples of energy sources – 5 marks
o Speed Description of energy problem - 5 marks
o Solar Power Consumption data or graphs-5 marks
o Geothermal Power Neatness, Grammar, Punctuation – 5 marks
o Tidal Power
o Wind Power
5
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
o Pendulum Vocabulary
o Axle What does the word potential mean when it refers to the Retrieved from: https://www.angi.com/articles/should-i-convert-my-
o Channel Markers voltage potential of 12 volts in a battery? electric-stove-gas.htm
o Shoals (the battery has the ability to do work that involves a requirement
of 12 volts- maybe a light, a car, a boat etc.) What is this family doing together? (Cooking)
Have you ever cooked with your family? (Yes/No)
● List activities that require
The word kinetic is used to describe many products that What is being used to cook? (Stove)
energy
involve motion. An example is running shoes like the one What does a Stove need to work? (Uses gas/electricity)
● Identify food as a source of below that has kinetic in its name.
energy.
● Compare the distance that
cars travel when released
different heights on an incline.
● Explain how the speed of an
Retrieved from: https://www.asics.com/us/en-us/gel-
object affects the energy the
quantum-kinetic/p/ANA_1203A270-021.html
object possesses
● Distinguish between potential Have students search the internet for products in our
energy and kinetic energy. world that use the word kinetic linked to motion.
● Give examples of potential Retrieved from: : https://www.freepik.com/premium-ai-image/girl-
energy and kinetic energy Why do Objects at a Height have Potential Energy? holds-flashlight-dark-room_45657162.htm
(Can students answer this?)
● Demonstrate ways in which
What is the girl holding in her hand? (flashlight)
motion can be changed (start
Objects at a height are naturally pulled to the ground by gravity Why do you think she is holding this flashlight? (She is in a dark place)
movement, increase or and therefore they have potential energy to do work as they fall. If a Have you ever used a flashlight? (Yes/No)
decrease speed) (ST 2 PS FMS rock is dropped from a ladder onto a mango by mistake, there may How does it work (Uses batteries to provide light)
1) be a dent in the mango. The rock in falling does work on the
● Identify devices that use mango when it impacts it.
moving water as energy
sources. (ST 2 PS EN 4)
Skills
● Suggest ways of minimizing
error when measuring time
taken (number of trials,
averaging)
6
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Observe the speed of objects Worksheets on Potential and Kinetic energy Retrieved from : https://www.pinterest.com/pin/268527196504623967/
and people.
What are the two girls doing? (playing with a toy car)
● Use a ruler accurately to
measure distance.
How do you think they are able to make the toy car move? [Draw
● Measure the time taken for
students’ attention to the solar panel on the top] (Uses sunlight/ use solar
objects to move from one panel to work)
point to another.
● Predict how the height and
distance affect the speed of an
object as it descends an
inclined plane.
● Communicate their results to
their peers.
● Construct an incline plane
with rudimentary materials.
● Investigate how the height
and angle of an inclined plane Retrieved from
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/science/358056
affect the distance and speed
of an object.
● Plotting motion data Retrieved from :https://depositphotos.com/photo/female-hands-
● Interpreting graphs ironing-clothes-109796552.html
● Extrapolating from graphs
● Investigate the ways in which
What is the lady doing? (ironing)
What is needed for the iron to operate? (electricity)
different forces can change
the speed and direction of a
moving object. (ST 4 PS FMS
1)
● Classify different kinds of
motion depending on what
causes the motion- gravity.
(ST 4 PS FMS 2)
● Determine experimentally that
varying the mass of an object,
7
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
and height from which it is Retrieved from:
dropped will vary the force https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/science/152993
exerted by the object. (ST 6 7
PS FMS 7)
● Given problems, be able to
design and construct simple
gadgets -water wheel. (ST
2TE TM 1)
Attitudes/Values
● Appreciate that the
relationship between motion
and energy can be seen in the
everyday activities we do and
in the environment around us. Retrieved from: https://www.ocregister.com/2016/08/14/miller-usain-
bolt-brings-showmanship-to-olympics-in-a-flash/
● Demonstrate persistence in
obtaining accurate and reliable
Who is the man in the picture? (Usain Bolt, the fastest man alive, he is
data.
from Jamaica)
● Show Interest/Curiosity in What is he doing? (running)
gathering data. What does he need in order to be able to move and run? (food as energy)
● Demonstrate respect for
collecting accurate and reliable Teacher documents the item and what is required to work (stove -
scientific data. gas/electricity; flashlight- batteries/dry cells; toy car - solar power; iron-
electricity; athlete -food)
● Work collaboratively and
cooperatively in groups.
Students, what do all these activities need to take place? (They require energy)
● Practice safety when
What is energy needed for? (work, activities)
conducting experiments. Answer Key
● When conducting practical Retrieved from: Can you do the following activities without energy?
and group work, display https://www.literacymn.org/sites/default/files/curriculu ● Riding a bike
sensitivity and offer assistance m/unit2.11_energy.pdf ● Running around the field
● Cleaning the chalkboard
to peers who may have
● Sweeping the classroom
physical or learning
challenges.
8
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Potential Energy and Kinetic Energy Interchange What other activities do you do that require energy? [Write down on the
● Participate actively in When Gravity Acts on an Object chalk board activities that require energy that the students do.]
As a bob (weight) is released on a pendulum the potential
classroom discussions.
energy of position begins to convert to kinetic energy of When you are performing these activities, what are you doing? (Work)
● Natural resources are not
motion. As the pendulum bob swings back up again, it Where do you get the energy you need to do work? (From the food we eat)
likely t to last forever so
gains potential energy back.
judicious use and looking for
Show students the pendulum picture below and pose the Energy is often defined as the ability to do work.
renewable sources ls following questions.
advisable. (ST 2 STSE 3) Recognizing Different Types of Energy
● Recognize that resources
should be used wisely since In certain parts of world like China they have created energy using water.
Look at this picture of the Three Gorges Dam. It took many years to
many of them are non-
build and produces the most energy of any hydropower dam in the world.
renewable. (ST 5 TE UT 2)
Hydro means water; yes, we get power from water!
● Abuse and overuse of non-
renewable resources lead to
depletion and should indicate
to policy makers that the
urgent search for and use of
renewable resources is critical.
(ST 6 STSE 2) Retrieved from: https://www.quora.com/Where-is-the-
potential-energy-in-a-pendulum
● Understand that countries
progress if the people are
Questions about the swinging pendulum:
involved in innovative and
1) At which numbered point(s) do you think the
creative activities-water
potential energy of the swinging weight is
wheels for power. (ST 3 TE highest? (1 & 5)
NT 3) 2) At which numbered point(s) do you think the
kinetic energy of the swinging weight is highest?
(3) Retrieved from:
3) At which numbered point(s) do you think https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Three_Gorges_Dam#/media/File:Three
potential energy and kinetic energy could be GorgesDam-China2009.jpg
similar? (2 & 4)
4) After you release the pendulum bob (weight) This technology is actually very old. For many years, settlers in countries
and it begins to swing downward, does it ever around the world have decided to
regain totally the potential energy it had in the build their homes near water so they could access power.
beginning? If not, why not? (The pendulum weight
will swing back and forth until it rests in the middle.
9
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
This is because air friction causes the initial amount of The water in a river above a waterfall can fall downward and turn a wheel.
energy to be slowly lost so that less is available to convert In the picture below you can see water has been directed from above to
to kinetic energy. turn this wheel if the wheel is attached to an axle in the centre, it can
create energy to do work like grinding grain or lifting a load.
Make a Waterwheel to Harness Energy
Depending on where you have the water falling on the
wheel you can change the direction of the wheel.
Can you identify places in your community where water
wheels have been used to create a renewable energy?
Retrieved from: https://energyeducation.ca/encyclopedia/Waterwheel
At the top of the wheel before the waterfalls, we say the water has
potential energy to do work- sometimes referred to as energy of
position. The word potential means it has the possibility to do work. Let
me use that word in a sentence “My students have the potential to be
wonderful parents and productive citizens!”
We sometimes hear that word used around batteries for our radio or
flashlight. That is because the battery has the potential to do work; play
music through a speaker or light a lightbulb!
When the water is pulled downward by gravity, it begins to have a new
Retrieved from: type of energy of motion called kinetic energy.
https://stileapp.com/au/library/publishers/stile/compil
ations/science/75556821-1a2f-4b47-a1a3- In modern hydropower they use special wheels called turbines to take
83f2dfe79fb0/preview/32-water-wheels/w2aI the energy from large volumes of flowing water.
Teacher Note: Pending availability of resources, the
students can make a water wheel from simple materials
using the instructions at the link above.
10
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Culminating Challenge Question:
Students, if we were to put a waterwheel in a local stream
like shown below, which day (#1 or #2) do you think
could produce the most energy? Explain why?
Day #1: Hot summer day with a trickle of water in our
stream
Day #2: In the rainy season, when the water rushes
down from hillsides.
(Day #2: the stream will have fast moving water so it will turn the
wheel more quickly- this should make more energy)
Retrieved from https://www.micro-hydro-power.com/hydro-turbine-
generator/
The turning wheel is connected to something called a generator that
creates electricity from the kinetic energy of the moving water.
Video Resource for Potential and Kinetic Energy
Let us now watch a video where we can learn more about energy.
Listen carefully to the two main types of energy.
https://youtu.be/Q0LBegPWzrg?si=mixpy9IyS5hr9e8O (4:13 mins)
Kinetic and Potential energy stops at 2:13 mins
Retrieved from:
https://energyeducation.ca/encyclopedia/Waterwheel
So, students you are telling me the faster something
moves the more energy it has to do work?
Think of your friend throwing a football at you. As you
catch a slow toss it feels different than a fast toss. That is
11
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
because your friend gave the ball more energy in a fast
toss when they released it towards you.
Integrating Mathematics
Peter sets up his toy train on the railroad tracks he has in
a straight line. He has a tool to measure the speed the
train is traveling in centimeters/second when he pushes
it to go. He set a box at the end of the ramp for the train
to crash into. He measures in centimeters how far the
train pushes the box and records the data in a table.
Plot a graph of the speed of the train (x axis) versus. the
distance the box traveled (y axis)
What are the two main types of energy mentioned in the video? (Kinetic
Questions Energy and Potential Energy)
1. What did you notice about the shape of the
graph? What did you learn about kinetic energy?
(It rises to the right) What did you learn about potential energy?
Students share their initial understanding.
2. What does the graph imply about the
relationship between speed and distance? Other Examples of Potential and Kinetic Energy
(as speed increases the distance the box moves also
increases- they have a direct relationship) There are two types of energy:
3. Multiple choice question: Potential Energy: stored energy, energy ready to go. Example, stretching
a rubber band, a race car at the starting line, a rock that rests at the top of
a cliff.
12
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
What would happen to the distance the box moves if the
train increased in speed beyond 70 cm/s? Kinetic Energy: is energy at work example releasing a rubber band, a rock
falling from a cliff
Possible Answers:
a. The box would move the same distance as a Teacher will provide students with rubber bands.
train moving at 70 cm/s. Stretch your rubber band between your fingers. What kind of energy
b. The box would move a shorter distance. does the stretched rubber band possess?
c. The box would move a longer distance.
d. The box would move the same distance as a (Answer: when the elastic band was stretched it gained potential energy. We know
train moving at 30 cm/s. this because your hand had to do some work to stretch the elastic band.)
Correct answer: Release your rubber band, causing it to shoot across the room. What kind
c. The box would move a longer distance. of energy is now present when the rubber band is released? (caution
students not to release in the direction of classmates or their own faces)
An elastic band when twisted can build up potential energy; enough to
Explanation: spin a propeller on a light-weight wooden plane. The winding of the
Peter’s investigation was testing how the distance a box moved elastic builds potential energy and the release that spins the propeller is
would change as the speed of a toy train increased or decreased. The kinetic energy of motion.
pattern within the data table shows that the higher the rate of the
train, the further the box moved. An inference can be made that the
higher something’s speed is, the more energy it has. Higher amounts
of energy will result in a more significant change of motion for the
object it is acting on. When the speed decreases, the distance the box
moves also decreases. There is a direct relationship between speed
and energy. So if he were to increase the speed of the train, the box
would move a longer distance.
Scenario retrieved verbatim from:
https://www.varsitytutors.com/4th_grade_science-
help/explain-how-an-object-s-speed-relates-to-its-energy
Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/hPf4d7-2G9Q
Extension Activities
A sling shot also involves stretching a rubber band to build potential
Energy, Speed and Ocean Waves energy and then releasing it with a pebble enclosed to quickly attain
kinetic energy of motion.
The regular tides in the ocean possess energy as they
move in and out of the shoreline. In some parts of the Linking Speed and Energy
world, the tidal difference between high and low tide
13
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
coupled with the resultant rush of water is enough that Students, I am sure you have heard the word speed before. If I told you
turbines can be lowered in the water and turned to create that a red car was traveling faster than a blue car, which car likely has the
tidal power. This is an example of renewable resource in greater speed? (The red car would have the greater speed)
that tides are constantly changing day and night without Speed is the distance travelled in a period of time. The car that goes
any effort on our part! the same distance in a shorter time will always be the higher speed.
Students should do internet research to find out where
tidal power projects have been successful in the world. Materials: stack of books, smooth wooden ramp, toy car, watch to
measure time, ruler.
NOTE: Can be done as a teacher demonstration or by individual class
groups.
We are going to release a car to roll down a ramp from different positions
and measure how far it travels from the bottom of the ramp in the same
amount of time (e.g. 10 seconds-measure by stopwatch)
A
B
Retrieved from:
https://www.wtsenergy.com/glossary/tidal-energy/
If you had to guess students, which car would go the fastest, the one
Why Do Waves Crash on the Shore?
released from point A or point B?
Waves have a lot of energy as they come to shore. The
(point A).
speed of the wave depends on currents and wind. But the
top of the wave and bottom of the wave can change in
If you had to guess students, which car would go the furthest, the one
speed especially as the water at the bottom of the wave
brushes up against the sand in the shallows. released from point A or point B?
(point A).
Which car would have the largest potential energy? (point A car
because it is the highest)
So let us try this and confirm our prediction.
Over 10 seconds
14
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Release from point A – distance traveled= _____cm
Release from point B – distance traveled= _____cm
Teacher notes
We know that the car released from point A went a further distance in
the same amount of time (10 secs) so it is going faster than the car
released from point B.
We also know that because point A is higher, the car released from
there has more potential energy. As the car goes down the ramp, all the
potential energy is converted to kinetic energy of motion.
Retrieved from: https://www.quora.com/Can-waves-
Our final conclusion is:
break-in-the-middle-of-the-ocean
The car released from point A will have the higher speed and the
higher potential energy and that car goes the farthest. This means
As a wave nears shore and the depth of water starts to
energy and speed are directly related, the higher potential energy the
decrease, the frictional effect of the seabed slows the
higher the speed.
bottom of the wave, and when the point is reached when
the top of the wave has a greater speed, it overtakes the
The earth’s gravity we feel every day (referred to as weight) causes objects
bottom of the wave, and the wave will break. It has been
at a height to have the ability to fall to the ground. This type of contained
found that a wave will break in water that is a depth of
1.3 the wave height. ability is called “Potential Energy”. As something begins to move it has
speed and takes on a new type of energy of motion called Kinetic
Ask students two questions about waves on their Energy.
community beaches.
1. Why do we sometimes see waves breaking far out
Motion can be described in terms of speed, and it requires energy in order
to sea on a windy day? (if the wind is high enough, it
to set something in motion.
increases the speed of the top of the wave so it topples over the
slower bottom of the wave)
Therefore, speed is related to energy.
2. Often we see channel markers near the entrance
to boat landings that guide fishers safely into the
harbor. Around these areas we may also see waves
breaking. Why would that happen there? (Channel
markers usually show wee shallow areas are located which are
dangerous for boats. These shallow areas sometimes called
shoals will slow the speed of the bottom of the wave and
cause the faster top of the wave to topple over.)
15
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Retrieved from:
https://www.miamiherald.com/news/local/article26544
3276.html
Additional Resources and Materials
13 Lesson Plan Ideas to Teach Potential and Kinetic Energy: https://www.sciencebuddies.org/blog/potential-kinetic-energy-lessons
Potential and Kinetic Energy
https://kidsdiscover.blob.core.windows.net/kdoassets/uploads/infographics/Potential-Kinetic-Energy-Infographic-Kids-Discover.pdf
16
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
PE/KE Activities: https://littlebinsforlittlehands.com/potential-and-kinetic-energy/
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Linking Speed and Energy: https://enjoy-teaching.com/speed-and-energy/
Questions students may ask: https://www.varsitytutors.com/4th_grade_science-help/explain-how-an-object-s-speed-relates-to-its-energy
Tidal Power: https://www.repsol.com/en/energy-and-the-future/future-of-the-world/tidal-power/index.cshtml
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Art and Craft: Making charts depicting the various forms and types of energy. Constructing gadgets like toy cars to be used during experiments.
Language Arts: Writing an expository essay about energy. Formulating poems and songs about energy.
Mathematics: Calculating speed. using the equation. Calculating distance and time.
Students will construct a line graph of incline height versus time taken for a car to travel the predetermined distance. (graph should show higher angle increases speed).
Ratio
Physical Education: timing students to determine the fastest runners to represent their house at sports. Using the stopwatch appropriately
17
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
18
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
retrieved from: https://studylib.net/doc/18110278/energy-to-motion
Students can construct various gadgets to be used in class activities. Some locally made toys are based on the principles of energy conversion of potential to kinetic energy.
The Kabouwé is a traditional truck made in Saint Lucia and Dominica, from scraps of wood and some are made large enough that a child can sit in. Children would ride them on
slopes or hillsides. This toy is called Roller in Grenada. Potential energy at the top of the slope provides the momentum to take them to the bottom at top speeds. Most often they
are pushed with a stick. SVG: box cars made from old banana crates or banana “trunk”.
19
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Students can construct various gadgets to be used in class activities.
Some locally made toys are based on the principles of energy conversion of potential to kinetic energy. The Kabouwé is a traditional truck made in Saint Lucia and Dominica, from
scraps of wood and some are made large enough that a child can sit in. Children would ride them on slopes or hillsides. This toy is called Roller in Grenada. Potential energy at the
top of the slope provides the momentum to take them to the bottom at top speeds. Most often they are pushed with a stick.
20
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 2: Make observations to provide evidence that energy can be transferred from place to place by sound,
light, heat, and electric currents.
[Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include quantitative measurements of energy.]
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Identifying Forms of Energy Students, I am sure you have heard the word energy before. Has a
parent or teacher ever asked you to do something and you have
Knowledge replied “I just don’t have the energy!”
● Define the terms: What do you mean when you say that?
o energy (I am tired, my body is sore, it is too late in the day)
o light energy A simple definition of energy is the ability to do work.
o sound energy
o heat energy Besides the energy we can produce (physical work) by eating a
o energy transfer balanced diet, getting exercise and caring for our health, there are
o energy other types of energy all around us!
transformation
o fibre optics Where do you see energy around us in everyday life?
o battery (lights, motion, heat, sound, waves)
o tsunami
o biomass
o oil consumption Energy exists in many forms. Based on the pictures below, are you
able to guess the forms of energy?
● Give examples of ways that
energy is transferred.
● Give examples of how
energy is transformed.
● Explain how fibre optics is
an example of transfer of
Retrieved from
energy
https://www.worksheeto.com/post_energy-light-
● Identify the sun as a source
heat-sound-worksheets_446/
of energy.
21
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Describe how sounds can be (The students will be engaged in a guided discussion in order to
made. Possible answers for: arrive at the answers.)
● Distinguish between natural Light energy (lamp, candle, flashlight)
and manmade sources of Sound energy (radio, drum, guitar, television)
light. (ST 2 ESS SS 2) Electric energy (phone, vacuum, fan)
● Identify and explain ways in Kinetic energy (person walk, bird flying, rolling ball)
which technology (especially Heat energy (hair dryer, toaster)
energy-related) has
enhanced lives of people
past and present. (ST 2 PS Identifying Energy Sources
EN 7)
● Identify and name natural
and human-made objects
that emit light. (ST 3 PS EN
1)
● Describe, with examples, the
ways in which heat, and light
are used by humans in
everyday activities. (ST 3 PS
EN 3)
Retrieved from:
● Describe the ways in which
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/science/1770567
solar energy is used in the
home (heat, electricity, air
Possible responses: ( 1. heat, sound, light, electrical
conditioning) (ST 3 PS EN
2. light, heat, electrical 3. heat, light, sound, 4. sound, electrical, heat 5. light,
6)
heat)
● Discuss simple examples of
energy transformation. (ST 3
As a supplement to this formative assessment, teachers that have
PS EN 8)
access to technology may show this video and ask students to
● List examples of fuels used
identify at least 5 forms of energy.
in their country in the home,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SNd1c4i5MYg
transportation and
(3.14 mins)
production of materials. (ST
3 PS EN 4)
22
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: Forms of Energy
Skills https://www.kidsacademy.mobi/printables/physica We will focus on four forms of energy.
● Observe and interpret l-science-energy-sources/
teacher demonstrations of 1. Sound Energy
energy transfer. Energy Transformation
● Infer that energy can be Sound is the movement of energy through substances in waves.
transformed from one form Sound occurs when a force causes an object to vibrate. These
to another. vibrations create sound waves.
● Exercise internet research
skills.
Sound energy is used in radios, IPods, and for the generation of
music. Sound is used for communication by animals including
● Communicate internet
humans
research
results/understanding
2. Light Energy
through text and graphics
● Create a bar graph from oil
Light is a form of energy that allows us to see. The sun is the
consumption data.
ultimate source of light energy (called solar energy. Solar energy can
● Construct a simple circuit.
be used to cook, keep warm, dry clothes and create electricity.) but
● Construct simple flowcharts
there are other forms of light energy such as light given off by a
to represent simple energy
candle or an electric bulb.
transformations.
● Design and draw a timeline We can use light energy to see or to power objects such as solar
to show how technology calculators or solar panels that can be used to generate electricity.
(energy-related) has changed Plants need light energy to produce their own food.
over time. (ST 4 PS EN 3)
● Identify and name the parts 3. Electrical Energy
of a simple electrical circuit
and demonstrate by setting Electrical energy is the movement of charged particles. Electrical
up one. (ST 5 PS EN 1) energy comes from other forms of energy that are changed. We
● Compare at least two commonly use this form of energy to power things in our homes.
devices that provide heat
and light using selected Examples of electrical energy include objects that run on batteries.
criteria. (St 4 PS EN 4) Batteries create a flow of particles (electricity) when a circuit is
● Compare devices that burn
different fuels from the
23
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
amount of pollution they Retrieved from https://formspal.com/pdf- complete. Lightning is an example of a natural form of electrical
cause. (ST 5 ESS ER 8) forms/other/illustrations-of-energy- energy.
● Compare the amount of air transformations/
pollution in two named 4. Thermal or Heat Energy
areas. (ST 5 ESS ER 9) What Fuels are Used for Energy in Your
● Describe and discuss how Community Thermal energy is a form of energy that we often refer to as heat
burning (of fossil fuels) can Students should work in groups to create a one- energy. Thermal energy is caused by the increased activity of the
cause air pollution. (ST 6 page graphic organizer showing all the different molecules (or tiny parts) that make up an object. When these
ESS ER 4) fuels that are used in their community for particles vibrate very rapidly, heat is produced. Our greatest source
Attitudes/Values transportation, heating, industry etc. of thermal energy is the Sun.
Negative Affects of Burning Fossil Fuels for
● Appreciate the importance Energy We use thermal energy to heat our water and our homes. Some
of energy The teacher should divide the class into two examples of thermal energy include a campfire, water boiling on a
transformation/conversion opposing teams to have a debate about the stove, and an oven.
in the home and in the pollution impacts of burning fossil fuels (oil, diesel,
community. natural gas, coal). How Does Energy Get Transferred?
The question: Can we tolerate the amount of Teacher demonstrations
● Be persistent in conducting
pollution generated by burning fossil fuels given the
research on energy.
extreme need in our communities for inexpensive Example 1: Motion of waves
● Understand that human
energy? Fill a large tub with water. Put a small floating boat at one end. At
production processes make
the other end of the tub agitate the water using a flat plastic cover.
goods and products
In the discussion, the teacher should challenge Ask the students why the boat at the other end of the tub begins to
(from energy) which may
students to consider: move? (The energy you put into the wave travels across the water and is felt by
impact the environment. (ST
1) the levels of pollution that different fuels the boat in its movement.) Reiterate- energy can travel!
5 PS MM 4)
generate. Are some tolerable and others
● Understand that
not? Example 2: Sound is a wave
technological processes (that
2) Where is air pollution most prevalent in Access a small drum (or stretch the latex of a balloon over a large jar
use energy) including
their communities (i.e. streets, industry, top and fasten the sides so that you have a membrane covering the
manufacturing and
farms etc.). Where is it tolerable and where bottle.) Place a small amount of sand on the top of the drum skin.
construction may have
should it be most avoided? Next to the drum play a sound from a radio or music player (or
impact on our lives. (ST 5
tuning fork if you have one). Ask the students why the sand on the
TE NT 5)
drum skin begins to jump? (Sound is a form of energy as a wave and as it
● Recognize that resources
travels by the drum skin it passes energy to the membrane causing it to vibrate.)
should be used wisely since
Reiterate- energy can travel!
24
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
many of them are non- Heat and Light as Energy Sources Example 3: Heat energy
renewable. (ST 5 TE UT 2) Student response paragraph: Cut a 15 cm piece of metal coat hangar and dip one end in hot wax
● Show Interest/Curiosity in In times gone by, fire was an important form of from a burning candle. Let the wax solidify. Hold the hangar at one
the uses of fibre optics to energy that provided heat and light. Compare the end and heat the middle of the metal with a candle flame. Ask
human life. forms of heat and light that we enjoy today on the students why the wax melted.?
● After research, respect the basis of cost, convenience and sustainability. (Eventually, the heat energy will be transferred along the metal and
multiple uses of fibre optics. Have students fill in the table below and be cause the wax at the end to get soft and melt.
● Demonstrate restraint to prepared to discuss these factors. Reiterate- energy can travel!
avoid overuse of energy. Ask students if they have ever seen a pot or fry pan with a rubber or
Source cost convenience sustainability plastic handle? What is the purpose? (to prevent he transferred heat energy
● Work collaboratively and
Fire from heating up your hand)
cooperatively in groups.
Flashlight
● Stewardship/Respect for
House lamp
Living Things and the need
Electric heat
Brief history on fire- An Example of Energy transformation-
for energy.
Oil fired
motion to heat
● Take safety precautions to furnace heat
prevent long term and Coal
We are fortunate to have matches and stoves in order for us to cook
short-term health issues
our delicious meals, but do you know how far back we have been
associated with energy
using fire? (cavemen days or 300 000 to 400 000 years ago)
conversions. Research Tsunamis
● When conducting practical Students should be asked to look up information on
Back in the days, people had to be creative in order to survive and
and group work, display the internet regarding tsunamis.
making fire was one of them.
sensitivity and offer In a one-page response paper, have students explain
assistance to peers who may what a tsunami is using a drawn picture if they wish.
In order to create fire, ancient humans converted motion (which
have physical or learning They must answer the question “how does a
requires work and hence energy) to heat.
challenges. tsunami demonstrate the transfer of energy? (Violent
● Participate actively in motion in the earth’s crust creates a wave that travels a long
Can you make a fire without matches or kerosene?
classroom discussions. distance and is felt in the form of wave surges on the beach
Take a look at the video below, will you be able to make a fire on
● Appreciate the role of and resultant flooding.) your own to survive in the wild?
human-made devices that Rubric:
provide heat and light in our Explanation of the tsunami (5 marks)
daily lives. (ST 4 PS EN 1) Explanation of the energy transfer (5 marks)
25
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Research the Ear Drum
Students should be asked to look up information on
the internet regarding the anatomy of the ear drum
using a drawn picture if they wish.
In a one-page response paper, have students explain
how an ear drum works to allow us to hear sounds.
They must answer the question “how does an ear
drum demonstrate the transfer of energy? (sound
waves are created by motion and this wave energy passes
through the air and into our ears where the wave causes the
ear drum to vibrate and signal unique sounds recognized by
the brain))
Retrieved from:
Rubric: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bxjqz2_-Zc4
Explanation of the ear drum (5 marks) (2.00 mins)
Explanation of the energy transfer (5 marks)
Research the Toaster Tools which were used to make fire Retrieved from:
Students should be asked to look up information on https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bxjqz2_-Zc4
the internet regarding a common household bread
toaster using a drawn picture if they wish.
In a one-page response paper, have students explain
what properties of the elements in the toaster make
it a good choice compared to other metals. They
must answer the question “how does the nichrome
element demonstrate the transformation of
energy?” (The nichrome alloy element has a high resistance
so when the element has electricity passed through, it gets very More Examples of Energy Transformations
hot. Electrical energy is transformed into heat energy.)
Rubric: Student experiment
Explanation of how a toaster operates (5 marks) Materials: batteries (dry cells), connecting wires, switch, light bulb,
Explanation of the energy transformation (5 marks) flashcards (with the terms: electrical, heat, light)
26
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Research the Sugar Cane Press Students will be placed in mixed ability groups and given materials to
Students should be asked to look up information on build a circuit. Students will be asked to use the materials provided
the internet regarding the use of animals to squeeze to make the bulb light. The students will play with the materials and
sugar from cane. eventually build a circuit.
e.g. Retrieved from:
https://www.flickr.com/photos/127184668@N03
/52315791127/
When is the circuit an open circuit? (The switch is open)
Students please leave your circuit open.
What form of energy is present in the open circuit? (electrical
potential energy) We call it this because the battery has potential to
do work as soon as we give it an opportunity.
Students, please close your circuit. Let us leave it on for a minute.
What happened to the bulb? (It lit up)
What form of energy was produced? (Light energy)
Place your hand around the bulb. What do you feel? (Heat/ bulb is
hot)
What form of energy was produced? (Heat energy)
In a one-page response paper, using a drawn picture
if they wish, explain how the sugar was removed
What energy was present before we put on our switch/complete the
from the cane using an animal. They must answer
circuit? (electrical potential energy) What happens to this energy? (changed
the question “how does food and water fed to the
animal transform the energy? (The animal in getting form) What new forms of energy were produced? (heat and light)
nutrients has the ability to do the work of turning the cane
press when it walks around the machine. When a piece of We have just observed that energy transformation took place. What
cane is directed into the press, the motion compresses the cane do you think is energy transformation? The teacher will have the
thereby releasing the sugar) students formulate a definition for energy transformation. (Changing
Rubric: of energy from one form to another.)
27
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Explanation of how the cane press operates (5 We can develop a flowchart to represent the energy transformation
marks) that took place. Students can be given the three forms of energy and
Explanation of the energy transformation (5 marks) the arrows on flash cards and can be asked in their groups to create
the flowchart.
Research Biomass
In a one-page response paper, using a drawn picture
if they wish, explain the sources of biomass that
might be used for energy in the Caribbean region.
They must answer the question “how does the
biomass get transformed into usable energy?” (there More Examples of Energy Transformations
are a whole host of bioproducts of plants and food that can be
heated to burn giving us energy that can be sued for heating or Materials: Electric kettle, tea, sugar, milk, cell phone, ice, towel,
steam production to turn turbines) flashlight, flash cards, markers.
Rubric:
Explanation the sources of biomass (5 marks) The teacher will set up the following workstations around the
Explanation of the energy transformation (5 marks) classroom and/or around the school in order for students to
observe, write down the energy transformations/conversions and
Useful Teacher Reference: then create flow charts. Guiding questions can be posed to the
https://education.nationalgeographic.org/resource students/placed at the workstations to help them identify the energy
/biomass-energy/ conversions such as
● What form of energy is powering up the object/device?
Extension Activities ● What energy form of energy is being generated when this
device/object is being used?
Careers in Energy ● If the object was left on/used for a long time, what would
Discuss with students the importance of careers in happen to it?
maintaining current energy sources and innovation
in exploring renewable energy. Ask invited speakers Workstation 1: Using an electric kettle to boil water for making tea
to share the career paths and daily work lives of Energy transformation observed:
those involved in energy careers. electrical energy → heat energy → sound energy
Cost of Renewable Energy Workstation 2: Using the cellphone to play a video.
It is easy to suggest that we should be careful of Energy transformation observed:
using up our non-renewable resources such as coal
chemical potential energy →Electrical energy → light energy→
and oil and natural gas. Students should do research
sound energy and heat energy
28
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
on the internet to answer some of the more difficult
questions in the region such as: Workstation 3: Use a remote-control car
1) What are the relative upfront costs of Energy transformation observed:
renewable energies such as solar power or Chemical Potential energy → electrical energy →kinetic energy →
wind power sound energy → heat energy
2) Can the average person afford renewable
energy? Workstation 4: Using a fan to cool the room
3) What are the job implications for moving Energy transformation observed:
away from oil? Electrical energy → kinetic → sound energy and heat energy
4) What are the environmental dangers and
resultant costs of continued oil use in terms
Alternatively:
of extraction and transport?
5) Are humans prepared to be more energy
A video demonstrating various energy transformations can be
conscious or are we too comfortable to
played. Students can identify the energy transformations and create
reverse our high energy consumption
the flow charts based on the examples from the video. The video
trends? reveals the flow charts for each example.
The class could be divided into groups where each
group got one of the aforementioned questions.
Students could be asked to prepare an essay to
answer these or a class presentation digitally or
through a poster.
Energy Consumption
Students will use the data below to create a bar
graph showing the number of barrels of oil
consumed daily by the identified countries in the
Caribbean. Note to students the dramatic difference
in consumption for bigger countries worldwide.
29
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Country Barrels per day
Dominica 1301
St. Vincent & Grenadines 1619
St. Kitts & Nevis 1700
Grenada 2000
Saint Lucia 3099
Antigua & Barbuda 5001
United Kingdom 1,583,896
India 4, 443,000
China 12,791,553
U.S.A 19,687,287
Data set: https://www.worldometers.info/oil/oil-
Inclusive Learning Strategies:
consumption-by-country/
30
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
All images retrieved from:
https://youtu.be/PKm4ZVNmJyQ?si=fN0tINMfOEipKkjH (4:10
mins)
The video has 8 examples of energy transformations. Each group
can be given different transformations to prepare the flowcharts.
- playing a guitar
- light a bulb
- light a matchstick
- use a bow and arrow
- Using an electric kettle
- Riding a roller coaster
- Using an electric bell
- Using a drill to put a nail/screw
Importance of Energy Transformations at home and in the
community
Did you know that energy transformations have been utilized over
the centuries so that people can do work? Remember energy can’t
be created or destroyed only transformed.
Let us watch a video that looks at examples of energy
transformations in everyday life over the centuries. Can you identify
some new examples of energy transformations from the video? Why
are these transformations important.
https://youtu.be/9wxbT2g1jtM?si=GsdCumFO1Na7eAQf (5:46
mins)
Note:
For those teachers without access to technology, please show
students pictures of the following energy transformations and get
them to explain what is happening:
➢ A person eating a mango as they work in the field (food
converted to work)
31
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
➢ A person drawing back the string on a bow to fire an arrow
(motion of pulling on bow creates forward speed of the arrow-energy
transformed form putting tension in the bow)
➢ Wind energy turns the fins on a windmill or water turns the
paddles on a water wheel. (The wind or water turns a wheel which
can be used as energy for pumping water, grinding grain, lifting objects,
creating electricity. Etc.)
These are examples of renewable resources because they
continue to flow naturally with no additional work on our
part and they should last forever unlike oil or natural gas
which eventually will be entirely used up- then what do we
do for energy?
➢ Sunlight shines on a coconut tree. (the energy from the sun is
converted into food in the form of a coconut which can further be used
by humans as food in order to do work)
➢ Wood is burned to create heat. (the wood has stored chemicals
that are capable of being ignited as a fire and to produce heat as a
biproduct of combustion)
Materials: pictures/ video footage of industries, factories, businesses
in your community.
Energy is needed for all activities. Students will be engaged in a
classroom discussion by posing the following questions. Pictures of
the industries and businesses can be present to stimulate discussion.
● What activities do we use energy for at home and in our
community?
● What industries/ businesses are present in your community?
Where do they get their energy from?
● How is it stored so it can be drawn from when needed?
● How is the energy used? Is it used in only one form?
The teacher will use a graphic organizer to record the information
from the discussion.
32
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
People that Work with Energy- Class Visit
Invite technicians, experts working in various industries to discuss
energy transformations that take place and how energy is used in the
workplace etc.
OR
Field Trip to various business and industries where students
learn about the energy transformations and how the energy is stored
and utilized as well as the negative effects of energy transformations
to the body and the environment. Example: paint factory, bakery.
The students can fill out the graphic organizer while on the field
trip/ listening to the professionals speak about energy.
33
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from :
https://squareheadteachers.com/2015/06/08/field-trip-report-free-
printable/
The teacher will elaborate on the following that ties the questions
together and highlights the importance of energy transformations:
The question will be posed to students: Can the constant conversion
energy from one form to another have any negative effects? The
teacher will guide the discussion using the local businesses and
industries for suitable examples.
34
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The negative effects of energy transformations can be added to the
graphic organizer.
Energy Transformations and advances in Technology
The teacher will pose the following question to the students: Can we
bend light?
Materials: plastic bottle, laser pointer, drill/ice pick, water
The teacher can demonstrate fibre optics by:
● drilling a hole through a plastic bottle about half-way up the
bottle.
● Fill the bottle with water and turn down the lights.
● Shine a cheap laser pointer light through the side of the
bottle directly across the bottle to the opposing hole.
● As the water leaves the bottle through that open hole, you
can see the light internally reflecting down the water stream
exactly like a glass fibre. We can bend light energy!
The students can be shown the following video that demonstrates
the bending of light.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hBQ8fh_Fp04 (1:18 min)
35
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Teacher will ask the questions after students view the video:
Light bends when it moves from one medium to another e.g. when
it moves from air to water. is the name given to the bending of light.
What name is given to the bending of light?
(Refraction).
Light refraction power fibre optic cables. Optical fiber is a very thin
strand of pure glass which acts as a waveguide for light over long
distances
What are fibre optics important?
(Fibre Optics have the ability to use light to transform energy more efficiently.)
Some discussion points:
Refraction and energy transformations are important concepts that
engineers apply in
developing technology and advances in science. Light refraction
emerges as a captivating
phenomenon central to the functionality of fiber optic cables. One of
the key advantages of fiber optic cables is their superior energy
efficiency compared to traditional copper cables. Fiber optic cables
36
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
transmit data using light signals, which require significantly less
energy compared to electrical signals used in copper cables. Thus,
the transformation of energy is more efficient for use.
Video that explains how fibre optic work and the uses of fibre optics
https://youtu.be/o5t6evogJbg?si=ZPnG_8bCExMsvamg (3:58)
What energy is transferred with the use of fibre optics based on the
video?
(Light energy is utilized and so energy is transferred from light energy to electrical
energy or to transmit signals)
37
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Modern Energy Sources: https://www.energy.gov/energy-sources
Sources of Energy: https://byjus.com/physics/natural-sources-of-energy/
Historical Energy Sources: https://www.sciencelearn.org.nz/resources/1636-energy-sources-through-time-timeline
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Energy is needed for most of the activities we engage in every day. We obtain our energy from the food we eat. Plants obtain their energy by using the energy from
the sun (solar energy). Energy is also needed for transportation, to drive industry and even for entertainment. Energy is needed to power most of the devices and
the technology that we take for granted. In order for efficient use energy must be stored and be readily drawn upon when needed. Usually, energy is transformed
from one form to another so that it can be used in a variety of ways.
https://en.islcollective.com/english-esl-worksheets/forms-of-energy/19744#&gid=1&pid=3
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts - Composition: Write an essay as to which form of energy they believe is most important.
Arts and Craft: create working musical instruments to create sound.
Health and Family Life -
1. The benefits of the various types of energy example the use of heat or thermal heat for cooking which can prevent various illnesses
2. Safety when working with the various forms of energy, for example heat, electrical safety.
3. Research the negative effects of energy transfer on human health.
Social Studies: Design and draw a timeline to show how technology (energy - related) has changed over time. / Social issues associated with dirty energy
Making simple toys at home:
How to make a drone: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jrFBko3k49w
How to Make a Mini Robot bug: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TFkUan5Uujs
How to make cars: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eT68ne9TwsA
SVG: Bamboo joint
38
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Making simple toys at home:
How to make a drone: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jrFBko3k49w
How to Make a Mini Robot bug: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TFkUan5Uujs
How to make cars: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eT68ne9TwsA
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Research on devices (energy - related) has changed over time. The benefits of such devices to man.
Research on the uses of fibre optics.
39
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 3: Ask questions and predict outcomes about the changes in energy that occur when objects collide
[Clarification Statement: Emphasis is on the change in the energy due to the change in speed, not on the forces, as objects interact.]
[Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include quantitative measurements of energy.]
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners are expected to: Terminology: Energy and Collision
Select a word from the box below to complete the
Knowledge
● Define the terms: sentences below.
o collide
o mass
o speed transformation fast direction
o energy transfer
motion decrease energy
● Explain how the changes in the
speeds affect the energy
more kinetic lose
transfer of objects when they
Retrieved from:
collide.
https://caribbeanbookblog.wordpress.com/wp-
● Account for energy changes as 1. Objects that move have this type of energy
content/uploads/2013/12/piaye-bridge.jpg
a result of the change in speed
_______
and in differences in the masses
Storms that involve high winds and rain can sometimes create
of objects 2. ____________ cannot be created nor
surges in waterways like streams and rivers. The increased
● Explain that when object
destroyed, but it can be transformed volume of water can cause streams to run more quickly. This
collide, energy is transferred
rushing water can do serious damage as it runs into (collides)
● Describe how the energy of 3. During energy __________, energy is
with riverbanks, vegetation and bridges. The photograph
objects changes when they
transferred between objects or changes form. shows the damage after a storm. What do you think happened
collide
to the bridge (The
● Demonstrate ways in which
4. In some collisions, objects bounce back or go
bridge was washed away.) What do you think collided with the
motion can be changed. (ST 2 off in another ___________ instead of becoming bridge? (water, trees, debris)
PS FMS 1)
deformed. In other collisions, objects are deformed
● Discuss simple examples of
energy transformation. (ST 3 PS or stick together.
EN 8)
40
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Describe and demonstrate the 5. The speed and energy of both objects will Review of Concepts That Relate to Collisions
forces of push and pull. (ST 3 Mass
always__________ when two objects collide
PS FMS 1)
Ask students:
Answer Key What is mass? (The amount of matter in an object.)
Skills 1. kinetic
● Predict how the energy of 2. energy Students, in this picture, do you think a heavier mass like a
objects are affected by 3. transformation desk, requires more or less energy to move than a book? (more
collisions 4. direction energy required to move heavier mass).
● Observe the collision of objects 5. decrease
with different speeds and
different masses Retrieved and adapted from:
https://www.teacherspayteachers.com/Product/Energ
● Infer that the larger the mass of
y-Collision-Quiz-
an object the greater the energy
4370800?st=9be4698bb37cbd03c53888b5eeba81b3
transfer during a collision.
● Investigate the ways in which
Terminology and Comprehension
forces can change the speed
and direction of a moving
Look at the paragraph below. Read carefully and select
object. (ST 4 PS FMS 1) Retrieved from:
the most appropriate word below to complete each
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KBzszSr6MWk
sentence.
Attitudes/Values Speed
heat energy mass speed
Ask students: If you are running faster than your friend, over
● Appreciate why the effect of the same distance, who has less speed? (my friend)
When two objects collide, _______ is transferred.
object collision is a Objects with larger _________ travelling at a greater If the teacher has access to technology they might show this
consideration in the
________ will transfer the most energy. Energy is also review video to students
engineering/technology design
lost in the collision as _________.
process
● Collaboration & Cooperation
Answers
● Stewardship/Respect for Living
Things When two objects collide, (ENERGY) is transferred.
● Practice safety measures when Objects with larger (MASS) travelling at a greater
conducting various activities.
41
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● When conducting practical and (SPEED) will transfer the most energy. Energy is also
group work, display sensitivity lost in the collision as (HEAT).
and offer assistance to peers
who may have physical or Testing Transfer of Knowledge with Scenario
learning challenges. Challenges
● Participate actively in classroom
discussions. A car and a truck collide that are going in opposite
directions. Set up 4 scenarios for students predict the
results by:
Retrieved from
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5JW8fUU9yEQ
(4:38 mins)
Briefly explain that energy is the ability to do work or make
things happen and that there are different types of energy,
such as kinetic energy (energy of motion) and potential energy
(stored energy).
Retrieved from: https://www.shutterstock.com/image-
Distribute objects that have kinetic energy (e.g., a moving car,
photo/yellow-car-accident-collide-blue-truck-
a bouncing ball) and objects that have
1051133627
potential energy (e.g., a stretched rubber band, a raised
hammer).
(The teacher should demonstrate sensitivity to students
After, explain that during a collision, energy can change from
who were in accidents or knew persons involved in
one type to another or can be transferred between objects.
accidents.)
a) drawing pictures of before and after the collision Effect of speed on energy
and
Two students should be asked to stand 2 meters apart with
b) writing a sentence that describes the likely result Person 1 with their back to Person 2. Person 2 with a ball of
crushed paper,
42
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
a. both are going the same speed and mass the marshmallow or ping pong ball in hand should throw the
same (They collide, stick together and there is loss of energy object slowly at the back of the Person 1. Ask Person 1 what
through heat and deformed bumpers on collision) it felt like? (it felt like a small impact on my back)
Person 2 should retrieve the object and once again throw it at
b. both are going the same speed but a heavier truck. the back of Person 1 but with greater speed.
(The truck pushes the car backward maintaining some motion Ask Person 1 how it felt this time? (the impact was harder)
and energy, some energy lost as heat and crumpled bumpers)
Ask the pair:
c. both vehicles have the same mass, but the truck In which case did Person 1 feel more energy as the object hit
is moving faster. (The truck pushes the car backward their back (the second instance)
maintaining some motion and energy, some energy lost as heat
and crumpled bumpers) In which case did Person 2 throw the object with greater
speed? (the second instance)
d. car slower and lighter; truck faster and heavier: (The Closure: so, we can say that higher speed can be equated with
truck pushes the car backward maintaining motion and energy, higher energy.
some energy lost as heat and crumpled bumpers)
Testing for application: In the rushing water example above,
Many years ago, most car bumpers were made of metal which water way is likely to have
but many today are plastic with foam inside. more destructive power (energy), a) a slow trickling stream or
b) a fast-overflowing river? (b)
Do you know why foam bumpers might be a good idea
when thinking about collisions? (Foam bumpers absorb So that means the speed of the water is directly related to the
better some of the impact of the collision so the car frame itself energy it possesses to exert damage upon collision with the
doesn’t get damaged) riverbanks or anything it is path.
As time passes, engineers and technologists design cars Simulation to Reinforce the Concept
so that on impact the metal and foam in the structure If the teacher has access to technology, have students view
will absorb energy while protecting the occupants of the simulation at the link below:
the vehicle. This in turn helps save the lives of the https://contrib.pbslearningmedia.org/WGBH/conv16/conv
passengers inside.
16-int-rollercoaster/index.html How
does speed change with energy? (Objects which move faster have
more energy).
43
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Scenario - Group Work Variables in a Collision
When a collision occurs the energy that each object had to
Below is a short scenario. In groups of threes, read the begin with, is transformed and redistributed.
scenario together and come up with a solution.
Begin by asking students if they have ever witnessed or
Glen and his friend London are going sledding at a experienced a collision, such as two vehicles crashing head-
local park. There are two hills to choose from, "The
on? Ask them what determines which vehicle gets the most
Bunny Slopes," which are small hills and lots of flat
damage? (the bigger vehicle less damage, the slower vehicle more damage)
surfaces, and "The Dragon," which is a steep hill and
Conclusions: Faster vehicles have more energy; heavier
not for beginners. If London goes first and reaches the
bottom and Glen crashes into him from behind on vehicles have more energy. Returning to paired object
"The Dragon," what would happen to the motion of throwing activity above…
their sleds?
If I allowed your partner to throw a cricket ball at your back
What does the outcome depend upon?
with the same speed instead of a ball of paper, how would it
feel? (it would hurt). Would you agree the heavier ball at the
A) If Glen (sled) is heavier than London (sled)?
same speed will have more energy? We call that energy of
B) If London (sled) is heavier than Glen (sled)?
C) How will these scenarios (A & B) compare motion Kinetic energy.
with respect to London’s final position?
Simulation to Explore Variables
For teachers with access to technology, have students visit the
following simulation and investigate variables based on the
questions
provided below: (or teacher projected demonstration)
(https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/collision-
lab/latest/collision-lab_all.html)
➢ Click on the >intro< icon
➢ Vary the mass of the balls by using the pink and blue
sliders- press the play button and see what happens to
The outcome depends on the mass of the sled and rider and the the balls- what conclusion can you make about the mass
speed they are travelling.
of the ball and its energy? (the heaver ball when put in motion
44
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Likely outcome has more energy than the smaller ball because upon collision the
small ball moves backwards)
1) London will be pushed forward and Glen
➢ Under the collision box you will see a normal and slow
will continue a very short distance after the
radio button. Change this choice and you will change the
collision
speed of the balls.
2) London will be pushed forward and Glen
will stop quite abruptly.
3) London will be pushed further when Glen Investigate how mass and speed combine to influence the
(sled) is heavier. result of the impact of the two balls. (the faster and heavier ball
will always push the lighter and slower ball backwards because it has
Energy Transfer During Collison
more kinetic energy)
Application/ Transfer of Knowledge
A collision is when two objects hit each other and during a
collision, the distribution and form of energy can change.
Retrieved from:
Retrieved from: https://www.shutterstock.com/image-photo/car-crash-
https://science.howstuffworks.com/innovation/invent
accident-on-road-city-573342697
ions/newtons-cradle.htm
Where does the energy go that each vehicle had as they
This apparatus is called Newton’s Cradle (some schools
moved towards each other just before the collision?
have access to one of these or it can be seen in
operation online: (the energy is used up to 1) collapse the bumper & metal in
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0LnbyjOyEQ8 the front of the vehicle, 2) push the lighter or slower vehicle
(0:52 mins) backwards or 3) create heat energy caused by the friction of
bumpers colliding.
45
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
As the one left ball swings downward, the energy is Reviewing the Concepts in a Video
transferred through collisions of each of the balls so Click on the link below to watch a short video on transfer of
the far-right ball is sent in an outward motion. This
energy in collisions.
continues back and forth for some time. Ask students
why it doesn’t continue indefinitely?
(The energy loss through collision is real and eventually it depletes
to zero.)
The Energy Necessary for a Longer Cricket Ball
Distance
Retrieved from: https://www.youtube.cRevom/watch?v=c-
St70_J8Xg (5:21 mins)
46
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Retrieved from:
https://espncricinfo.com/ci/content/stats/index.html
The graph above shows the runs scored by a cricketer
in a game and the distribution of runs scored.
1. How many fours were scored in the match?
(14)
2. How many sixes were scored? (9)
3. In which instance does the cricketer apply
more energy to the bat to hit a six or a four?
Give
reasons for your answer. (More energy is applied
for a six since the ball moves a greater distance).
Why might there be fewer 4’s? (fewer cricketers have the
strength to exert enough energy for a longer distance hit)
Additional Resources and Materials
Converting Energy to Motion worksheet: https://www.k12reader.com/worksheet/converting-energy-to-motion/view/
Design of a Bumper for a Car: https://www.sciencebuddies.org/blog/teach-types-of-energy
Energy transfer: https://www.generationgenius.com/energy-transfer-and-collisions-lesson-for-kids/
Simulation Collisions for Advanced Students: https://www.physicsclassroom.com/Physics-Interactives/Momentum-and-Collisions/Collision-Carts/Collision-
Carts-Interactive
Bumper car STEM Challenge: https://www.science-sparks.com/bumper-car-stem-challenge/
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Collisions: https://www.slps.org/cms/lib/MO01001157/Centricity/Domain/13280/untitled.pdf
Collisions & Energy: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cxkeoq1ie38 (4:15 mins)
Forces & Motion (Collision) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cxkeoq1ie38 (2:03 mins)
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics - calculating mass of various objects and speed
47
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Arts and Craft - create a model to demonstrate how collision happens
Composition - write a short poem on collision
Health and Family Life: safety measure to be taken to avoid collisions
Students can create devices or gadgets to demonstrate collision and its effects. Visit by a safety officer or police officer to give a talk on road safety and
avoiding collisions.
See: Bumper car STEM Challenge: https://www.science-sparks.com/bumper-car-stem-challenge/
SVG: Local sports where objects or persons may collide like football, rugby, tennis, marbles, etc.
48
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 4: Apply scientific ideas to design, test, and refine a device that converts energy from one form to another.
[Clarification Statement: Examples of devices could include electric circuits that convert electrical energy into motion energy of a vehicle, light, or sound; and a
passive solar heater that converts light into heat. Examples of constraints could include the materials, cost, or time to design the device.] [Assessment Boundary:
Devices should be limited to those that convert motion energy to electric energy or use stored energy to cause motion or produce light or sound.]
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: 1. Reading and Comprehension Passage on
Solar Energy. Questions After Reading
Knowledge
● Define the terms:
o Renewable energy
o Fossil fuels
o Solar power/energy
o motion energy
● Compare the advantages and
disadvantages of using solar
energy as a major energy source
of power
● Explain how solar power is
used in the community and
industry
● Distinguish between renewable
and non-renewable energy
● Identify and explain ways in
Retrieved from:
https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Fan_in_the_summer.jpg
which technology (related to
energy use) has enhanced the
Look at the picture above. Have you used a handheld fan? (yes
lives of people past and present.
/no)
(ST 2 PS EN 7)
● List examples of fuels used in
How is the fan able to cool you down? (The air is circulated).
their country in the home,
transportation and production
What powers the fan? (Battery)
of materials. (ST 3 PS EN 4)
49
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Describe ways in which solar What is the energy transformation in a fan? (electrical →
energy is used in the home. (e.g. kinetic energy)
heat, electricity & air
conditioning) (ST 3 PS EN 6) Let us discuss solar power and its uses.
Skills Solar Power and Its Uses
● Observe solar-powered devices
at work Students will be given a KWL chart where they will fill the K
● Infer that black objects harness column indicating what they know about solar energy and the
the heat from the sun better W column indicating what they wonder about solar energy and
than a similar object in another would like to learn.
colour.
● Measure temperature using a Guiding questions to fill KW columns:
thermometer ● What is solar energy? (Energy from the sun capable of
● Construct solar-powered producing heat and electricity)
devices using everyday materials ● How is solar energy used in everyday living? ( To
generate electricity, used in chemical reactions.)
● Graph experimental data to
identify trends
● Infer that the position of the
sun changes at different times
during the day. (ST 2 ESS SS 3)
● Investigate the effects of heat
on matter and light on
materials. (ST 4 PS EN 2)
● Use problem-solving,
technological processes, and
resources to find solutions to
human wants and needs. (ST 5 Retrieved from:
TE TM 1) https://www.discountschoolsupply.com/stem-
● Design and construct objects to curriculum/stem/science/really-good-stuff-jumbo-magnetic-
satisfy human needs and to dry-erase--kwl--know-want-learn-chart/p/s812033
make life easier. (ST 5 TE TM
2)
50
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Attitudes/Values Students will be engaged in a brainstorming session where they
will share what they know about solar energy.
● Appreciate the many ways solar
energy is utilized in the home, The teacher will play the following video that introduces the
environment, and industry concept of solar energy and how it has been harnessed around
● Show persistence in creating the world in ancient times and in recent times.
and testing solar-powered
devices
● Demonstrate inventiveness in
designing and creating solar-
powered devices
● Work collaboratively to design
and test scientific ideas.
● Stewardship/Respect for Living
Things
● Safely handle hot substances
and devices that produce heat Retrieved from
● When conducting practical and https://youtu.be/cie87hYf1uo?si=LT64gwNC_xI89-Qh
group work, display sensitivity (3:28)
and offer Students will be asked based on the video:
● assistance to peers who may
have physical or learning What is Solar Energy? (Energy that comes from the sun)
challenges.
● Participate actively in classroom Why is solar energy considered to be renewable energy?
Answers to questions.
discussions. (It cannot be used up. It can be drawn upon over and over again)
● 1)B
● Natural resources are not likely
● 2)B
to last forever so judicious use
● 3)A
and looking for renewable
● 4)C
sources like solar alternatives is
● 5)C
advisable. (ST 2 STSE 3)
● 6)D
Passage retrieved from:
https://www.softschools.com/language_arts/reading
How did ancient dwellers use the sun’s energy to heat
_comprehension/science/111/solar_power/
their homes (They built their homes in such a way so that the position
51
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. Reading and Comprehension Passage of the sun fell directly into an opening of the cave/house near the top
providing heat and light, especially in cold winter months). The position
What is Energy and Where Does It Come From? of the sun changes at different times so the design must take
advantage of that so there is heat and light.
Passage including answers to questions.
What are some of the ways that solar energy is used?
https://www.essa-tlemcen.dz/wp- (Heat or cool homes and buildings, to generate electricity, power small
content/uploads/2018/02/What-is-Energy-and- devices)
Where...-Comprehension-
Passages%E2%80%9D.pdf
3. Advantages and Disadvantages of Solar
Energy.
Students will complete a table showing the
advantages and disadvantages of solar energy.
Read each statement carefully. Complete the table by
placing each statement under the correct heading. What is used to harness the energy from the sun so that it
can be converted to other forms of energy?
Statements (Panels filled with light-sensitive elements that are positioned to capture
1. Solar energy can help reduce your electricity sunlight.)
bill. (advantage)
These panels are used to make photovoltaic cells that can
2. Solar equipment is expensive. (disadvantage) generate electricity.
3. Solar panels require lots of space.
(disadvantage)
4. The production of solar energy produces no
pollution. (advantage)
5. Solar power cannot be harnessed during a
storm or at night. (disadvantage)
52
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Advantages of Solar Disadvantages of Solar
Power Power
4. Make a Better Solar Cooker Project
Solar Energy is used in so many ways right in our home and
In small groups students will be challenged to community. Let us examine some other uses by observing and
construct the following solar cooker, record the discussing these pictures:
temperatures, and brainstorm and design a better
cooker that can achieve greater temperatures. This Here are some other uses of solar energy.
activity will require more than one lesson.
As heat for making hot water, heating buildings, and cooking.
Let’s make a solar cooker To generate electricity with solar cells or heat engines.
You will need: an old tire, a sheet of glass, a dish of To take the salt away from sea water.
water, a thermometer To use sun rays for drying clothes and towels.
It is used by plants for the process of photosynthesis.
Lay the tire on the ground in a sunny spot. To charge batteries
Stand the dish of water inside the tire.
Place the thermometer in the water.
Cover the tire with glass. Teacher will have a discussion with students about solar panels
and their usefulness in the far north as compared to equatorial
Record the temperature of the water every 15 locations.
minutes in the table below.
Note: heat energy from the sun passes through the Why are solar panels not as useful to use in the far north
glass and heats the air, water and the ground inside. for energy compared to equatorial locations?
The glass helps to trap the heat inside.
The tilt of the earth on its axis means the north and south
poles get indirect sunlight at some of the year
53
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
while the equatorial regions are exposed to direct sunlight all
year round.
The indirect sunlight places the sun's energy over a greater
area and therefore individual locations get less sun energy.
Now draw a simple line graph of temperature on the
Y axis (the dependent variable) and time on the
X axis (the independent variable) for the data in the
table.
Rubric to Assess Improved Solar Cooker
Adapted from:
:https://ccasciencelab.weebly.com/uploads/3/7/8/0
/37805103/solar_cooker_rubric_and_web_quest.pdf
https://youtu.be/2O0JaROLuUY?si=PMrlM-pII6o7U8O0
(Stop at 2:52 - use in photovoltaic cells and in small devices)
54
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5. Copy and complete these sentences using the
key words.
electricity heat light solar energy
Energy from the sun is called _____ _____. This
energy arrives at the earth as heat and ________.
Solar panels trap solar energy as ______ and solar
cells convert solar energy into _______. How does the calculator and wristwatch work?
(Solar cells power calculators, wrist watches, and other small solar-
Energy from the sun is called solar energy. Thus,
powered devices.)
energy arrives at the earth as heat and light. Solar
panels trap solar energy as heat and solar cells
convert solar energy into electricity.
6 Answer in complete sentences.
Describe three (3) ways in which we use solar energy
every day.
7. Creative Writing/ Student’s Choice
Each student selects one of the following tasks to
complete. The completed products can be displayed Solar Cells are an important power source for spaceships and
in a class exhibition. man-made satellites.
a. Students can create a poster describing at
least three benefits of solar energy.
b. Students can create a short comic strip
explaining the benefits of solar energy.
c. Students compost a song or poem on the
benefits of solar energy.
55
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://byjus.com/question-answer/which-
of-the-following-scenario-is-the-best-for-drying-our-clothes-
the-quickest-given/
Why were the clothes placed outside on the line? (To dry) How
do they dry? (The sun's rays are used for drying clothes and towels. The
water gains heat energy and evaporates into the atmosphere.)
Retrieved from
https://www.bhg.com/gardening/houseplants/care/watering-
houseplants/
What is that plastic container used for? (To water the plants)
Why were the plants placed near the window? (To get sunlight)
What is sunlight needed by the plants? (To make their food)
Plants utilize solar energy in the process of photosynthesis.
56
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Photosynthesis
Solar energy powers the food chains, providing food for all
living things. Plants use sunlight to make food for energy and
when animals consume plants, they gain some of that energy.
Retrieved from https://www.walmart.com/ip/Solar-Charger-
30000mAh-Portable-Power-Bank-For-Cell-Phone-Camping-
External-Backup-Battery-Pack-With-Flashlight-IP65-Outdoor-
Activity/
57
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
What devices is the cell phone connected to? (Charger)
What is powering the charger? (Solar power) How can you
tell? (I can see the solar panel/cell)
Solar energy can be used to charge batteries in different
devices.
Retrieved from
https://patricklepetit.jalbum.net/_AGRICULTURE/PHOT
OS/SALT%20FARMS/indexb.html
This is a sea salt farm. Sea water is first pumped into the fields.
Once the water has evaporated, layers of salt remain to be
collected by the farmers.
What energy do you think is used for evaporation? (Solar
energy is used to take the salt away from seawater.)
58
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Advantages and Disadvantages of Solar Energy
The students will be given a passage to read on Solar Energy.
The passage reviews the uses and also points out some of the
advantages and disadvantages of using Solar Energy. Students
will read together.
Passage:
https://www.softschools.com/language_arts/reading_compre
hension/science/111/solar_power/
59
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The students will be engaged in a classroom discussion aimed
at identifying some of the advantages and disadvantages of
Solar Energy, drawing on some ideas from the passage.
What are some of the advantages of using solar power?
(Good source of light and heat, can generate electricity, environmentally
friendly - reduction in carbon emissions)
Solar energy is called a renewable resource because unlike oil it
doesn’t disappear after we use it. Why would we choose
renewable forms of energy? (The amount of oil and gas we can access
is limited and we will become reliant on other countries for this type of fuel.
This could get very expensive
Those forms of fuel like coal, gas, and oil are commonly referred
to as Fossil Fuels and are non-renewable. Solar energy is readily
available and can be used when needed without running out.
What fuels do you use at home? (charcoal, propane gas, etc.) Why
60
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
are these non-renewable? (They have limited supply because they are
obtained from fossil fuels)
Solar power costs money to set up but panels last a long time;
Do you think over the long-term solar power can be cost-
effective? (Over the long term it saves energy/power costs, so your
electricity bill would be much lower)
Let us discuss.
Having solar power depends on the amount of sunlight that a
country gets. Do you think the Caribbean countries get
enough sun to justify solar power?
Retrieved from: https://www.constellation.com/energy-
101/energy-innovation/solar-energy-pros-and-cons.html
61
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Students will fill the L column of their KWL chart, stating
what they learnt about solar energy: its uses, advantages, and
disadvantages.
Solar Oven Project
Students will be required to collaborate with their classmates
to build an oven. The purpose of this project is for students to
understand that the sun is a source of energy.
Materials
marker/pencil
ruler
box cutter/scissors
tape
black construction paper
pizza box
thermometer
foil paper
saran wrap
oven mitt
dish/plate
the object that will be used for heating up (marshmallow,
chocolate)
Steps:
1. Start with a clean pizza box
2. use a maker/pencil and a ruler, draw a square one inch in
from the edges on top of the pizza box
3. Using the scissors/box cutter, cut out there of the four lines
to make a flap
62
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4. cover the inside of the clap with aluminum foil and
tape it down securely
5. Line the inside edges of the bottom of the pizza box with
aluminum foil strips
6. Line the bottom of the bottom of the pizza box with the
black paper
7. Cover the opening with the saran wrap and securely tape
one piece of it to the top of the bole and one-piece
underneath. Ensure its an airtight window.
8. Place the aluminum pan/plate covered with foil inside your
solar oven then your item on the plate.
63
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Students can use their oven to make predictions:
How long will the food item take to melt?
How hot was the sun?
What time of day was the hottest?
retrieved from https://jenniferfindley.com/solar-oven-
project/?epik=dj0yJnU9M1RRSmQzMXBhYTJoc242dThOU
mI2X0prRGFRX0E2LUEmcD0wJm49QUtFbW9xRzZqdTQ
0enRRUFpYUjZvdyZ0PUFBQUFBR1dwTjU4
Students can test their oven by:
1) measuring the temperature of a cup of water every 15
minutes for 2 hours using a timer and a thermometer
Students can
draw a simple line graph of temperature on the Y axis
(the dependent variable) and time on the X axis (the
independent variable) for the data in the table.
2) the length of time it takes to melt a tablespoon of
butter/ bar of chocolate/wax. Repeat each substance
three times and take the average time.
64
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Students can also sketch their completed oven. label the
materials used and the purpose for each.
Students can also share the difference observed with their
solar oven compared to the oven used at home.
Making a Solar Water Heater
You will need: five metres of rubber hose pipe (black works
best) two corks, cold water, and a funnel.
1. Cork one end of the hosepipe using the funnel to fill
the pipe with cold water. Then cork the open end.
2. Measure the temperature of the cold water that you
added by putting some water in a cup and using a
thermometer.
3. Wind the pipe in a spiral on the ground in a sunny
place. Leave the pipe for one hour.
4. Uncork the pipe and feel the water with your hands.
Is it hot or cold?
Pour some of the water into a cup and measure the
temperature. How does it compare to the water you put into
the black hose?
Note: Heat energy from the sun warms the hose and the water
inside.
65
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Some people use such black pipes or (black barrels on the
roof) to preheat water for use in their homes.
Retrieved from https://housing.com/news/overhead-water-
tank-location-and-position-as-per-vastu/
Is black the best color for our hoses for heating water?
Students will conduct an experiment.
What you need: four clear colourless plastic bottles the same
size, white paint, black paint, aluminium foil, water,
thermometer, measuring cup
● Plastic bottle 1 - paint white
● Plastic bottle 2 - paint black
● Plastic bottle 3 - cover in foil
● Plastic bottle 4 - keep clear and colourless
Measure 4 cups of water and place in a large bowl. After 5
minutes measure the temperature of the water. Using the
water from the bowl measure 1/2 cup of water or an
appropriate volume and place it in each plastic bottle. Place
the bottles outside in the sun for two hours. Measure the
66
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
temperature of the water in each bottle. Students record their
measurements in a table. (Black should be the hottest.)
Without light, there is no color. When people see colors, they
are really seeing different types of light bouncing off objects.
Light is made up of wavelengths of light, and each wavelength
is a particular colour. Objects appear to be different colours
because they absorb some colours (wavelengths) and reflect or
transmit other colours. The colours we see are the wavelengths
that are reflected or transmitted.
White objects appear white because they reflect all colours.
Black objects absorb all colours so no light is reflected. Thus all
the sun’s heat was kept to keep the water the hottest in the
plastic bottles.
67
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
(Additional material and resources that are not included in the Inclusive Learning and/or Inclusive Assessment Strategies that may be useful for lesson planning)
What is Energy and Where Does It Come From?
https://www.essa-tlemcen.dz/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/What-is-Energy-and-Where...-Comprehension-Passages%E2%80%9D.pdf
Lessons on Solar Energy
https://www3.uwsp.edu/cnr-ap/KEEP/Documents/Solar%20Lessons%20One%20Pager.pdf
Solar Oven Project
https://ccasciencelab.weebly.com/uploads/3/7/8/0/37805103/solar_cooker_rubric_and_web_quest.pdf
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher such as reading material at a lower or
higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
Solar Energy
https://education.nationalgeographic.org/resource/solar-energy/
The Advantages and Disadvantages of Solar Energy
https://www.constellation.com/energy-101/energy-innovation/solar-energy-pros-and-cons.html
Video on the design process:
https://www.sciencebuddies.org/science-fair-projects/engineering-design-process/engineering-design-process-steps
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the curriculum)
Language Arts - Reading passages and answering questions based on renewable energy and solar energy.
Expository writing - Writing steps involved in constructing a device, for example a solar cooker.
Art and Craft - making a collage with pictures and statements showing the advantages and disadvantages of solar energy
Social Studies - uses of solar energy long ago and present. (research and devise a timeline)
Health and Family Life - Precautionary measures to be taken for example when using thermal energy. (appliances that use heat energy / thermal energy)
Research on modern devices/ gadgets that use solar energy.
Mathematics: plotting graphs of experimental data; calculating energy used in kilowatt per year at home
Students can build a solar oven as a class or in groups.
SVG: flambeau is a local element that converts chemical energy->light and heat energy, however there are safety concerns regarding construction and use,
homemade solar water heaters, incubators, wind turbine, windmills, etc.
68
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Students can build a solar oven as a class or in groups.
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
1. Questions for research by students:
● Where do plants get their energy? (sun, water and soil)
● Where do humans get their energy? (food converted to motion)
● Where do cars get their energy? (burning fossil fuel)
● Where did grinding mills get their energy many years ago? (water wheels powered by flowing water in rivers)
2. Research on the various ways solar energy was used long ago versus now.
3. Research on the various devices that use solar energy. (The pros and cons of these devices).
4. If a family uses 5000 kilowatt hours of energy per year, how much savings will they have using the comparative rates shown below?
Have students fill in the table and find the differences.
69
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Students can also research and suggest ways they can conserve electrical energy at home.
70
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 5: Obtain and combine information to describe that energy and fuels are derived from natural resources and
that their uses affect the environment
[Clarification Statement: Examples of renewable energy resources could include wind energy, water behind dams, and sunlight; non-renewable energy resources are
fossil fuels and fissile materials. Examples of environmental effects could include loss of habitat due to dams, loss of habitat due to surface mining, and air
pollution from burning of fossil fuels.]
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: 1. Define the terms by using them in a Introducing Natural Resources
complete sentence.
Knowledge Students, do we use things from nature? (Yes) Let us go outside and find
a. natural resource
● Define the terms: some of those things that we use from nature. Ask students to record
b. renewable resources
the resources they identify.
○ natural resources
c. non-renewable resources
○ renewable resources
d. fossil fuels Note to teacher: For
○ non-renewable
e. fissile materials example: Wind, water, trees, soil, plants, animals, rocks, sunlight.
resources
2. Name four (4) devices in the home that
○ fossil fuels make it easier for us to dry/heat things. When students return to the classroom, generate a list of ONLY natural
○ solar power Complete the table below with the name of resources. Where needed, explain to students why some of the things
○ hydropower each device, what each device is used for and they listed are not natural resources. Students, all the things that we
○ geothermal power
the type of energy source it uses. have identified are called natural resources. Hold a discussion on the
natural resources that they have identified and how these are used.
○ tidal power
○ biomass
Activity
○ wind power
○ energy consumption Look around the classroom and list as many items as you can that are
○ greenhouse effect made from natural resources.
○ sustainability
Let’s watch the short video below to learn some more about natural
○ global warming
resources:
● List examples of both
renewable and non- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=axCR3uIn3Vs (0-0:28 mins)
renewable energy resources.
● List 3 benefits of using fuels
71
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● List 3 consequences to the 3. Complete the following table to show one
environment of using fuels. advantage and one disadvantage of each
renewable source of energy listed.
● What the sources of
different fuels are.
● State the benefits of fossil
fuels
● Recommend solutions for
reducing the use of fossil
fuels.
● Summarize the
As you watch the video be prepared to answer questions about the
following:
environmental impact of
1. What is a natural resource? (A natural resource is a part of the
obtaining and using fossil
earth that people use.)
fuels.
2. What are some examples of natural resources? (Ans: sunlight,
● Explain the difference wind, water, plants and animals and fossil fuels like, coal, crude oil and
between renewable and non- natural gas)
renewable sources of energy. 3. What are the new natural resources that you didn’t know
● Identify multiple sources of 4. Complete the following table to show one before? (coal, crude oil and natural gas)
advantage and one disadvantage of each of
renewable and non-
As we would have learnt, natural resources provide us with many
the non-renewable source of energy listed
renewable energy.
different things. Natural resources provide the raw materials necessary
● Explain how each resource for various human activities. including the production of energy.
is used to generate energy.
● Compare renewable and Renewable resources and non-renewable resources
non-renewable energy
You would have also learnt from the video that natural resources can
resources.
be divided into two main groups: renewable resources and non-
● Briefly explain the process
renewable resources. Let us continue watching the short video
of obtaining energy from the to find out the differences between renewable and non-renewable
different renewable sources resources.
of energy (wind,
hydroelectricity/water from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=axCR3uIn3Vs (0:28 - 1:16 mins)
72
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
behind dams, geothermal See overview of response types here:
and sunlight). https://www.energysage.com/about-clean-
energy/advantages-and-disadvantages-of-
● Describe ways in which
renewable-energy/
solar energy is used in the
home (heat, electricity, air
conditioning)
● Discuss how the use of
As you watch the video, listen for the following:
renewable sources of energy
1. Differences between renewable and non-renewable resources.
may affect the environment.
● List examples of fuels used
2. Examples of renewable resources and two examples of non-
in their country, in the renewable resources.
home, transportation and
production of materials. From the video we see that natural resources can be divided into two
main groups: renewable and non-renewable. From the video, let us
● Describe, in simple terms, Retrieved from:
now write a definition for these terms.
how these fossil fuels are https://pixabay.com/photos/fuel-gas-station-
extracted and prepared. refueling-gas-6999637/
Renewable resources are replaced or replenished by nature when they
● Identify and discuss some are used so they won't run out. They can be used now and by future
of the unintended 5. The above photo shows a vehicle being filled generations too. Sunlight, wind and water are examples of renewable
consequences of using fuels with fuel at a station. resources.
for transport and production a. List 2 renewable fuels which are
Non-renewable resources on the other hand are not able to be
of materials for commerce currently being used to power vehicles.
replenished by nature at the rate at which they are being used whenever.
(e.g. pollution). (alcohol, electricity)
Examples of non-renewable resources are crude oil, coal and natural
● Realise, that with all good b. List 2 non-renewable fuels that are
gas.
intentions, technology may currently used to power vehicles. (diesel,
be abused and misused. gasoline) Natural Energy resources
● Develop an understanding
6. Wind energy is a renewable source of energy As mentioned above, natural resources provide us with the energy we
that:
that is used in many countries of the need to cook, run vehicles, factories, light, etc. The natural resources
● Sustainable use of resources
Caribbean. that provide us with energy are called natural energy resources.
would help to minimize
73
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
pollution and destruction of a. Give one reason why wind turbines do
the environment. not generate electricity all the time. Note to Teacher: Discuss the importance of energy in everyday life with
the students. Include a talk about common sources of energy that may
● The impact of Science and (weather patterns may not include breezes))
have been observed on the nature walk that children are familiar with,
Technology may be positive b. Give one advantage of using wind
such as sunlight, wind, and water.
or negative. turbines to generate electricity compared
● Knowledge acquired and with using fossil fuel power stations.
products developed in the (wind source is free) Renewable and Non-renewable Energy Resources
search for solutions to c. Give one disadvantage of using wind
The following table shows examples of renewable and non-renewable
human problems and turbines to generate electricity compared
sources of energy:
challenges affect everyday with using fossil fuel power stations.
life, the society and the (requires space and initial investment)
Non-renewable Renewable resources
environment.
resources
● Compare devices that burn 7. Draw one line from each energy source in
different fuels and the List A to the statement about the energy Crude oil Sunlight
amount of pollution they source in List B Coal Wind
Natural gas Hydro
cause.
Nuclear fuel Geothermal
● Compare the amount of air
Biomass
pollution in two named Tidal/wave
areas.
● Hypothesize as to the Activity on Natural Energy Resources
reasons for the differences
exhibited. Divide the class into two groups: Renewable and Non-renewable
● Explain the importance of
Energy Resources, then divide these groups into subgroups as follows:
“clean: air in their country.
Geothermal: energy inside the earth Team Renewable Energy Resources:
● Recognize that resources
Hydropower: energy from falling water
should be used wisely since Subgroups: Wind Energy, Solar Energy, Hydropower.
Nuclear energy: produces dangerous waste
many of them are non-
renewable. Team Non-renewable Energy Resources:
8. Different energy sources are used to
● Recognize that the impact of
generate electricity.
Subgroups: Coal, Natural gas, Crude oil.
science and technology
74
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
activities may be planned or Use words from the box to match the correct
unplanned. energy source to each of the descriptions given in Instructions: Provide each subgroup with the following materials:
● Summarize the the table.
environmental impact of
A sheet of cardstock paper, toothpicks/matchsticks, glue and assorted
obtaining and using fossil
coloured markers, scissors, a picture of the device/material used to
fuels. harness the energy (wind turbine, solar panels, hydro plant - dam/river)
● Recommend solutions for or the actual material (coal, crude oil, natural gas burning), as shown
reducing use of fossil fuels. below.
● Distinguish fossil fuels from
nuclear and renewable
energy sources.
● Discuss uses of various
Energy from earth’s core: geothermal
fossil fuels.
Rotting plant material: Coal or Biofuel
● Describe the sequence of
Fusion of Uranium: Nuclear
processes by which coal
forms.
Game-based Learning
● Describe the sequence of
The teacher should make up cue cards with the
processes by which oil and
following questions one per card. The teacher
natural gas form.
would mark out a game board (or tiles on the
● List the advantages and
disadvantages of the use of
floor) for start to finish. The object is to play a
cooperative game where the game piece advances
biomass
if the students (one at a time) are able to answer
● Develop an awareness of the
the questions correctly as they select a card from a
use of biomass in the
box. This could be a summative assessment to
Caribbean.
review unit understanding.
● Give examples of biomass
and state their uses.
1. Give two reasons why recycling is
● Explain why the supply of
important to the environment. (less
fossil fuels is limited
75
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Describe the origin of fossil pollution, reuse materials protects natural
fuels. resources)
● Explain the important role 2. Explain how reducing electricity is good
of engineering in gathering for the environment. (energy to make
and finding oil. electricity can be expensive and non-renewable)
● Describe how people use oil 3. State three things we can all do to reduce
in their everyday lives the amount of electricity we use. (Turn off
● List examples of fuels used lights, preheat water in the sun, reduce hot water
in their country in the home,
consumption, dry clothing on a clothesline)
transportation and
4. Explain briefly how coal is obtained from
production of materials (ST
the earth. State two ways that these
3 PS EN 4)
methods can impact the environment.
● Identify and discuss some of
the unintended (underground mines, strip mining/ pollution &
consequences of using fuels destruction of land habitat)
for transport and production 5. Crude oil is normally transported all over
of materials for commerce Links to the sites where photographs were retrieved from:
the world from one place to another. Oil
(e.g. pollution) (ST 3 PS EN
spills have occurred in several different
5) Wind Turbine - https://pixabay.com/photos/windmill-energy-
places. State two ways in which these
● Describe ways in which transition-4865181/
spills have impacted the areas that the
solar energy is used in the
home (heat, electricity, air spills have occurred. (killed animals, Solar panels https://pixabay.com/photos/solar-energy-
conditioning) (ST 3 PS EN destroyed drinking water) photovoltaic-power-872804/
6) 6. What are some of the technologies that
● Compare devices that burn Hydro dam - https://pixabay.com/photos/dam-hydro-power-
have been put in place to reduce the
different fuels from the water-2492809/
impact of fossil fuels on the environment.
amount of pollution they
(emission scrubbers, cleaner burning fuels)
cause. (ST 5 ESS ER 8) Liquid Petroleum Gas (LPG)-
● Compare the amount of air 7. Apart from reducing our use of electricity, https://live.staticflickr.com/8313/8053592864
pollution in two named name two things that we can do to reduce _09eb9959a3_b.jpg
areas. (ST 5 ESS ER 9) our use of fossil fuels. (reduce automobile
Coal - https://pixabay.com/photos/coal-briquette-black-471903/
consumption, reduce transportation & delivery of
items by truck)
76
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Hypothesize as to the 8. Name two materials that we can burn in
reasons for the differences order to get energy from biomass. Natural gas burning -
exhibited. (ST 5 ESS ER 10) https://www.flickr.com/photos/todbaker/9148692
9. Describe two methods for getting energy
● Explain the importance of
from the Sun.
“clean: air in their country. Drums of crude oil-
10. List three uses of the Sun’s energy in the
(ST 5 ESS ER 11) https://pngimg.com/uploads/oil/oil_PNG13.png
home.
Skills 11. Why are renewable resources considered Coal pit – Reni King, St. Vincent and the Grenadines
● Observe the use of sustainable?
On the cardstock sheet provided, have students create a poster/model
renewable and non- 12. Explain how one of the following
showing the natural energy resource they have been assigned.
renewable energy sources in renewable sources can be depleted if it is
(Research/Teacher provides).
a given environment.
not used carefully.
● Observe the impact of
a. Water Their poster/model should also include a few sentences about the
energy-related activities on
b. Trees device or the energy resource.
ecosystems.
● Infer the consequences of
c. Soil
Example of a poster
continued reliance on non-
renewable energy sources. Answer the following questions on the
● Infer the potential benefits Greenhouse effect.
of transitioning to renewable
energy.
1. What is the major cause of the
● Classify different types of
greenhouse effect? (gases like carbon dioxide
resources as renewable and
trap the heat of the sun close to the earth)
non-renewable energy
resources.
2. What are greenhouse gases? (CO
2
, CH
4
,
● Classify environmental N 2 O)
effects based on the type of 3. Which form of energy is absorbed by the
energy resource and its atmosphere and mainly causes this Have each group present their work to the class, then display the work
extraction method. increased temperature? (solar energy) on the classroom wall. Ensure that all of the students are able to
● Measure different materials identify the forms of energy, or the devices displayed.
4. Where do greenhouse gases come from?
when making models of
(motor vehicles & burning fuels to heat homes &
devices used in the
cook),
production of energy.
77
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Formulate hypotheses about 5. What impact are greenhouse gases having Let students state:
the long-term impact of on the climate? (higher mean temperatures &
specific energy-related melting of glaciers- rising sea levels) 1. Which ones they had not seen or used before.
practices. 2. Which ones are renewable energy resources, and which one
6. Why don't we use wood as our main
● Develop hypotheses were non-renewable energy resources
energy resource anymore? (supply of wood
regarding the potential
isl ow)
advancements in renewable Renewable energy sources
energy technologies. 7. How is the greenhouse effect helpful for Let us now have a closer look at the energy sources grouped as
● Communicate the life on Earth? (provides environment for plant renewable energy, to see how they are formed, extracted and prepared
environmental implications growth) for use.
of energy choices effectively. 8. Name two human activities that
● Collaboratively present contribute to greenhouse gas emissions? Fossil fuels
findings on the benefits of Coal, crude oil and natural gas are a group of fuels called fossil fuels.
(vehicles which rely on oil production industry)
renewable energy. A fuel is any substance/material that when burnt, produces energy.
● Construct models to
Fossil fuels were literally formed from the fossils or the remains of
illustrate energy conversion
Assessment on the Greenhouse Effect
plants and animals that lived millions of years ago. It is important that
processes in renewable and
students have an appreciation for the fact that these fuels were formed
non-renewable systems.
The following resource was retrieved from:
a long time ago and they take a very long time to be formed.
● Construct arguments for
https://www.educationnaturepark.org.uk/resourc
sustainable energy practices.
e/greenhouse-effect-simulation
● Investigate information
regarding emerging
Link:
technologies in renewable
https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/greenhouse
energy.
-effect/latest/greenhouse-effect_all.html
● Investigate the historical and
current trends in energy
consumption.
● Compile/analyse data
obtained from experiments
and from different sources
● Interpret the significance of
policy decisions on energy
and the environment.
78
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Interpret data to assess the
effectiveness of renewable
energy initiatives.
● Plan and execute
appropriate research using
technological methodology,
to solve environmental
challenges. (ST 4 TE TM 1)
Attitudes/Values
● Develop an appreciation for
the interconnectedness of
energy choices and
environmental impact.
● Appreciate the importance
of energy in our everyday
lives.
● Develop an awareness of the
importance of conserving
and using energy efficiently.
● Be persistent in conducting
experiments to demonstrate
the effects of non-renewable
What do you mean by refining petroleum?
sources of energy.
Name four products formed by this refining.
● Foster a habit of inquiry into
Explain the uses of each.
the environmental
consequences of energy- 2. Suppose that electricity to your area was cut off
related decisions. for two weeks. Give one suggestion on how
you would do the following things.
79
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Respect evidence obtained a. How would you light your house? (battery
through experimenting and torch) After students have studied the information on the posters and watched
b. How would you cook? (gas stove or wood fire) the videos, lead students on a discussion centred around the following
from different sources.
c. How would you keep cool? (wet cloth) concepts:
● Demonstrate their
d. How would you play your devices? (battery
inventiveness in the models powered) 1. How fossil fuels are formed and the time it takes for them to
they will develop be formed.
● Work collaboratively with 3. Below is a table showing the different sectors 2. Reasons why fossil fuels have been placed in the category of
group members and other that use both renewable and non-renewable non-renewable energy.
sources of energy. Complete the table to show 3. If it is possible to use all of the fossil fuel that has been
members of the class to
the different energy sources used by each mined/drilled from the Earth or we are aware of.
produce the models, create
sector and what the 4. What might be the consequences of No. 3 happening.
posters, make presentations,
etc.
Sector Energy What the
source used energy source
● Develop a sense of Extracting fossil fuels and preparing them for use
by the is used for
stewardship towards the sector
Now you know how fossil fuels are formed and where they are found.
environment and respect for
Residential Let us now look at how they are extracted from the Earth and how they
living organisms affected by
sector (fossil fuel) (electricity for are prepared before they are used to provide energy.
energy choices.
lighting and
● Participate in a class appliances) Natural gas:
discussion of their ideas and
opinions related to energy Let us look at the following video to find out how natural gas is formed,
Commercial (fossil fuel) (electricity for
extracted and processed before use.
conserving efforts that could
businesses lighting and
directly impact their school appliances)
Natural gas https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-njmj0diWu8
experiences
(3:38 mins)
Industrial (fossil fuels) (conveyers,
● When conducting practical
sector boilers, lighting,
and group work, display heating systems) Once natural gas is found, it is transported to the surface by a well.
sensitivity and offer Natural gas can be pumped out through the same wells used for
Transportation (fossil fuels) (power motors) extracting crude oil. After it is brought to the surface, it then flows into
assistance to peers who may
sector large pipelines. At a gas processing plant, certain gases found along
have physical or learning
with the methane gas are separated from the methane and cleaned.
challenges.
80
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Analyze data from a graph Why do you think it is important to remove the unwanted substances
to determine the types of A large portion of the natural energy resources man from the coal before it is used?
uses goes towards producing electrical energy.
energy currently used in the
Electrical energy Coal:
Caribbean
Coal buried below the surface of the Earth, can be extracted by
● Participate in a class
may be sourced through a variety of resources both underground or surface mining.
discussion of key terms renewable and non-renewable.
related to energy including
fossil fuels, renewable and Look at the picture below and state where each of
the electricity sources below gets their energy:
non-renewable resources,
greenhouse gasses, and
Retrieved from:
global warming
● Participate in a simulation
activity and conduct
research and create a project
that will be used to teach https://pixabay.com/photos/industry-dumper-minerals-coal-
others about 2023592/
alternative/renewable
https://pixabay.com/photos/coal-briquette-black-471904/
energy sources
The mined coal is taken to a plant, where it is cleaned and processed, to
● Realise, that with all good
remove unwanted substances such as dirt, Sulphur, ash, etc. The coal is
intentions, technology may
then broken into smaller usable lumps for use in domestic settings.
be abused and misused. (ST
3 TE UT 2)
Why do you think it is important to remove the unwanted substances
● Sustainable use of resources
from the coal before it is used?
would help to minimize
Retrieved from:
pollution and destruction of
https://www.123rf.com/photo_68605792_stock- Crude oil: How do
the environment. (ST 3
vector-alternative-energy-sources-set-wind- we get oil from the ground
STSE 1)
geothermal-power-bio-energy-solar-energy- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vjcfxqMt5D (1:24 mins)
● Impact of science and
hydropower-
technology may be positive
illustration.html?vti=mmgyzlkjwm0ltd9mv4-1-2
or negative. (ST 3 STSE 2)
81
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Knowledge acquired and Where Do We Get Oil From?
products developed in the Questions: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xZ1HIBIIJU0
search for solutions to (1:31 mins)
human problems and
challenges affect 1 . W h i c h o f the above use renewable sources of Before crude oil can be used it has to be converted into various finished
everyday life, the society and energy and which use non-renewable sources products through a process known as refining., which is a series of
the environment. (ST 4 of energy? processes that transform it into useful products like gasoline, diesel and
STSE 1) 2. How does each electricity source affect the jet fuel. Crude oil distillation is the first process in the refining journey.
● Recognize that resources environment? (include discussion on Crude oil is also used for the manufacturing of plastics.
should be used wisely since greenhouse gases and air pollution) The following simulation helps to explain the processes that take place
many of them are non- 3. What do you understand about global at a refinery.
renewable. (ST 5 TE UT 2) warming? Animation
● Recognize that the impact of 4. What do you think will happen if there are showing the process of refining crude oil through fractional
science and technology no greenhouse gases? distillation https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=COm8ute0VJs
activities may be planned or (0:34 mins)
unplanned. (ST 5 TE UT 4) Research and Writing
A new technology known as “fracking” has become So, what are the different fossil fuels used for?
a popular technique for extracting oil or natural gas
from the ground. Coal: Coal is a
solid fossil fuel that is used for heating homes, cooking and generating
Students should be asked to do internet research power plants
and create a one-page response paper that includes
a description of the fracking technology and the Natural gas
possible detrimental effects to the environment. Natural gas is widely used for cooking and for heating homes.
They should include a picture in their description.
Rubric: Crude oil Many
Definition of fracking (5 marks) substances are obtained from the refining of crude oil. Refined
Diagram of technology (5 marks) products obtained from crude oil have several uses. While some are
Impacts of the technology (5 marks) used as fuels, some are used for other purposes. Uses of some of the
more well-known fuels are shown in the table below.
Teacher reference:
https://education.nationalgeographic.org/resourc
e/how-hydraulic-fracturing-works/
82
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
SUBSTANCE USES
Butane and For cooking, heating and
propane transportation
Gasoline Fuel for cars
Diesel Fuel for cars and heavier vehicles
such as lorries and buses.
Kerosene To power aircrafts
Fuel oil Fuel for ships and power stations
Activities
1. As a whole class, generate a list of machines that have an engine
to ‘burn’ fossil fuels to generate power, the fuel each uses and one
function of the equipment. Encourage kids to think of things that
they use. Examples: lawn mower, quad, dirt bikes, etc.
Homework:
Ask students to identify 5 different fuel-burning sources at home.
From what we have covered so far, you would have seen that, to extract
fossil fuels, we have to bore into the Earth’s crust, in some cases
hundreds of metres. These fossil fuels then must be processed and
transported over very long distances.
83
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Impact of fossil fuels on the environment
Although fossil fuels have made life easier, finding, extracting, refining,
transporting and using fossil fuels, all have negative effects on the
environment.
Let us continue watching the video to find out how fossil fuels impact
the environment:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=axCR3uIn3Vs
(1:45 - 400 min)
As you watch the video, pay attention to the different ways that coal,
oil and gas impact the environment, keeping the following questions in
mind.
Questions:
1. What are two ways that the mining of coal or the drilling of oil or
natural gas may impact the land? (Landscape changes and habitat loss.
Destruction of living things. Chemical use for extraction and effluent pollutes
the air and land.)
2. What impact does fossil fuels have on our water bodies? (Pollution
of waterways from oil spills. Rising water levels due to global warming.)
3. Air pollution is one of the ways that fossil fuels impact the
environment and organisms. State two ways how this can
happen. (Burning of fuels gives off gases that pollute the air. The emissions
from power plants can combine with water in the air to make acid rain which
kills plants and potentially destroys farmlands.)
Discuss with the students the differences between surface and
underground mining of coal. Also discuss the effects that mining and
drilling may have on the environment.
84
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1. List two ways we use coal today.
2. Why do you think coal is still being used today, even though it
causes many environmental problems?
Cookie mining activity
Below is an investigation using chocolate chip cookies (similar models
using plasticine or clay, can be used instead) as a model for what
happens to the environment when fossil fuels are extracted.
Today, you will get an opportunity to play the role of a miner in a
simulation exercise, but you will not be mining coal, you will be mining
chocolate chips from a chocolate chip cookie, using a toothpick.
Chocolate chip cookie - Retrieved from: https://pixabay.com/photos/cookie-
chocolate-chip-cookie-snack-1264231/
Before you start the activity, there are a few rules you must follow.
● You must wash your hands before you receive your cookie.
● The chocolate chips are not to be eaten before the end of the
activity.
1. After you receive your cookie, draw your cookie in the top left-
hand box of the table on the worksheet provided.
2. After you have drawn your cookie, you must now draw an
imaginary habitat in the top right-hand box of the table. Your
habitat must contain animals, plants, a water body, etc.
85
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3. Now mine the chocolate chips from your cookie using the
toothpick supplied.
4. After you get to a point where it is not possible to mine anymore
cookies, draw your cookie or the pieces of cookie remaining, in
the bottom left-hand box in your table.
5. Look at the damage done to your cookie, and imagine similar
damage being done to your habitat. How would your habitat be
impacted? What would it look like? What parts of your habitat
would be affected? Now draw a picture in the bottom right-hand
box of your table, to show what your habitat may look like, after
it was damaged from the mining.
After you have finished your drawing, answer the following questions.
1. Was it difficult to mine chocolate chips from the surface or
from deep in the cookie?
2. What could you have done to make mining the chocolate chips
easier? (Wetting the cookies).
3. State two damages that could result from mining coal or
extracting oil.
86
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Highlight that the cookie represents the environment, the chocolate
chips represent fossil fuels.
Air pollution caused by fossil fuels
Activity: Investigating the Amount of Air Pollution caused by
Different Fuels
When fossil fuels are burnt to produce heat or electricity, they release
certain gases into the air that can cause air pollution.
The following activity, comparing the amount of air pollution caused
by two different fuels, should be done by the teacher, as a
demonstration:
Materials: Spirit lamp with kerosene oil, gas stove, two metal lids or
wires, potholder, matches/lighter. white tissue/cloth
Method:
1. Hold the metal lid or wire above the flame spirit lamp flame
for 30s to capture the soot that forms. Caution: The lid will
become very hot please handle with care.
2. Once the lid/wire has cooled, label it A.
3. Have students observe the lid/wire once it has cooled. Wipe
the lid or wire with a white tissue or cloth and make
observations.
4. Repeat the experiment by holding the other lid/wire over the
flame of a stove for 30s. Label the cooled lid/wire B. Wipe
the lid or wire with a white tissue or cloth and make
observations.
5. Compare the amount of soot on each tissue/cloth.
Questions for discussion:
1. How did each tissue appear after being wiped? (There was a
black solid on one of the tissues)
87
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. Which lid/wire made the tissue made the tissue dirtier (The lid
heated with the kerosene oil flame became black(er) than the lid heated
over the stove)
3. What is the black substance? (Soot)
Emission of Greenhouse gases
The emission of greenhouse gases, causing the Earth to heat up, to
temperatures, above which is sustainable, is another impact of the use
of fossil fuels. This is known as the greenhouse effect.
Discuss with students the greenhouse effect, global warming and
climate change.
With additional materials on these topics, ask students to create a
poster, similar to the one shown below.
88
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Students can also be taken to the following sites where they would be
able to manipulate several variables to see the greenhouse effect.
https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/greenhouse-
effect/latest/greenhouse-effect_all.html
An accompanying worksheet can be found in the assessment section.
The transportation of crude oil and natural gases
Another problem with fossil fuels is their transportation, often over
hundreds of kilometres.
Most oil spills are the result of accidents at oil wells or on the pipelines,
ships, trains and trucks that move oil from wells to refineries. Oil spills
contaminate soil and water and may cause devastating explosions and
fires. Oil spills can also damage or kill wildlife and destroy habitats of
many organisms.
Retrieved from:
https://www.flickr.com/photos/19378856@N04/2037098785
One of the most devastating oil spills occurred in 1989 in Prince
William Sound, Alaska. The video below gives more information on this
oil spill.
89
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Another oil spill, which occurred in Trinidad and Tobago, happened,
off the coast of Tobago, in February 2024.
As you watch these videos, pay attention to the effects of the spills on
the environment and organisms living in the areas. Also look to see
what was done to clean up the spills in each case.
Exxon Valdez oil spill harmed wildlife
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CVm1pB3iJOw (2:25 mins)
Oil spill in Trinidad & Tobago
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FRApkdzKheM (1:36 mins)
Cleaning up oil spills
When an oil spill occurs, it is very important that as much of the oil as
possible is removed from the area where the spill occurred. Attention
must also be given to the animals in the area that are affected and to
remove those not affected to safer areas if possible.
There are several methods currently available to clean up oil spills.
These include skimming the oil off the water, using chemicals to help
to break up the oil and burning the oil.
Clean-up simulation exercise
Activity
Imagine that you have an oil spill in a dish of water. Design an
experiment, to clean-up this oil spill using three different methods.
From the videos and from the different activities you have done, you
would have gathered that fossil fuels as energy sources, can have very
devastating effects on the environment.
90
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Problems with fossil fuels
● Fossil fuels are non-renewable
They are dangerous to produce.
● Can cause land/water pollution from oil spills or chemicals
used to extract the fuels.
● Destruction of habitats
● Air pollution and smog formation.
● Emissions of greenhouse gases.
Do you know of any other problems associated with fossil fuels?
Class activity
● Lead a class discussion about the environmental impact made by
each type of fuel and energy-producing device from the video.
Discuss how these impacts can affect the environment, human
beings, plants and other organisms.
● Generate a class list of the types of impacts that the problems
listed could have on the environment, person, animals and plants.
Write students’ responses on the board.
● As a whole class, generate a list of machines that have an engine
to ‘burn’ fossil fuels to generate power. Encourage kids to think
of things that they use. Examples: lawn mower, quad, dirt bikes,
etc.
● Can you think of three types of transport that do not burn fuel to
make them work? For each one given, state where you think the
energy comes from to make it go.
91
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Advantages of fossil fuels
Despite the many problems associated with fossil fuels, they have
remained the major sources of energy used the world over. This is due
to the fact that they have several advantages. A few of them are listed
below.
● The energy produced by fossil fuels is greater than that produced
by other energy resources.
● Many products sold nowadays were developed thanks to fossil
fuels, for example computers.
● Fossil fuels are both cheap and reliable.
● Transport of fossil fuels is very easy as it is usually done through
pipes.
● Fossil fuels are easier to extract and process than the renewable
forms of energy.
Do you know of any other advantages of fossil fuels?
Working in their groups, students could be asked to state how each
advantage is important.
Activity After
students have gone through the advantages and disadvantages in their
groups, listed above and have done and have done the exercises,
organize a class debate on the following topic
“Do the advantages of fossil fuels outweigh the problems
associated with their extraction, processing, transport and use?”
92
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Nuclear energy another form of non-renewable energy
Nuclear energy comes from radioactive elements, mainly uranium,
which is extracted from mined ore and then refined into fuel.
Nuclear Energy
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uvhi4vju1TY
(2:45 mins)
As you watch the video, pay close attention to how nuclear energy is
formed and its effect on the environment.
● Found in the centre of atoms – tiny particles that make up every
object in the universe.
● Energy is released from these atoms by a process called nuclear
fission.
● During ‘nuclear fission’, atoms are broken apart and the energy
stored in their centre is released.
● This energy is used to produce steam. The steam turns huge
turbines, which drive generators that make electricity.
● Nuclear-generated energy releases no carbon dioxide into the
atmosphere.
93
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● The waste that is produced must be stored carefully so that it
does not come into contact with the outside environment, where
it can cause serious damage to all organisms.
Why do you think nuclear energy is not produced in all countries of the
world?
Renewable energy and Sustainable energy
Fossil fuels are not only harmful to the planet but one day the world
will run out of fossil fuels, as we are using them faster than they can be
replenished. So, what can we do to save the planet, reduce our
dependence on fossil fuels and combat global warming? One key
solution is sustainable energy use.
Sustainability refers to the concept that all people can meet their basic
needs infinitely, without compromising future generations. Sustainable
energy meets our demand for energy without any risk of going bad or
running out.
Examples of sustainable energy sources include wind, solar and water
(hydropower). To help us gather more information on sustainable
energy use, let us watch the following video.
In a previous lesson, you learnt that renewable resources are natural
resources that can be replenished at a higher rate than they are
consumed. Therefore, using renewable energy resources forms a
significant part of sustainable energy use. In this section, you will look
closer at these renewable energy resources and the advantages and
disadvantages of producing and using these energy resources. You will
also get a chance to demonstrate your creativity and innovation, as you
create models of different energy resources.
94
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Sustainable Energy for All
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7PrMaAY39sY
( 0:50 mins)
Teacher, introduce each of the renewable energy resources by showing
photographs or videos of each type.
A series of questions related to each type can then be asked.
Sample questions on solar energy are given below. These can be used
as a guide for the other renewable energy resources.
Solar Energy:
● What types of energy do we get from the sun? (light, heat)
● How do we use it in our homes? (dry clothes, light rooms, dry
plant materials).
● Is solar energy used in your country?
● What can we use the transformed energy for?
● What kind of work can the device do for us?
Teacher, show a photo of a solar plant/solar panels. Have you seen
these before? If so, where?
Retrieved from: https://pixabay.com/photos/solar-cells-
photovoltaic-electricity-491701/
95
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Discussion should highlight why solar panels are seen in bright sunny
spots. Let students share their thoughts.
Teacher, explain how sunlight can be captured using solar panels to
generate electricity or heat water.
Suggested resources and suggested technological activity for each
renewable energy source are shown below.
Energy resource Suggested video
Solar energy Solar Energy - Science for Kids
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2O0JaROLuUY)
(5:19 mins)
Wind energy What is Wind Energy - Science for Kids Duration:
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_8DtGAp1fyI)
(3:34 mins)
Hydropower What is Hydropower - Science for Kids Duration:
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Zwe_2f_PyY (4:25
mins)
Geothermal What is Geothermal Energy
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ldfRWjUpO8M
(4:18 mins)
Biomass What is Biomass
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LsvrsXhxO2I (3:59
mins)
Tidal/wave What is Tidal Energy?
energy https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nai-dcyogb8
(1:31mins)
96
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Suggested projects
Solar energy - A solar oven or solar cooker
Wind energy - A wind turbine
Hydropower - A model water wheel
Biomass energy - Observing the fermentation of yeast
Tidal/wave energy - Wave turbine model
Geothermal energy - Model geothermal power plant.
Students can also be taken to a place where solar panels have been
installed. Have someone point out the main components of the devices
and explain how they work. Solar energy can also be demonstrated
using a small solar panel to power a toy car.
Note to teacher: You are encouraged to take the students on a field
trip to observe the power plants available in your country. A panel of
local energy experts can also be invited to visit the classroom to discuss
with students’ examples of alternative energy sources being used in their
country.
Advantages and disadvantages of renewable sources
While we know that renewable sources of energy can be replaced over
a short period of time and that they are good for the environment,
some environmental issues have been associated with their production
and use. We would now take a closer look at some of these issues.
97
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Advantages and disadvantages of renewable sources.
Advantages Disadvantages
Solar energy P r o d u c e s no toxic pollution ● Habitat loss
or global warming ● Solar energy is expensive
emissions
Wind energy Produces no toxic pollution ● Habitat loss
or global warming ● Affect wildlife such as birds
emissions
Hydropower Produces no toxic pollution ● Can flood land upstream.
or global warming ● Dams can alter the natural flow of
emissions
water in an area.
Geothermal Produces no toxic pollution ● Geothermal system can be very
energy or global warming costly to install.
emissions
● Limited to areas with volcanoes and
geysers, etc.
Biomass When burnt, biomass may Use is limited as there are only a few sites
energy produce less pollution than to produce enough power
fossil fuels.
Tidal/wave Is able to provide a more ● Large areas of land are needed to
energy predictable source of plant the plants needed.
energy. ● In some areas, forest are being
destroyed to plant these crops
Have students discuss these impacts.
Now that you know the advantages and disadvantages of using
alternative energy sources, we will now organise a class debate on the
following topic.
98
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Would you consider using an alternative energy source to power your
car or cool your home? Why or why not?
Ask students to design a poster to depict the following.
What will happen if renewable alternative energy sources are not
developed and used widely by the general public.
Activities
Divide the class into five groups and assign one of the following to each
group. Working in your group, prepare an advertisement to sell one of
the following. When you are done, you will present your advertisement
to the class.
1. A house heated by geothermal energy.
2. A property which has solar panels.
3. A machine that captures and stores solar energy.
4. A house that is powered by wind energy.
5. A house where everything is powered by the Sun.
The impact of energy technologies
Over the last set of lessons, we looked at both renewable and non-
renewable sources of energy – how they are formed, extracted,
processed and transported. We have also looked at the environmental
impact of these fuels.
You would therefore have seen that several technologies are involved
in the energy industry. These technologies are crucial to our daily lives.
Without them, we would not have the ability to power our vehicles, air
99
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
conditioners or heaters or have warm water. However, these
technologies have both positive and negative effects on the
environment.
Technology can also be misused and abused
Abusing technology
● Buying equipment/devices that are not needed.
● Energy exploration by oil and gas companies that are not
warranted.
● Wasting energy simply because it can be afforded.
Misusing technology
This is where a technology is used for a purpose it was not intended for.
One of the best examples of the misuse of energy technology is the use
of nuclear energy for the development of nuclear weapons.
What are some other examples of the misuse of technology you can
think of?
Conservation
We all must play our part in reducing the amount of energy we use,
which will help to reduce the negative impact on the environment.
Conservation means to use less of something. If nothing else, we need
to use the resources we have more efficiently.
Every action counts! What can individuals do to reduce the amount of
energy they use? What do you do to save energy? What else could you
do?
100
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Working in groups, students can be asked to make a list of the things
that they think persons can do to reduce the amount of energy they use.
Each group can then present their ideas to the class.
Examples could include:
1. Uses buses and trains instead of individual vehicles, as these
hold more persons.
2. Use cars less, walk where possible. Use a bike instead of
using a vehicle.
3. Recycle, reuse and reduce garbage generated.
4. Turn off lights and other appliances and devices, when not in
use.
5. Use sources of clean energy instead of fossil fuels, such as
solar energy.
6. Use energy saving bulbs.
7. Energy smart landscaping.
8. Switching to more efficient appliances.
Add to the list that students generate where necessary. Go through the
list with students to find out how they think each suggestion would help
to reduce the use of energy.
Ask students to look at the list and state some of the things that they
are currently doing to reduce their energy use. Also ask students to list
other things that they may be able to do to reduce their energy use.
Invite someone from a well-known business to tell students what they
are doing to reduce their energy use.
101
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Activity – School energy audit
Divide the class into groups of three or four students. Have students in
each group, conduct an energy audit in the school, during which time,
they will identify areas where energy is being wasted.
After conducting the energy audit, they will discuss their findings and
then come up with measures that the school could put in place to save
energy.
Each group will then write an energy management action plan for the
school. Each group will present their plan and the class will discuss the
proposal put forward by each group.
Homework assignment
With the help of an adult, conduct an energy audit in your home. Look
out for the following:
1. Areas where energy is being wasted.
2. Activities designed to save energy.
3. Any energy saving devices/equipment found in the home.
4. After conducting the energy audit, discuss your findings with
members of your family and suggest different measures that
can be put in place to save energy in the home.
List some of the things you are doing or could do, to save energy.
102
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Ask the pupils to each share one thing they are going to do at home to
reduce their energy consumption.
Students can research and propose renewable energy options for their
school, such as solar heating or photovoltaic cells, or a wind turbine.
Culminating activity
The OECS territories use a lot of energy however they are not
producers of the fossil fuels needed for generating that energy. For
example, the electricity needed to power our homes, factories and
industries come from the burning of fossil fuels. This fuel has to be
imported from oil producing countries at very high costs. As a result,
the energy consumption bills in the region are very high.
Activity: Have learners conduct research to demonstrate that they can
obtain and combine information on the following
● the energy and fuels used in their territory.
● the main sources of the energy and fuels in their territory
● how the energy and fuels are used in their territory
● Students may complete a table such as the one below, some
possible answers have been included for teachers to be
guided:
103
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The uses of energy can be placed in 4 main categories as shown in the
table below.
Sector Energy source Uses
Home Wood, coal Cooking, cooling and heating homes
Transportation Gasoline, diesel, Transport people, goods and animals
sector by buses, cars, trucks and planes
Industrial Coal, wood and For operating industrial motors and
diesel machinery.
Producing electricity
Commercial Light, heating, Coal, charcoal, LPG, natural gas,
sector cooking, security nuclear energy
From the list of energy resources used in your country, choose one then
prepare a presentation on that energy resource. Your presentation must
include the following:
1. What is the natural source it is derived from?
2. What is this energy resource used for?
3. How it addresses energy needs in your country.
4. The positive and negative effects that this energy resource has on
the environment.
5. The role of technology in improving or mediating the
environmental effects of using the given energy resource.
104
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Renewable Energy 101: How Does Hydroelectricity Work? (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pEUzot8Zufo 1:15 mins)
How Do Wind Turbines Work? | Sources Of Electric Energy | The Dr Binocs Show | Peekaboo Kidz (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ia1LJE9sOxQ 5:30
mins)
What If The Whole World Runs On 100% Solar Energy? | The Dr. Binocs Show | Peekaboo Kidz (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6djnJxdSQWQ 6:00
mins)
The journey of natural gas (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V8EHHW-3N5Y 7:11 mins)
CRUDE OIL DISTILLATION SIMPLIFIED
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-0CwOvo3aKs (3:33 mins)
Working in groups, students can create various models for renewable and non-renewable energy sources. Here are some ideas.
Solar Oven:
Materials: Cardboard box, aluminium foil, plastic wrap, black construction paper, glue, scissors.
Instructions: Students can construct a simple solar oven using a cardboard box lined with aluminium foil to reflect sunlight onto a black construction paper-
covered surface inside. They can experiment with different designs and angles to optimize heat absorption and cooking efficiency.
Wind Turbine:
Materials: Cardboard, wooden dowels or sticks, paper cups, hot glue gun, scissors, string, small DC motor (optional).
Instructions: Students can build a small-scale wind turbine model using cardboard blades attached to a central shaft made of wooden dowels. They can mount the
turbine on a base and experiment with different blade designs and wind speeds to generate rotational motion.
Hydroelectric Generator:
Materials: Plastic bottle, small water pump or motor, plastic tubing, wooden dowels, cardboard, glue, scissors.
Instructions: Students can create a hydroelectric generator model by constructing a miniature dam using a plastic bottle filled with water. They can attach a small
water pump or motor to the bottle's opening and connect it to a turbine made of cardboard blades. As water flows from the bottle through the turbine, it can
generate electricity.
105
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Geothermal Heating System:
Materials: Clear plastic container, soil, small water pump, plastic tubing, thermometer, heat lamp (optional).
Instructions: Students can simulate a geothermal heating system by filling a clear plastic container with soil and burying a small water pump connected to plastic
tubing inside. They can monitor the temperature of the soil and observe how it varies with depth.
Oil Refinery Model:
Materials: Plastic bottles, straws, clay or playdough, food colouring (optional), scissors, glue.
Instructions: Students can construct a simplified model of an oil refinery using plastic bottles to represent different processing units. They can use straws to
simulate pipelines connecting the units and moulding clay or playdough to depict storage tanks and other structures.
Coal Power Plant:
Materials: Cardboard tubes, small LED lights, black construction paper, cotton balls, glue, scissors.
Instructions: Students can create a model of a coal power plant by using cardboard tubes as smokestacks and attaching small LED lights inside to represent burning
coal. They can cover the base with black construction paper to simulate coal storage and use cotton balls for smoke emissions
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher such as reading material at a lower or
higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
The teacher should have:
A Basic Understanding of Energy Concepts
Knowledge of Renewable Energy Technologies
An understanding of Environmental Science Principles
Knowledge about current events and trends in renewable energy research, industry developments, and policy changes enables teachers to provide
students with up-to-date and relevant information.
106
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the curriculum)
Social Studies- Resources
Mathematics:
Measurement and Data Analysis: Collect and analyse data related to energy usage, such as electricity consumption in their homes or school. Calculate energy savings
achieved through renewable energy initiatives and graph their findings.
Geometry: Explore the geometric shapes and dimensions of renewable energy structures, such as the blades of a wind turbine or the surface area of a solar panel.
Language Arts:
Writing: Write persuasive essays advocating for the adoption of renewable energy policies or expressing their opinions on environmental conservation.
Public Speaking/Debates: The writing pieces can be used to participate in debates about energy policy and environmental issues.
Reading: Students can read informational texts and literature related to renewable energy, sustainability, and environmental activism. Analyse and discuss the
themes, characters, and messages conveyed in these texts.
Social Studies:
Civic Engagement: Explore the role of government, NGOs, and communities in promoting renewable energy adoption and combating climate change. Research
local and global energy policies.
Art:
Visual Arts: Create artwork inspired by renewable energy themes, such as paintings of wind farms or sculptures made from recycled materials. Design posters or
infographics to raise awareness about renewable energy and environmental conservation.
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Some factories in the OECS e.g. arrowroot and sugar cane factories, used dammed water, turbines and water wheels to generate energy for milling.
The local “coal pit” is made by cutting trees and burning them in the absence of air to make charcoal.
Baking in a stone or drum oven using charcoals which are commonly referred to as “coals”. This coal is to be distinguished from coal which is the formed by heat
and pressure applied to plant materials over millions of years.
107
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Forest fires which threaten the environment
Burning bamboo joint
Dominica has hot sulfur pools and champagne beach which is a strong indication that geothermal energy is very a viable technology and renewable energy source.
St. Lucia has hot water pools and mud baths that are heated very hot due to geothermal energy.
Underwater signals can affect the migration patterns of animals such as whales.
108
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Waves
Introduction to the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of caring not
only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic study of the structure and
behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from leveraging and evaluating available
technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it
Strand (Topic): Waves
An understanding of the properties of waves helps students to account for natural phenomena including the behaviour of light and further establishes the
foundation for explaining interactions of matter based on an atomic theory.
Essential Learning Outcomes 1: Develop a model of waves to describe patterns in terms of amplitude and wavelength and that waves can
cause objects to move
[Clarification Statement: Examples of models could include diagrams, analogies, and physical models using wire to illustrate wavelength and amplitude of waves.]
[Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include interference effects, electromagnetic waves, non-periodic waves, or quantitative models of amplitude and
wavelength.]
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: General questions on waves motion and wave Wave Motion Characteristics
characteristics
● Define the terms: As part of introduction, students may be asked to describe the
➢ Wave 1. Draw a picture of a wave and label it with the sea/ocean when the winds are high, or a storm is approaching. The
waves are in a regular pattern. Students may also describe the
➢ Amplitude following terms.
effect on the surface of the water when they skip rocks across the
➢ Wavelength
surface or drop a stone into a pool of water.
➢ Crest a. Wavelength
➢ Trough Repeating patterns
➢ Pattern
b. Amplitude
Introduce the concept of “repeating patterns” by presenting to the
➢ Longitudinal waves
c. Crest students’ examples of repeating patterns. Ask them to state the
➢ Transverse waves
things that they notice about each of the examples. After some
➢ Pitch
d. Trough
➢ Vibration
109
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
➢ Volume 2. You encounter many different waves in your discussion, identify what you have presented as examples of
➢ Loudness daily life. “repeating patterns” and define the term for the students.
➢ Mechanical waves
➢ Electromagnetic waves
a. Give two examples of waves that you
encounter in everyday life. (ocean, skipping
➢ Reflection
rope)
➢ Refraction
➢ Diffraction
b. Give two characteristics that you expect
➢ Sound intensity and
the waves you listed in 2a. to have. (have an Patterns retrieved from:
decibels.
amplitude, have a direction) https://pixabay.com/illustrations/zigzag-lines-colorful-pattern-
7957807/
● Demonstrate an understanding
that waves carry energy from
c. Explain how you know that waves have
https://pixabay.com/vectors/gingham-background-fabric-texture-
place to place. repeating patterns. (same crest and trough
48107/
● Describe the characteristics of a repeated)
wave.
Divide the class into groups of three to four students.
● Identify the amplitude, d. Give two reasons why studying waves is
wavelength, crest and trough of important. (waves are used for communication Students, working in your group, create an example of a repeating
a wave on a wave diagram.
and medical devices) pattern. Use numbers, shapes, etc. When you are finished creating
● Explain how amplitude and
your pattern, present it to the class. The other members of the class
wavelength change when
3. A wave can be considered as a disturbance, will determine if it is a repeating pattern and make suggestions, if
energy is added or taken away
necessary, as to how it can be corrected.
moving energy from place to place. For each of
from a disturbance.
● Demonstrate an understanding the following examples given, state the source Class, what are some other examples of repeating patterns that you
that waves can cause an object of energy for the wave. have seen before? (Stripes on a bee's body, spots on a leopard and scales on
to move. a fish).
● Demonstrate an understanding
that the motion of objects Students, I want you to keep the term repeating pattern in mind as
varies with the amplitude and we begin to look at this unit’s topic – waves.
wavelength of the wave
carrying it. Introduction to waves
● Compare waves produced from
the same source. Students, what do you think of when I say the word waves?
110
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Account for differences
observed between waves Write students’ responses on the board.
produced from the same
source. To help us answer that question, let us look at the following video.
● Demonstrate how certain As you watch the video, keep in mind the following:
waves are produced.
● Explain how different types of ● A definition for the word wave.
waves are produced. ● Examples of waves.
● Explain how different waves
travel from place to place. Video - Waves
Rope: moving hand provides energy
● Explain how the repeating https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=73FLjzJNt_I
patterns produced as a wave are Waves in a pool: a dropped object provides energy (1:50 mins)
propagated. Drum: hand motion beating drum provides energy
● Explain what a longitudinal From the video we learnt that there are many waves that we
wave is. 4. Below is a picture of a swimming pool. If a encounter on a daily basis. Can you name some of them? (Sound
● Explain what a transverse wave stone is thrown into the pool, water waves waves, light waves, radio waves, microwaves and water waves).
is. would form.
● Give examples of longitudinal We will now begin our exploration of waves, by taking a closer look
waves. at the ocean waves., shown in the following video.
● Give examples of transverse
waves. Video – Waves
● Distinguish between different https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h0W5GBobAZE (2:00 mins)
types of waves.
● Describe the basic As you watch the video, pay attention to how the waves are moving,
characteristics of waves. how they sound, etc. Also think about possible answers to the
● Describe how different types of https://pixabay.com/photos/pool-swimming-pool- following questions.
waves transfer energy. swimming-system-375466/
● Describe what happens when 1. Do the waves make the same sound?
waves move across the surface a. Describe how the water waves would 2. Do the waves look similar?
of deep water. move in relation to the point where the 3. Do the waves move in a similar manner?
● Identify models or diagrams of stone was thrown. (in a circle moving from the
Suppose I tell you that a wave is a repeated pattern of motion.
different types of waves. centre)
What evidence from the video supports this?
● List the different mediums that
(The ocean waves repeated themselves over and over space and time)
a specific wave can go through.
111
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Label parts of a wave diagram b. Where does the energy to form the wave
As the ocean waves move from place to place, they carry energy with
or model. come from? (the impact of the stone falling –
them. One of the ways that ocean waves get their energy is from
● Explain what a wave is in terms potential & kinetic energy)
the wind, as it blows over the surface of the water.
of energy.
● State the similarities and c. Suppose a beach ball was on the surface of
The formation of water waves and how they affect the
differences among different the when the stone was thrown into the
movement of objects
types of waves. pool. How would you expect the ball to
● Differentiate between volume move after the stone was thrown into the
Teacher demonstration
and pitch. pool? (the ball would ride the crests of the
● Describe the properties of waves and move across the pool)
Demonstrate for students how water waves can be created, by a fan
sound waves.
blowing across the surface of water in a container. Turn the knob
● Explain how frequency and d. What would you expect to see if a larger
on the fan to the lowest setting, then to its highest setting Ask
pitch are related. stone was thrown into the pool of water?
students to record their observations.
(a larger wave would be formed because the falling
Skills stone would have more energy due to higher mass)
● Students, what did you notice? (When the fan was turned on,
● Draw a model of a wave based
waves formed in the water. When the fan was turned to the highest
on the information given. Questions on types of waves
setting, a larger disturbance was produced, and hence larger waves were
● Demonstrate sound travelling
produced).
through different media. NOTE: Teacher should limit the assessment to
● How is this similar to the formation of ocean waves?
● Develop and use models to simple examples of transverse (rope) longitudinal (Energy from the wind caused by the fan, caused water waves to form.)
describe patterns of waves in
(slinky) and electromagnetic (light) waves. Some
terms of amplitude and
questions that follow can be differentiated to be Students, now that you know what a wave is and you know what it
wavelength.
does, you will now continue your exploration of waves by creating
age and ability appropriate.
● Illustrate the relationship
some of your own and studying their characteristics.
between vibration and pitch.
● Demonstrate the transfer of 1. Transverse waves and Longitudinal waves are
ACTIVITY
energy through the creation of two different types of waves. Answer the
a mechanical wave. following questions about these two types of
Creating and studying water waves further
● Observe the vibrations made by waves.
various objects that produce
Materials needed:
sound.
Water in a container, 1 plastic cup, A plastic toy that floats on
● Observe how waves are
water and Rule Students, have you ever thrown a pebble or rock
produced.
into a body of water such as a pool, puddle or stream? (yes/no)
112
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Infer how a wave will behave
under certain circumstances.
● Classify waves based on their
characteristics.
● Conduct measurements when
making models of waves. In this experiment, you will get a chance to do so. Students, working
● Hypothesize how a wave will in your group, drop the small stone into the container of water
behave under certain provided, from about 15 cm above the level of the water. Pay close
Retrieved from: http://t1.gstatic.com/licensed-
circumstances. attention to what happens to the water and the direction the waves
image?q=tbn:ANd9GcTyWR0SIbrrIsegvTOVsgDIe7
● Communicate data collected are moving. Record your observations.
Dgm8TcYjA6D40FYqe9mNn4AemmrVPcVKD0az
from investigating waves in
UC6F3rohl2sG6NScnKB31en2qIKA
different formats. Retrieve the stone from the container and drop it again.
● Construct models of different
a. Define Transverse waves and give two
waves. Class, it is sometimes difficult to see water waves, so we will now
examples of a transverse wave. (skipping
● Calculate the time taken for a look at two short videos that show, in slow motion, what happens
wave to move from one point rope, ocean wave) when a rock is thrown into a pool of water. As you watch the videos
to another. b. State one way in which a transverse wave again, pay close attention to what happens to the water and the
● Conduct experiments to is different from a longitudinal wave. direction the waves are moving
determine how the properties of (longitudinal wave moves because of compression
sound waves are related to Video - Stone makes waves
like a slinky)
wavelength and frequency. h t t p s : / / w w w . p b s l e a r n i n g m e d i a . o r g / r e s o u r c e / b u a c 2 0 - 3 5 - s c i - p s -
● Conduct experiments explaining waveenergy/wave-energy/ (
the characteristics of waves.
2. Waves can also be classified as mechanical
0:29 mins)
waves and electromagnetic waves.
● Compile data on the
characteristics of different types Video - Another large rock thrown off a bridge -
of waves.
a . W h a t a r e m e c h a n i c a l w a v e s ? ( w a v e s c r e a t e d
h t t p s : / / w w w . y o u t u b e . c o m / w a t c h ? v = i Q W-BE8abZs (Timestamp
by a physical movement)
● Interpret different wave 0:46 to 1:03 mins)
diagrams in terms of the
different characteristics of a
b. Give one example of a mechanical wave.
Now that you have done the experiment and have seen the videos,
(stone in a pool)
wave. answer the following questions.
● Illustrate wave motion in
different media.
c. What are electromagnetic waves? (waves
1. What happened around the pebble when it went into the water?
that are created as a result of vibrations between an
● Investigate to compare how (Ripples, or waves, formed.)
electric field and a magnetic field)
vibrations travel differently 2. Which direction do the waves move? (The waves move in circles,
away from the rock.)
113
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
through solids, liquids, and d. Give one example of an electromagnetic 3. Do you think if you dive into a pool you will cause similar waves
gases. wave. (different types of light) to form?
● Demonstrate how the pitch and
loudness of sounds waves are 3. Slinkys are very useful for modelling Give each group an object that will float on water.
related. longitudinal and transverse waves.
● Explore and describe different Students, place your object on the surface of the water. While you
sounds (e.g., high, low, soft and a. Explain how you would move a Slinky to are waiting for the water to settle, predict what would happen to the
loud). object if you made waves with the cup provided. Now make waves
produce transverse waves. (compress and
● Investigate the effect on by moving the plastic cup (rim up), up and down in the water.
release a slinky)
changing the pitch of a sound.
● Classify sound by pitch and by Students record what happened to the object and state whether or
loudness
b. Explain how a longitudinal wave moves
not it matched your prediction(s).
● Compare the transmission of along a Slinky. (the compressed wire pushes each
sound through air, water, and adjacent wire as the compression is released) Let us summarize what was observed
some solids.
● Use a model to demonstrate c. What happens to a transverse wave when ● When the stone was thrown into water, waves formed.
how waves cause objects to it gets to the end of a Slinky? (the energy gets ● These waves moved outwards away from the point of
move. disturbance, in a circular manner.
absorbed by hand holding it or it pushes air)
● Develop a model (e.g., diagram, ● The objects on the surface of the water moved up and
analogy, or physical model) of down. but did not move with the water.
4. Below is a diagram of a transverse wave. Write
waves to describe patterns in This point will be explored further in the next activity.
the name of the different parts of the wave in
terms of amplitude and
wavelength. the spaces provided. ACTIVITY - ROPE WAVES
Attitudes/Values Students, many of you might have played with a jump rope/skipping
rope. In this exercise, you will be creating waves using a rope.
● Show an appreciation of the
importance of waves in our To do so, you will be working in groups of three – One student to
daily lives. hold the rope firmly, one student to create the waves and the third
● Demonstrate persistence in the student to record observations. Your roles will be rotated as you
investigation of waves and the repeat the tasks.
production of models of waves.
● Show interest in finding out Note: It is easier to create waves if the rope is held almost parallel
about different waves.
to the floor and not held too tightly.
114
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Use the inquiry approach to A_______________________________________
Students, to begin the exercise, the Wave maker will flick the rope
investigate wave characteristics
quickly up and down. However, before the rope is flicked, predict
and wave motion. B_______________________________________
how the rope will move when it is flicked.
● Demonstrate respect for the
evidence produced through the
C_______________________________________ Begin flicking the rope now. Practice flicking it a few times, before
investigations of different
you begin to take observations. After the Observer records the
waves.
observation, switch roles.
D_______________________________________
● Demonstrate their
inventiveness in the Now, repeat the above step. However, before you do so, tie a ribbon
construction of models of E_______________________________________ at any point along the rope. Before you flick the rope, predict how
different types of waves. the ribbon will move when the rope is flicked. Record your
● Work collaboratively in the F_______________________________________ observations.
investigation of waves and the
production of models of waves. a. What type of wave is shown in the Answer the following questions:
● Ensure when investigating diagram?
waves in the environment e.g. 1. How did you generate waves in a rope? (The waves were generated
throwing stones into water b. Why do you think waves might be
as the rope was moved up and down.)
bodies, or making sounds, that important?
2. How did the rope move? (Up and down)
animals are not affected.
● When investigating waves, 5. Below is a wave diagram. 3. What was transferred by the waves along the rope? (Energy was
being transferred from the hand going to the end of the rope.)
ensure that safety rules are
followed, especially when using 4. How did the ribbon move with respect to the movement of the
items such as ropes and slinky wave? (The ribbon moved up and down in the same spot, while the wave
to produce waves. moved along the rope.)
● When conducting experiments 5. How is the movement of the ribbon similar to the movement
on the characteristics of waves, of the objects in the bucket of water? (Both moved up and down in
display sensitivity with respect the same spot)
to persons who may not be able a. What type of wave is this? (longitudinal)
to for example, hold a rope, b. Describe how this wave would move along a Explanation
move a slinky, etc. Slinky.
● Participate actively in classroom c. Describe how the slinky would move. The up and down movement of your hand at the end of the rope,
discussions, investigations, created a wave, which moved energy from your hand along the rope.
d. What are the areas labelled A and B called?
presentations about waves, at You should have also observed that while the ribbon tied to the rope
moved up and down, it did not move along the rope with the wave.
115
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
individual, group or class levels A__(rarefaction)_______________________ This shows that the energy produced moves along with the wave,
where necessary. not the source of the energy, your hand.
B___(compression)______________________
Different Types of waves and wave characteristics
Questions on sound waves
On a whiteboard/chalkboard write down the words: longitudinal
1. Sounds are all around us. We hear sound wave, transverse wave, wavelength, amplitude, trough and crest.
because it travels from one place to the other in
In this activity, you will be using the Slinky you have been given to
the form of a wave.
model two different types of waves.
a. What type of waves are sound waves?
(longitudinal)
b. What are sounds made by? (vibrations)
c. How do sound waves travel from one place
to the other? (through a medium like air or
water)
d. If you screamed in outer space no one
would hear you. What is the reason for this?
Note: The following video gives some insight as to how this activity
(Space consists of a vacuum (no air) therefore
can be conducted.
without a medium the vibrations can’t travel)
Slinky Waves -
2. Pitch and loudness are two terms which can be
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OXlMWa3kxL (5:47 mins)
used to describe sound.
a. What is the pitch of a sound? Slinkies can be used to demonstrate two important groups of waves:
b. What is a high pitch sound? transverse and longitudinal waves. From these activities, you will
c. What is a low pitch sound? also learn about some important wave features.
d. What is the amplitude of a sound wave
Creating transverse waves using a Slinky
equal to?
e. Give an example of a high pitch sound
Like in the last activity, you will again work in groups of three, with
f. Give an example of a low-pitch sound
each student having the same role as before. As before, your roles
will be rotated as you repeat the tasks. Spend a few minutes
practicing moving the Slinky from side to side.
116
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3. Draw a wave diagram to represent each of the
Now that you are comfortable moving the Slinky, begin the
following sound waves.
experiment by moving the Slinky from side to side and recording
your observations. Pay close attention to the movement of the
Slinky and the movement of the wave.
The type of wave you just made is called a transverse wave. It is
the same type of wave that you made with the rope. Let us look at
the following video to see this wave in slow-motion.
As you watch the video, pay attention to how the wave is travelling
and also the direction the hand is moving.
Video - Transverse wave using slinky coil
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g8GcMn7K0u4
(0.56 mins)
Now, repeat the above step. However, before you do so, tie a ribbon
at any point along the Slinky. Before you move the Slinky, predict
how the ribbon will move when the Slinky is moved. Record your
observations.
Questions
1. What direction did you move the slinky to create the
disturbance? (Side to side)
2. In what direction was the wave moving? (Along the Slinky)
4. Circle the correct option. Which sound is the
3. Were both the Slinky and the wave moving in the same
direction? (No)
4. What happened to the wave when the wave got to the end
of the Slinky? (It bounced back/was reflected)
5. Did the ribbon move down the Slinky or did it stay in the
same place? (It stays in the same place)
117
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
loudest? Draw a picture of your wave. It should look similar to the drawing
below. Let us look at the diagram closely to see what it is telling us
a. A whisper b. A Fire alarm c. An airplane
From the activity and from looking at the video, what can you
https://pixabay.com/photos/alarm-fire-alarm-red-danger-safety-
3410065/ conclude about transverse waves? (In a transverse wave, the material of
the slinky moves in one direction (up and down) while the wave travels along the
https://pixabay.com/photos/whisper-children-indonesia-funny- slinky in another direction.)
2792979/
https://pixabay.com/photos/plane-aircraft-flight-sky-take-off-50893/
This means that while the hand is moving the Slinky from side to
side, the wave is moving along the Slinky in a direction that is said
5. Circle the correct option. Which sound is the to be perpendicular/at right angles to the direction the Slinky is
softest? moving.
Creating longitudinal waves using a Slinky
a. Footsteps
You are now going to model another type of wave using the Slinky.
b. Beating of a drum
Keeping the slinky straight, Wavemaker, quickly push your end of
c. A kettle whistling
the slinky just a few centimetres toward the person holding the other
end of the slinky and then bring it back to the original length. Before
you push the Slinky, predict what will happen to the Slinky as the
8. Circle the picture that best matches each wave reaches the other end of the Slinky
question
a. Which sound wave is louder?
118
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Repeat the action you just performed. This time, pay attention to
the direction you had to move the slinky to make the wave and the
direction the wave is moving.
The type of wave you just modelled is called a longitudinal wave.
Sound is an example of a longitudinal wave
b. Which sound wave has a higher pitch? Just as we did with the transverse wave, we will now look at a video
showing the movement of this wave in slow motion.
Video - Longitudinal waves using a slinky coil
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fMJrtheQfZw
(0.56 mins)
Questions
1. What direction did you move the slinky to create the
c. What makes some sounds louder than disturbance? (Forwards and backwards)
others? 2. In what direction was the Slinky wave moving? (Along the
Slinky)
Question on light waves 3. Were both the Slinky and the wave moving in the same
direction? (Yes)
1. Light is all around us, without light we would 4. What happened to the wave when the wave got to the end
not be able to see the things around us. Answer
of the Slinky? (It bounced back/was reflected)
the following questions.
From the activity and looking at the video, what can you conclude
about longitudinal waves? (In a longitudinal wave, the slinky moves
a. Light travels in ___________
forwards and backwards and the wave moves in the same direction as the slinky
_____________ is moving.) Therefore, in this type of wave, we say that the
slinky is moving in a direction parallel to the direction in which the
b. Light is an example of a wave is travelling.
______________wave.
Below is a diagram of a longitudinal wave. Let us look at the diagram
closely to see what it is telling us.
119
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. Like other waves, light can be reflected,
refracted and diffracted. Define these three There are some areas where the coils of the Slinky appear to be very
close together, while in other areas, they appear to be further apart.
processes in the space provided.
The areas where the coils of the Slinky appear to be very close
together are called compressions, while the areas where the coils
a. Reflection
appear to further apart are called rarefactions.
__________________________________
__________________________________
Did you see compressions and rarefactions?
____________
b. Refraction
__________________________________
__________________________________
___________
c. Diffraction
__________________________________
__________________________________
____________
Now, I want you to tie a piece of coloured fabric around one of the
coils. Predict what will happen to the ribbon as the wave travels
3. State two ways that light waves are different
along the Slinky.
from sound waves.
1. What happened to the ribbon as the wave moved through
4. Light waves get their energy from the light
the Slinky? (It moved up and down)
source. Give two sources of light.
2. Did your prediction match what happened? (Yes/No)
3. How is this similar to the ribbon on the rope? (Both moved
Health and Wellness
up and down but did not move along with the wave)
Some large cities in the world have sound level
Summary:
measures (decibels) on street corners.
● The Slinky is the medium that the waves travel through.
● The student holding the slinky provided the energy to make
the waves.
● There are two main types of waves: transverse waves and
longitudinal waves.
120
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● When the wave reached the opposite end of the Slinky, it
bounced back or was reflected.
Naming parts of a transverse wave
It is now time to put names to the various parts of a wave. Here, I
have a blank diagram of a transverse wave. Pay attention as I label
the diagram to show certain characteristics of waves.
Retrieved from:
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/edmonton/noise-
monitoring-edmonton-led-1.4824209
1) What is the purpose of those? (to measure and
then reduce loud sounds in the neighborhood)
2) Why are loud sounds dangerous? (the wave
vibrations can enter our ears and do damage to our
ear drums)
3) In what occupations do we see people ● The amplitude of a wave is the height of the wave
hearing protection? (construction, roadwork, ● The wavelength of a wave is the distance
fabrication, automotive tools, airport runway staff) ● The trough is the lowest point on the wave.
The waves that carry sound energy to our ● The crest is the highest point on the wave.
ears can be very dangerous and cause long
term hearing damage because our ear drum Changing the wave patterns made by a Slinky
vibrates as the wave enters our ear.
Students, now that you have created transverse waves using the
slinky, you will now manipulate the slinky further, to identify
patterns in waves, to see if there is a relationship between frequency,
wavelength and amplitude, by exploring the changes in frequency,
amplitude and wavelength by:
121
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Teacher Demonstration
● Shaking the slinky at different rates without removing it from
Arrange for two identical empty bottles. Fill one the surface.
bottle A two-thirds filled with water and the other
● Shaking the Slinky with different force without removing it
bottle B one third filled with water.
from the surface.
By changing the size of the Slinky
Students, try stretching the slinky out a little more. Make some
waves. Try pulling the slinky closer together and make more waves.
Before you make the waves, predict if the wave would be smaller or
larger. Record your observations in the table below.
Create a sound above bottle A by striking a tuning
fork above the bottle. Ask students to listen very
carefully to the tone that leaves bottle A. Now strike
the same tuning form above bottle B. Students
should note that the tone they hear is not the same.
1. Did the waves move faster when the Slinky was stretched
out or when it was pulled closer?
2. Were bigger waves (waves with more amplitude) produced
when the Slinky was stretched or when it was pulled closer?
Changing the amount of energy used to make the waves
Students, let us now see if the amount of energy used to make the
waves affects the amplitude and wavelength of the waves produced.
122
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Questions About the Demonstration Before you shake the Slinky, predict what will happen.
1) Ask the students what that means? (The tone they
hear is not from the tuning fork but instead from the bottle.)
2) Ask students why the tone would be different from
the second bottle B? (there is a different amount of water
and the air space above the water level is different in bottle B)
3) Ask students …is the tone from the bottle coming
from the water or the air above the water? (the air
column above the water gives a certain space for the wave energy
to move) 1. What does shaking the slinky harder do? (Shaking the slinky
harder causes greater amplitude)
4) Would you expect there to be a different tone 2. What does shaking the slinky softer do? (Shaking the slinky
created for different levels of water in the bottle? (yes)
softer causes less amplitude)
Let try some different levels and see if you are correct!
Now students draw pictures of the waves for the different actions
performed on the Slinky in the table below.
Our ear drum receives wave energy just like the
bottles when the tuning fork vibrates. Depending on
the energy in the sound wave our ear drums can be
damaged.
123
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://www.goldendance.co.jp/English/bonecondu
ct/01.html
The sound pressure or sound intensity is measured in
decibels. Have students do internet research to find
out decibel levels of different sound wave sources in
our environment including the dangerous levels for
human ears.
Teacher resource: https://soundear.com/decibel-
scale/
Have a discussion about ways to protect our hearing
from loud sounds.
Students now make conclusions based on the patterns that you see
in your drawings.
Did both the force and the speed at which the Slinky was shaken
change the pattern of the waves produced by the slinky? (Yes, the
shape of the wave produced was determined by the amount of energy that was
used to cause the disturbance and how fast the vibrations were made.)
Students, you should have observed the following:
● When the Slinky was shaken slowly, they got more waves
on the Slinky (a higher
124
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● frequency of waves) and the waves were longer in length
● When the Slinky was shaken faster, they got more waves on
the Slinky (a higher frequency of waves) and the waves were
shorter in length.
● Shaking the slinky harder produces waves with greater
amplitude.
● Shaking the slinky softer produces waves with less
amplitude.
Activity
Using a Mexican wave to demonstrate different types of waves
Students you may have seen spectators participating in “the wave”
at a sporting event, such as football or cricket. Now that you have
made longitudinal waves and transverse waves, as a class, have fun
modelling each type of wave using your body.
Note: During the Class demonstrations, ensure that students do not
push each other hard, as a student could fall.
1. Students form a line standing shoulder to shoulder with
everyone facing me (the teacher).
2. To create the wave, we will start with the student at the end
of the line to my (the
teacher’s) left, by him/her raising his/her arms, then
immediately putting them down.
3. As soon as his/her hands are lowered, the second student
should raise his or her arms. This continues down the line
with each student raising his or her arms as soon as the
student before him/her in line, puts his/her arms down
125
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4. Let us see how quickly you can do the wave! Good, you
have just modelled a transverse wave.
5. Now to model a longitudinal wave, this time, line up with
your hands on the shoulders of the student in front of you.
Each student will carefully lean into the student in front of
him/her and then stand up straight. Each student must,
however, wait until they have been “leaned into” before
they can continue the wave.
Note: A video of the students making the “wave” can be recorded,
so that the students can see the result.
Sound Waves
Sound can only be made when something is vibrating. To vibrate
means to move back and forth very fast.
Sound waves are a type of mechanical wave that require a medium
to travel through.
They are longitudinal waves, meaning the particles of the medium
vibrate in the same direction as the wave is travelling.
Remind students that sound is produced by vibrations and
vibrations produce sounds, by doing the following demonstrations.
1. Strike a drum on which a few grains of rice have been placed.
a. Could the drum make a sound by itself?
b. How did the drum make the sound?
c. What happened to the rice grains when you hit the
drum? Why?
2. Tap a tuning fork on the desk then bring it close to a ball on
a stick, without touching the ball. The ball should begin to
126
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
vibrate. Repeat the action, this time put the tuning fork near
the surface of some water in a bowl, without touching the
water.
What did you observe? (The vibrating tuning fork caused both the ball and
the water to vibrate).
Sound travels from one place to the other
Teacher, ask students to close their eyes, then stand behind the class
and clap your hands.
Students, what did I just do? How did you know what I just did since
you couldn't see me? You knew what I just did because you heard
the sound I made.
How did you hear me? You heard me because the sound I made
travelled through the air in the form of waves called sound waves.
https://pixabay.com/vectors/audio-signal-wifi-wireless-304331/
Is sound affected by the matter it travels through
1. Distribute a pair of bottles the same size to each student.
2. First, have students listen to a sound travelling through the
air, then have them hold the empty water bottle to one ear
127
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
while they cover the other. Ask their partner to tap the
bottle with a pencil. Have students described the sound they
heard?
3. Then ask them to listen to the same sound travelling
through water, by holding the full water bottle against one
ear while their partner taps it with the pencil.
4. Have pairs of students then repeat, using the block of wood
as a solid. Have students switch roles, repeat the
experiment, then answer the following questions.
Questions
1. How did the sound change between what you heard with
air and what you heard with water? (The tapping sound is louder
through the bottle filled with water than the bottle with air.)
2. How did the sound change between what you heard with
water and the solid? (The sound is louder through the solid than
through the bottle of water.)
3. How did the sound change between what you heard with
air and the solid? (The sound through the solid is louder than the
sound through the bottle of air.)
Pitch and volume - Two properties of sound
The larger the amplitude of the waves, the louder the sound. Pitch
(frequency) is determined by the spacing of the waves. The closer
together the waves are, the higher the pitch of the sound.
Pitch and loudness are two characteristics that help us to decide
whether a sound is pleasant or not.
128
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Pitch
Pitch distinguishes shrill sounds from grave sounds. A shrill sound,
such as the blowing of a whistle, is called a high pitch sound, whereas
a less shrill sound, such as a whisper, is called a low pitch sound.
Let us compare the sound of a whistle with that of a drum.
https://pixabay.com/photos/drum-musical-instrument-hand-drum-96179/
https://pixabay.com/photos/whistle-toy-1115360/
Which sound would you say is a high sound? You will
notice that blowing a whistle produces a high sound, while a drum
produces a low sound. The whistle is an example of a high pitch
sound, while the drum is an example of a low pitch sound.
Provide more sounds for students to listen to and categorize as high
pitch sounds and low pitch sounds
Homework assignment
Listen to sounds in your home and see if you can identify five
examples of high pitch sounds and five examples of high pitch
sounds of low pitch sounds. How do these sounds make you feel?
Investigating pitch - Teacher demonstration
Students, today I will be using these materials to conduct two simple
experiments. Before I conduct each experiment, I want you to write
down a hypothesis about what you think will happen.
129
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Experiment one:
In front of me are 3 glass bottles of the same size - one full of water,
one half-full of water and the third one empty. I am going to strike
each one with a spoon and I want you to observe what happens.
You must be quiet as I strike each bottle.
1. What happened to each bottle when it was hit with the
spoon? (It made the glass vibrate)
2. Which bottle produced the highest sound? (The empty bottle)
3. Which bottle produced the lowest sound? (The full bottle)
4. Why do you think you got the results you got? (Fast vibrations
make a high sound and slow vibrations make a low sound)
Explanation:
A full bottle will produce a slow vibration and a low sound because
water slows down the vibrations. An empty bottle produces a faster
vibration and a higher sound. This is because of the air space for the
sound to vibrate within the bottle. That is the same principle of a
130
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
pipe organ in a church where the pipes are different lengths forte air
to vibrate in.
Activity No. 2
I am now going to blow across the top of each bottle, instead of
tapping it with the metal spoon. Before I blow across the bottle,
write a prediction about whether or not blowing across the bottles
will produce the same sound, as when I tapped the bottle with the
metal spoon.
Record your observations.
1. Was your hypothesis correct? Why or why not?
2. Did the pitch change?
Explanation: Clinking the bottle and blowing into it do not produce
the same sounds. Blowing into the bottle makes the air in the bottle
vibrate while hitting the glass makes the glass vibrate.
Using a Shoebox Guitar to produce sounds of different pitch
Materials needed: Shoebox or similar box (with a hole cut out
from the top), tape, rubber bands (of different thickness), pencils
Students, you will now build a shoebox guitar from the materials
provided. Follow the following steps to make your guitar. After
131
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
making your guitar, you will use it to further investigate pitch and
sound.
● Decorate your shoe box (which already has a hole cut in the
top of it).
● After you are finished decorating your boxes, pull the elastic
bands (of different widths) around the length of your box,
be sure there is space between the rubber bands.
● Place two pencils underneath the rubber bands, to lift the
rubber band and allow them to vibrate freely. Tape the
pencils down to ensure that they stay in place.
● Once you are finished making your shoebox guitar, pluck
the rubber bands one by one to make a sound. Repeat this
step, listening carefully. Record your observations.
See if you could arrange the sound from the rubber bands
from highest pitch to lowest pitch.
● Pluck the bands again but before you do, hold down part of
the elastic bands with your fingers to shorten them.
● Record your observations
Questions
1. Which rubber bands made the highest sound?
2. Which rubber band made the lowest sound?
3. How do you think both shoebox guitars and real guitars
make sound? Explain your answer.
What you should have found:
● The thickest rubber band made the lowest sound while the
thinnest rubber band made the highest sound.
● The shortest rubber band vibrates the fastest. It makes the
highest note.
● The longest rubber band vibrates the slowest. It makes the
lowest note.
132
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Loudness
A loud or soft sound is identified by its volume, another property of
sound.
A loud sound has a high volume while a soft sound has a low
volume.
Loudness is related to the amplitude of a sound. The larger the
amplitude, the louder the sound. Loudness depends on the energy
of the sound. The greater the energy, the louder the sound.
Homework activity
Identify 10 loud sounds in the neighbourhood. Why is it important
that these sounds are loud?
USING THE COMPUTER TO GENERATE AND
VISUALIZE WAVES
133
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
There are several sites that could be used to provide students with
the opportunity to manipulate certain wave characteristics. For
example, students may be able to change the amplitude and
frequency, to see how these changes affect wavelength and hence
see how the wave diagram changes as the different wave
characteristics change. Three of them are shown below. As
students explore these sites, they should begin to recognize how a
wave’s amplitude (height) and wavelength (length of a wave) can
change. Students should be able to describe patterns of waves in
terms of amplitude and wavelength and draw diagrams to represent
waves with different features.
https://www.physicsclassroom.com/Physics-Interactives/Waves-
and-Sound/Simple-Wave-Simulator/Simple-Wave-Simulator-
Interactive
https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/waves-intro/latest/waves-
intro_all.html https://academo.org/demos/virtual-
oscilloscope/
Note to teacher:
Using the computer can be very challenging for some students.
Students who are better at manipulating computer sites, should be
placed with those who may have difficulty doing so.
134
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
As students explore the sites and become familiar with them, they
can be asked to produce waves with specific features. Some
examples are given below
1. a wavelength with high amplitude.
2. a wave with many wavelengths (high frequency).
3. a wave with many wavelengths and high amplitude.
4. a wave with few wavelengths and low amplitude
Working in groups, students can be asked to draw the waves they
create.
Exploring sound waves
There are also other programmes that allow students to explore
sound waves to see how the wave diagrams change as the amplitude
(loudness) and frequency (pitch) of a sound are changed. They also
get to hear how the sounds change. The links to two of these sites
are given below.
https://serpmedia.org/scigen/oscillo-board/
https://academo.org/demos/virtual-oscilloscope/
Some sites may also allow students to upload their own sounds, to
see how the wave pattern changes as the sound changes.
Before students begin their exploration, remind them of the
following. Sound waves are Longitudinal waves and longitudinal
waves are difficult to draw, as a result, sound waves are represented
using the same wave diagrams as those of transverse waves.
135
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Loudness is given by the amplitude of the sound wave, while pitch
is given by the frequency of the sound wave.
Amplitude changes when more or less energy is added to the wave.
With sound, the more volume, the higher the amplitude. Also, the
higher the tone or pitch, the more wavelengths can be seen.
High amplitude sounds are made by objects that vibrate with a lot
of energy, like the sound of a rocket blasting off. Low amplitude
waves are like a whisper, where your vocal cords vibrate lightly to
make sound waves.
Upon visiting a site, allow students free exploration for about 2
minutes to familiarise themselves with the different options available
for them to manipulate. After some time, students can be asked to
produce waves with specific characteristics. Some examples of
waves that they may produce are given below.
a. High amplitude with few wavelengths (high volume with a low
note)
b. High amplitude with many wavelengths (high volume with a
high note)
c. Low amplitude with few wavelengths (low volume with a low
note)
d. Low amplitude with many wavelengths (low volume with a
high note
Discuss the differences between the waves created with:
1. A high pitch and a low pitch sound.
2. A loud and soft sound
136
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
For those sites that allow students to upload their own sounds or
have sound files that students could use, students should find that
the objects that create loud sounds should have large wavelengths
and amplitudes, while the objects that create little noise would have
the opposite.
1. How does the size of amplitude and wavelength impact the
sound that is made?
2. How did the long wavelengths look and sound?
3. How did the short wavelengths look and sound?
(The length of wavelengths will change with the sound and frequency)
4. How did the high amplitude waves look and sound?
5. How did the short amplitude waves look and sound?
(Amplitude changes with volume of the sound)
Drawing wave diagrams
Students can then draw the waves that different sounds make.
1. Draw a wavelength with high amplitude.
137
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. Draw a wave with many wavelengths (high frequency).
3. Draw a wave with low amplitude
4. If you are given two wave diagrams and asked which one
has the higher frequency, how would you decide?
5. If you are given two wave diagrams and asked which sound
is louder, how would you decide?
138
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
A CLOSER LOOK AT LIGHT WAVES
Like other waves, light waves exhibit the following characteristics.
● Light waves also transfer energy from place to place. A light
source such as a candle flame, is the energy for the light
waves.
● Light waves can also be described by their frequency,
amplitude and wavelength.
● Light waves do not need a medium to travel through,
therefore waves can travel through a vacuum.
● Light waves are just one type of electromagnetic wave.
Other electromagnetic waves include the microwaves in
your oven, radio waves, and X-rays. Light travels much
faster than sound.
● The amplitude of a light wave is its brightness.
● Like other waves, light waves undergo reflection, refraction,
and diffraction.
● An important property of light is that it travels in a straight
line. We get shadows when light is blocked by an object.
● Light can pass through some but not all materials.
Using the materials provided (pieces of cardboard with a hole in
each piece, tape and a light source), set up a simple experiment to
demonstrate the fact that light travels in a straight line.
Teacher: The following video gives some ideas as to how this may
be done.
Video - Light Travels in a Straight Line
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iXy9Z4J17xY (3:33 mins)
139
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Reflection of light
All waves are known to undergo reflection or the bouncing off of
an obstacle. In previous lessons, you would have learnt that you see
objects because the light reflected from them reaches your eyes.
Two other properties of light is that it can be refracted and diffracted
like other waves.
Refraction of light
As with sound waves or other waves, light waves bend or are
refracted as they move from one medium to another.
Place a pencil into a half-full glass of water. What do you observe?
Hold the pencil straight up and observe what happens.
What would you expect to observe at the water level, if you were to
look at someone standing in a pool of water?
Give one reason why refraction is important.
140
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Spearfishing and Refraction
Light coming from the fish refracts (changes direction) when it hits
the surface. A person above the water sees the apparent position of
the fish closer to the surface than the real position of the fish.
Retrieved verbatim from:
https://www.sciencelearn.org.nz/images/59-refraction-and-
spearfishing
Diffraction
When light waves encounter a small obstacle or a small opening, like
other waves, the light wave can bend around the obstacle or pass
through the opening and then spread out. This bending or spreading
out of light waves is called diffraction.
A very simple demonstration of diffraction of light waves can be
conducted by holding your hand in front of a light source and
slowly closing two fingers while observing the light transmitted
between them.
141
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1. What do you observe? (As the fingers approach each other and
come very close together, a series of dark lines parallel to the fingers are
observed).
2. What are two examples of diffraction in everyday life?
The following video will also help to explain the concept a little
better.
Video - Demonstrating diffraction using laser light
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MZktgCWvHlE
(Timestamp: 0:00 to 2:40 mins)
CREATING MODELS OF WAVES USING DIFFERENT
MATERIALS
● Now that you have a better understanding of waves and you
are familiar with the different types of waves and properties
of waves, working in your groups, you will now create physical
models of transverse waves.
● You are provided with different materials (Play-Doh, pipe
cleaners, string, wire, fabric, glue and masking tape, etc.).
● Use these materials to make a model of a transverse wave.
Your model should have more than one wavelength. Your
wave should be labeled with definitions of crest, trough,
wavelength, and amplitude at the correct points on the model.
● After you are finished making your physical model, you will
make a presentation to explain how transverse waves move.
You should use the model you created to demonstrate and
define the parts of a wave.
142
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The following video demonstrates one example of a wave machine
that can be used to make waves.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LvFOPWChyA0 (0.22 mins)
Additional Resources and Materials
● Straw waves - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IlF8sdHTqaU (2:12 mins)
● A simple wave machine: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2eMT3skCTDg (4:10 mins)
● Waves - Light Waves and Sound Waves: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lIrjYh9GrGM (9:52 mins)
● How are Longitudinal Waves Related to Transverse Waves? - https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=fNqFciMgJbI (3:13 mins)
● Water droplets make waves - https://www.pbs learningmedia.org/resource/buac20-35-sci-ps-waveenergy/wave-energy/ (0:29 mins)
● Water bottles with a different Pitch: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YdAZQhIABAM (1:58 mins)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
English Language
● Integrate multimedia and visual displays into presentations to clarify information, strengthen claims and evidence, and add interest.
● Describe characteristics of waves.
● Provide definitions of different concepts of waves
● Take notes and categorize information collected.
Mathematics
● Counting the number of peaks of a wave.
● Taking measurements of amplitude and wavelength.
● Measuring materials to make models of waves.
Social studies
● The use of waves in sporting events such as cricket and football and social events.
● The effects that waves can have on coastal areas and on persons.
143
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Health
• Loud sound waves can damage hearing. Examples: music, jackhammers, vehicle horns, airplanes etc.
• Large waves in the ocean have energy that can knock you down and the undertow can pull you in the water.
144
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 2: Generate and compare multiple solutions that use patterns to transfer information
[Clarification Statement: Examples of solutions could include drums sending coded information through sound waves, using a grid of 1’s and 0’s representing black
and white to send information about a picture, and using Morse code to send text.]
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge 1. Write the meaning of each symbol People Use Waves to transfer information – Introduction
● Define the terms: shown below.
For as long as humans have been on Earth, they have enjoyed
o Decoding
communicating with each other. Some of the earlier methods of
o Encoding
communicating to persons was the use of speech, gestures, symbols and
o Cell towers
drawings, reflected rays of the Sun, fire and smoke signals and the
o Digital
beating of drums.
o Patterns
o Signals From this we can see that waves have been used in communications for
o Symbol a very long time.
o Gestures
o Binary Communicating using Sound Waves
o Code
o Constraint Who's ready to feel the beat? Turn on your listening ears and listen
o Criteria closely as I clap out a pattern.
o Radio wave
Teacher introduces the lesson by clapping/drumming to a rhythm.
o Controlled
experiment
Students, can you match my rhythm? (Students try to match the rhythm)
o Causal relationships
2. A long time ago, messages were sent using Students when you hear this beat I want you to run on spot/dance/move
● Demonstrate an around. Teacher beats another rhythm and says when you hear this
methods such as the beating of drums and
understanding of the sound I want you to freeze. Teacher repeats the exercise for students to
importance of waves. puffs of smoke. follow the codes. Teacher makes another pattern and declares that it
means, turn around and play it again and continue the game.
145
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Demonstrate how high-tech a. State one reason why each method
Students, in today’s lesson we are going to learn how patterns can be
devices use waves to send
was not useful for sending messages
used to transfer information. In your own words tell me, what is a
and receive information.
over long distances.
pattern?
● Compare two different ways
So, what makes waves suitable for communication?
of encoding and decoding
b. Before Morse code and the telephone
information.
From our last series of lessons, you found out that waves occur in
were used to send messages long
● Give advantages and repeating patterns and energy is transferred by waves without matter
disadvantages of the distances, how were messages sent being transferred. Waves also travel unchanged over long distances.
different coding methods. over long distances?
All of these properties make them very suitable for transferring
● Compare multiple solutions
information through the use of coded signals.
to a problem based on how
3. Complete the following table by writing This makes waves useful for sending and receiving messages. Some
well they meet the criteria
examples include:
and constraints of the design sound waves, light waves or radio waves
solution. to tell how each signal is sent. ● Patterns of sound waves can transfer information (for example,
● Show how light and sound Morse code and drum signals).
waves can be used to ● Patterns of light waves can transfer information (for example,
transfer information. smoke signals and ship-to-ship signals of light).
● Account for differences
observed in the transmission
Gestures, symbols and codes all communicate messages across
of information.
distances.
● Explain how a telephone
works using a basic model. Symbols
● Explain the importance of
A symbol is something that represents or stands for something else.
encoding and decoding
messages using different Activity symbols
methods
● Explain how a string phone
● Present to students a series of symbols such as a stop sign shape
or street sign, common emoji, the peace sign, etc. Ask students to
works.
state what each symbol represents.
146
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Explain how the use of Develop models of signalsEngineers use waves ● Decode each of the symbols together.
waves to transfer and signals to communicate images, words and ● Then make a list of other common symbols.
information has changed the ● Discuss the advantages of using symbols and codes for
ideas. Draw a model of each of the following. In
way information is communication
transferred your model show how waves or signals are used to
● Give an advantage and one help the technology work. Signals
disadvantage for each model A signal transfers a pattern. Often, this pattern is made up of light waves
of encoding information or sound waves
● Give examples of devices
Introduce the idea of a signal by testing the smoke alarm so that it makes
which use different types of
a sound.
waves to transfer
information
If it is not possible to test the smoke alarm, play the sound of a smoke
● Decode and write messages
alarm to the class.
in Morse code.
● Identify different types of
Discuss how a smoke alarm uses a code and a pattern.
symbols encountered in
everyday life
● Distinguish between
symbols, signals and
gestures.
● Examine past inventions in
their historical context, with
a view to understanding the
various positives and Examples of light and sound used to send signals
negatives of research. (ST 3
A lighthouse
TE NT 1)
A lighthouse projects a bright, flashing light out to sea. The
Skills
lighthouse’s lamp is the source of the light waves. Sailors detect the
light waves and observe any patterns they see. Every lighthouse uses a
147
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Observe the use of different Answer the following questions unique pattern of flashes. Sailors look at a chart to help them decode or
codes in the transfer of
a. Give three examples of how you can
interpret each signal.
information
communicate with someone living in Every lighthouse also has a foghorn. A foghorn makes a loud sound
● Infer how a change of
that can be heard far from land. Each foghorn makes its own unique
another country. (phone, email, letter)
different parts of a string
pattern of sounds.
telephone will affects its b. How might you communicate with a
ability to transmit sound Play a sound bite of a foghorn and ask students to identify the sound
friend to invite him or her to your
waves and what is its purpose.
birthday party? (send an invitation,
● Describe characteristics of
● Under what condition would it be necessary to use the foghorn?
waves that make them telephone call or message by someone)
(foggy night)
suitable for the transfer of
Answer the following questions on how light and
● How do the lighthouse and a foghorn communicate
information.
sound are used to communicate information. information?
● Classify devices based on
a. What type of waves do ambulances
the type of signals they use Traffic lights
to transfer or receive and police cars use to communicate
A traffic light is another kind of signal. Light waves are employed in
information
with people?
communicating an idea. It flashes red, green, or yellow. These colors
● Measure the length of
b. Give three examples of how we can let drivers know whether they should stop, go, or begin to slow down.
materials to conduct
Traffic lights help drivers move safely in different directions. They also
experiments use different sounds to
help keep traffic flowing.
● Hypothesize how changes to communicate information. (alarms,
a string phone will affects its Activity:
sirens, clapping, whistle)
ability to transmit sound
c. What is the message that ambulances ● Make a class list of different signals that students have
waves
encountered and what they communicate, for example, railroad
● Construct a message for and police cars want to
crossing, fire alarm, alarm clock, low battery alert.
others to decode using
communicate to people
● Review the different types of signals that students have
codes
d. as they move on the roads? (emergency discussed. Categorize them by energy type. sound signals light
● Construct a model
telephone situation) signals, motion signals.
● With students, identify the pattern that each signal uses to
communicate.
148
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Construct diagrams to show e. List three ways that persons use light ● With students, identify the type of energy and wave that each
how a cell phone transfers signal employs to communicate.
to communicate information over a
and receive information.
distance. ( headlights on a vehicle,
● Generate and compare ● Identify how each signal transforms a pattern of one form of
multiple solutions to a flashlight, boat messages) energy to another to communicate.
problem based on how well f. List three ways that persons use
they meet the criteria and Note:
sound to communicate information
constraints of the design Be sure students understand that signals act over a distance. Some signals
solution over a distance (horn, siren, speaker can act over longer distances than others, depending on the type of wave
● Draw diagrams to show how system) and the medium (wires, air, or other) being used.
cell phones transfer and
receive information Gestures
Have each student think of one gesture they can used to communicate a
● Design at least two different Draw a light signal for the directions given in
positive message, such as a smile, a thumbs-up, a head nod, or a high
code designs for transferring
each box
five. (Remind students that some gestures are negative and therefore,
information
should be avoided.)
● Plan and conduct
Discuss how students can communicate with babies who can’t yet talk
investigations on different
or with people who speak a different language.
devices that communicate
information
Activity
● Compile data from carrying
● Whisper to one student an animal name (giraffe, wolf, cat, or
out different investigations.
whale, for example).
● Analyse data obtained from
● Have student use gestures, signals, or symbols to communicate the
testing codes or devices
name of the animal
developed by classmates.
● Discuss the difference between gestures, symbols, patterns, codes,
● Analyze data to explain how
and signals.
communication devices
transmit data.
Different ways that information is transferred from one device to
another
149
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Create and Interpret data The Morse Code was a very important invention Transferring information using patterns
obtained from testing
that allowed persons to send messages over long
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oWOq2cv0U6k
devices
distances. Answer the following questions. (3:57 mins)
● Interpret messages using
Video includes:
Morse code or other codes.
a. Why was the invention of the • Discussion of morse code and use of flashing light source to
● Evaluate each code and
communicate.
design solution based on telegraph so important? (long distance
• Discussion of binary code (communication with zeros & ones)
speed, accuracy, and ease of communication)
and how a computer uses 0 for “off” signals and 1 for “on”
use.
b. How does Morse Code allow us to signals.
● Design and draw a timeline
send messages? (Using a code of dots
to show how technology for
How information is transferred using patterns
particular purposes has and dashes for words)
changed over time (ST 4 PS https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wBBi3FuZsls&t=306s (5:15
c. Write your name in Morse Code
EN 3) mins)
d. What is an advantage of Morse code?
Video includes:
(simple language using simple equipment)
Attitudes/Values • Discussion of how computers and phones use binary codes.
e. What is a disadvantage of Morse
● Appreciate the role that the
code (long words take time to spell)
different types of waves play f. Why do you think Morse code is not
in the communication of
used much today? (other
information
communication faster)
● Show persistence when
developing codes for the
transfer of information and
in the development and
testing of devices to transfer
information
● Demonstrate interest in
developing codes for the
150
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
transfer of information and Complete the table below by choosing a word to
in decoding messages
represent the categories of nouns listed.
received from others
● Use the inquiry approach in
conducting various
investigations on the transfer
of information via different
types of waves
● Show respect for evidence
obtained from investigation • Discussion of binary code (communication with zeros & ones)
on the transfer of and how a compact disc is read by a laser to convert music
information into binary and send it to a listener.
Look at the following scenarios and respond to
● Work collaboratively with
each by answering the questions.
their group members to
develop different codes for
a. Imagine you are lost in the woods and
the transfer of information
need help. Would you rather use a
and in the development and
telephone or Morse Code to send out a
testing of devices to transfer
message?
information.
b. What are two advantages of using this
● Stewardship/Respect for form of communication?
Living Things c. Imagine you are in your backyard and
o When conducting want to send a message to your best
experiments outside friend, who lives next door. Would
be careful not to you rather use a telephone or Morse However, while some of the methods of communication we mentioned
disturb animals Code to send out a message? earlier were suitable for sending messages over short distances, using
nearby with loud them to send information over long distances was a challenge. To send
sound, shouting, information across long distances (e.g. from my country to England or
Answer the following questions about string
etc. to another OECS state) people wrote letters, which in some cases, took
telephones. weeks or more to get to their destination, after traveling by boat,
horseback and by foot. As a result, sending messages over long distances
151
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● When conducting practical a. What materials do you need to make was slow, unreliable and inefficient. Which is why new technologies were
and group work, display developed to help to overcome these problems. These also allowed
a string telephone?
sensitivity to those students persons to send information from one device to another.
b. How does a string telephone work?
who may have hearing
With the discovery of electricity, people began experimenting with
difficulty or who may be c. State three factors that may affect
electrical communication. One device that came out of this period of
visually impaired or colour
how a person hears what the other experimenting was the electric telegraph.
blind.
person is saying, when they are using Subsequently, the Morse code was developed for use with the
● Participate actively in whole-
class and group discussions a string telephone. telegraph. A telegraph is a device that moves electrical signals from one
place to another through wires.
on the transfer of
Write the binary code for the following images.
information.
● Humankind values, beliefs
and overall attitudes can
influence technological
activities and use. (ST 3
STSE 3)
Retrieved from:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Automatic_telegraph_recie
ver-CNAM_14704-IMG_5206-white.jpg
So, what is Morse Code?
To help us answer that question, let us look at the following videos.
Invention of Morse Code
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ORIDAmGf_yQ (4:24 mins)
What Is Morse Code
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N-KcLgXQVa4
(7.06 mins)
152
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
From the videos we learnt that the Morse Code was developed a very
long time ago, by a gentleman called Samuel Morse. The Morse Code
is a very unique method of communicating information over long
distances.
Using this method of communication, messages can be sent using a
special code. A message is sent by tapping out a code via the telegraph.
The telegraph converted the taps to electric signals which were sent
along telegraph lines. The person receiving the message then decodes
the message.
From the video we also learn that the Morse code communication
system uses dots and dashes to relay messages. Each letter in the English
language and every number corresponds to a unique combination of
dashes (—) and dots (•).
153
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Look at the binary codes given below, shade the In the Morse Code system, a dot is called a “dit” and a dash is called a
“dah”. Different combinations of dits and dahs represent each letter in
bitmaps for each set of codes to show the image
the English language as shown in the chart below.
each set represents.
The Morse Code is special because it can be sent electronically using
sound or lights. Using the chart above, letters can be put together to
create words and sentences.
You will get a chance to use the code to write messages and to decode
messages sent to you.
To use this system, the following rules on timing are employed:
The length of each symbol is related to the length of one dit:
• A dit is one unit of sound.
• When switching between dits and or dahs in the same letter,
you leave one unit of silence.
• A dah is the length of three units (three dits).
154
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Worksheet for each student to complete after • To move to the next letter, you insert a pause of three units.
To move to the next word, you insert a pause of seven units.
they present.
To hear what the Morse Code alphabet sounds like, let us view the
following video. Listen carefully for the differences between the dits and
the dahs.
Morse Code Numbers Receiving Practice
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6PRYLczCB4&list=PLb3UNFkJ
4XkzPPmsxQLmQ7hs7gvqFbtrY (1:56 mins)
Practice Morse Code Words with Sound
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uEfTbKDGo-g (7:21 mins)
Write a few words on the board using the Morse Code or project onto a
screen to help students to see how the code is used.
Sound the Morse code script for each word to the students and then
have students take turns sounding out these words using the rules
given.
155
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Divide the class into groups of two. Give each student a copy of the
Use the chart to write the following words in Morse Code Chart. Give students a few minutes to look at the codes
Morse code: for the letters of the alphabet.
1. School
2. Bag
3. Book
4. Glue
Timeline of Technology
The teacher should create a Bristol board poster
and have students do research to place a timeline
of communication devices that use codes.
Secret Codes
During World War II, it was common to send
secret messages about troop moves, warfare
equipment and attack locations. Letters and
numbers on a page could look unintelligible as When you think the students understand the code, ask each group to
words yet using a deciphering code book could write a word together in Morse Code and to share this word with the
actually communicate an important message. class. This will allow you to see if they understand how to use the code.
They even developed special code machines that Once students understand how to create words, each student will create
made messaging and coding easier. You can a message secretly,
imagine that the enemy was looking for ways to then swap the message for his/her partner to decode. Check to see if
steal one of these coding/deciphering machines the work is done correctly. Students can then tape their messages around
so they code understand the secret message and the classroom for others to see.
be better prepared for battle. Note:
The enigma machine was arguably the most It might be helpful to set up parameters for what is an appropriate
famous of these coding devices and even though message.
it was very complicated and seemed foolproof,
some very clever cryptologists from Poland were
156
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
able to decipher how it worked. You can read the Now try decoding these words on your own:
story on Wikipedia (see link below)! 1. •••/–––/•••
2. ••–•/–––/–––/–••
But the machine was changed regularly making it 3. –••/–––/––•/•••
very challenging to decode. 4. •–––/••–/••/–•–•/•
Have students do internet research to 5. ••/ /•–••/–––/•••–/•/ /•••/–•–•/••/•/–•/ –•–•/•/
discover who finally decoded the enigma
machine. Write a message to a friend thanking him/her for inviting you to
Teacher note: his/her birthday party. The message must have at least 10 words.
Finally, a British mathematician named Alan
Turing was instrumental in solving the decoding Other ways to communicate with dots and dashes
problem (see: There are many ways to communicate with dots and dashes besides
https://www.iwm.org.uk/history/how-alan- writing them. Examples of these are as follows:
turing-cracked-the-enigma-code) 1. If you use your feet, a quick stomp will represent a dot, while
sliding your foot on the floor from right to left will represent a
dash.
2. If you use an instrument, a quick, 1-second beep or note will be
used for a dot and a 3-second-long beep or note will be used for
a dash.
3. Tapping a pencil on a hard surface will work well, too. A quick
tap of the pencil will be the dot, while setting the whole pencil
on a surface will be the dash.
Retrieved from: Let us try some of them!
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enigma_machine
Using Sound to “Tap” out the Morse code for a message.
Coding is Very Important in Today’s World
The first phonograph, a device used to record and play sounds (like
Coding continues to be important for operating
music), operated much like a pencil tapping on a table. The only
computers in many contexts. Codes can give
difference is that a needle tapping a metal cone made the sound.
instructions for computer games but also to
157
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
operate machinery in industry. In our technology- Recall that sound waves can travel through solid mediums, such as a
rich world coding is a viable career. desk. Tell students they will be passing a Morse code message through
the desk to the other students in their group. Have students take turns
There are many user-friendly free programs that tapping a five-letter word on their desk. The student tapping the
allow students to write code to do simple tasks as message should tap slowly to ensure that their group members receive
well as operate robots! the message. Group members should record each letter and as soon as
they figure it out, they should signal to allow the student tapping the
The teacher may refer to the following resource message to continue onto the next letter.
for examples This can be repeated with a student listening with his/her head on the
desk.
(https://stackoverflow.blog/2021/01/12/want- ● How quietly can the first student tap and still have the message
to-teach-your-kids-to-code-here-are-three-apps- be heard by the second student?
that-can-help/) but is suggested the teacher team ● Now repeat the message at the same volume with the second
up with other teachers and consider doing some student listening
simple coding activities with children using normally, away from the table. Can the message be heard as
“Scratch” (https://www.scratchjr.org/) well as before?
Morse Code in Lights
The pattern of turning lights on and off can work in the same way as dits
and dahs. Every "dot" in the Morse Code is represented by a quick flash
of the light. Every "dash" of the Morse Code is represented by a longer
flash of light.
158
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://pixabay.com/illustrations/flashlight-desk-spotlight-
wood-3519697/
Try this activity with a flashlight. Have students take their flashlight and
try shining it on the dark surface. cover the front of their flashlight with
their palm and move it away to simulate the dits and dahs. Let us look
at the following video to see how this is done.
Morse Code with Flashlight
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i3HOGdQkTvM
(6:27 mins)
Sending messages in Morse Code using light can also be done using the
bulb and switch in an electrical circuit.
1. If time permits, provide students with materials and help them
to build a working circuit with a battery, wires, and a bulb.
2. Next, ask students to add a switch in such a way that the switch
turns the bulb on and off.
Students, practice by expressing the letter "a" in light by turning your
flashlight on for 1 unit, off for 1 unit, on for 3 units, then off (dit-dah).
159
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Safety tip:
Remind students not to shine the light in anyone’s eyes. They should
aim the light on the wall or on the dark paper provided.
3. Have each group devise a "secret" message.
4. Have the group practice the lighted code message a few times
so that it is clear and readable.
5. Have the groups present their message in Morse Code in light
to the class and have one of the other groups decode the
message.
Questions:
● What did the other team's message say?
● Did you have any challenges understanding the other team's
message? If so, what?
● What did your team's message say?
● Did the other team understand your message? If not, what went
wrong?
Where would Morse code using light be useful?
(on the ocean large lights can flash codes between ships!)
160
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Signal_lamp
The use of Walkie-talkies, phones, and cell phones etc. to
communicate information
https://pixa https://pixa https://pix
bay.com/p bay.com/ph abay.com/
hotos/hono otos/phone- photos/aut
r-honor-9- communica o-
huawei- tion-retro- navigation
fingerprint- vintage- -gps-
2631271/ 7473539/ vehicle-
5414514/
Morse Code allowed us to send and receive messages over long
distances. Since the development of the telegraph and the Morse Code,
many other communication technologies have been developed. Today,
the two main devices that are used to send messages from one person to
another across long distances are the cellular phone and the computer.
Almost all communication technology that we use today, including cell
phones, TV, and the Internet, all send signals using either electricity or
radio waves.
Radio waves are waves similar to light waves.
● What are three different methods of communication that you
use?
● How do these methods differ?
● Are you able to communicate the same ideas or feelings in each
method
161
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The telephone
The telephone is a very common device for communicating over a
distance. With a telephone, a person can talk almost instantly with
someone on the other side of the world. Most telephones are linked to
each other by wires.
When you speak into the phone, your voice makes sounds. In the
telephone, sound is converted into an electrical energy that can travel
through wires. When the electrical energy reaches the receiver in the
phone on the other end, it is changed back to sound.
Come up with a list (as a class) of modern devices that are used to
communicate sound. The most important items on such a list are the
radio and the telephone.
The Science of the String Phone
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3yqB2KFwJCo (4:37 mins)
In this lesson, students will investigate the relationship between sound
waves, encoding, and decoding a message. They will be conducting a
controlled experiment which is defined as an experiment where
everything is kept constant except one variable. By carrying out the
experiment out in this fashion, they can establish what are called causal
relationships.
Scientists can then say that changing a variable caused the overall result.
The experiment will involve investigating the variables involved in
making string phones. Ultimately, they want to solve the problem of
producing a string phone that can send the clearest and loudest message
without leaking the sound to others.
162
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Note: Explain that if you change more than one variable at a time, you
won't know exactly which change had what effect. So, you should only
change one variable at a time, and keep the others constant.
Experiment One
Students, you are provided with the following materials.
• 4 cups (each with a small hole
at the bottom),
• 2 pieces of string the same
length but different thickness
• paperclips.
163
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Follow the following steps on how to make and use a string telephone
1. Thread one end of the string through the bottom of one of the
cups, from the outside in.
2. Pull the string through the hole and tie the end of the string to
a paperclip to hold it in place it so that the string cannot pass
back through the hole.
Note: you can also tie a knot if you do not have a paper clip.
3. Repeat steps 1-2 with the other end of the string and cup.
4. Hold one cup and have your partner hold the other. Walk away
from each other until the string is fully stretched and tight
between the two cups.
5. Hold the cup up to your ear and have your partner speak into
his/her cup. The speaker does not need to talk loudly but must
be clear because the cup muffles the sound a bit.
6. Talk back and forth with your partner.
7. Make a new string telephone using smaller cups and the first
piece of string, repeat steps 4-6. Record your observations
Experiment Two
● To find out the type of string that sends out the loudest and
clearest message through a string phone.
● Replace the string of your cup telephone with the thicker pieces
of string provided. Retest your phone by talking with your
partner and recording your observations.
Experiment Three
● To find out which size cup sends out the loudest and clearest
message through a string phone.
164
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Replace the cups with the other sized cups. Retest your phone
by talking with your partner and recording your observations
Note: At some point during the lesson have students place a hand on
the cup and the string to feel the vibrations traveling through the phone.
Have the students make a diagram showing how sound travels through
their model of a telephone. Label each part of the diagram (air, cup,
string, etc.) with a note about how the material carries the sound and in
which direction the sound is moving.
● Was it easy or hard to hear?
● What is one limitation that a string phone has compared to a
real phone?
● Which string material worked the best for your telephone
design? Give one reason for your observations.
● Describe a change that you think would make your telephone
better.
How do string telephones transmit sound?
A string telephone works very much like a landline phone. When you
talk into the cup, the sound from your voice vibrates the cup, which in
turn vibrates the string. The vibrations are transferred to the string,
across the string and into the bottom of the other cup, which vibrates
the air inside the cup, causing the original sound to be heard. The original
message was encoded from vibrations in the air to vibrations in the cup
and string. On the other end, that message is decoded back into
vibrations in the air.
165
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Mobile phones
Mobile phones use radio waves to transmit and receive signals. These
waves are a type of waves similar to light waves. When a text message is
written, the cell phone turns your message into a digital pattern of 0s and
1s. Digital communication turns information into number patterns.
Digital signals exist in discrete bits and often only include the numbers
0 and 1. Information is thus broken into a pattern and is a code.
With a digital signal, information can be sent anywhere. Tablets,
computers, and cell phones use digital signals to send and receive
information.
When you make a phone call or send a text message your phone sends
radio waves traveling through the air to a nearby cell tower.
Cell towers are tall structures that are designed to receive and transmit
radio signals. The cell tower then sends the signal to another tower or
directly to the receiving cell phone. The cell phone receiving the signal
changes the pattern back to a text message that your friend can see.
How Do Cell Phones Work?
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qxze1Tzp66U (3:55 mins)
How do phones work?
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=44hR8ZD5NjI (7:04 mins)
166
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Thanks to this binary representation, we can store and process
information efficiently on computers.
To store an image on a computer, the image is broken down into tiny
elements called pixels.
A pixel (short for picture element) represents one colour. In order for
the computer to store the image, each pixel is represented by a binary
value. In a monochrome (two colour) image, like the example below, just
1 bit is needed to represent each pixel e.g. 0 for white and 1 for black. in
order for the computer to store the image, each pixel is represented by a
binary value (One or Zero).
Binary Representation of Images
Organise students into small groups of three or four. Provide groups
with a range of black and white squares: Black and white cards and a 5
x 5 design mat for them to lay tiles on the Design mat .Invite groups to
fill up their board with the black and white squares to make a pattern.
Ask students how they would get another group of students to create
exactly the same pattern without allowing them to see the image? Note
ideas on a whiteboard.
Note:
You may want to introduce some constraints such as:
● Students are not allowed to say black or white.
167
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Students are not allowed to use any words or letters
This would leave them with either symbols or numbers to work with.
Once they have come up with a solution to this, it should be relatively
simple to explain that they have essentially created a binary solution.
Binary is commonly represented in 1s and 0s.
Explain to students that they have just created an image pattern using
‘pixels’.
Activity
● Break students into small groups and have them brainstorm
how they think a text message moves from one phone to
another phone. Students can then diagram a text message
moving from one phone to another phone.
● Ask students to name things in their homes that show video or
provide audio. video and audio that enter their homes as radio
waves are then transformed to electrical signals that move
through wires before they can be seen or heard. Specific
examples of this may be televisions and radios.
You will now use patterns of 0s and 1s to transfer information.
1. Ask students to individually create an 8 x 8 square table in a
document. Ask them to use the fill bucket to create a picture.
They will fill some squares with black and leave others white.
168
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. If an internet connection is available, students could create images
using software available on different sites. Two examples are
given below.
Make your own binary image
https://tools.withcode.uk/binaryimage/
Black and White Image Representation in Binary
https://learnlearn.uk/binary/black-white-image-representation-binary/
1. Alternatively, students could be provided with an 8 x 8 template
and asked to shade some of the squares black to create an image.
2. Ask students to get into groups of three and to swap their work so
that they have someone else’s image. Explain that they are now
acting as binary code writers. They need to develop a code for each
line of the picture. Each line of code should have 8 numbers
(consisting of 0s and 1s).
3. Ask students to swap their work for the final time so they will have
someone else’s code. Explain that they are now acting as decoders,
trying to put the picture back together using each line of code.
Lesson closure
1. Place a pixelated image on the board for the whole class to see.
Challenge students to write the binary code for this image in their
books.
2. Place up on the board the following binary code and have students
colour it to see the image. Students can then check each other’s
work.
3. In their notebook, ask students to explain how text, audio and
images were transferred from one cell phone to the other
169
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Fibre optics
Fiber optics is a process of transferring information via light waves using
a special cable.
Fiber
Fiber optic cables can be used to transmit signals very long distances
Light travels in waves along bundles of thin, flexible glass fibres. The
fibres are bundled inside the cable.
How are light waves used to send signals in a fibre optic cable? First, the
information, such as a TV show, is changed to a digital code. The code
is then transformed from numbers to flashes of light. The light waves
enter one end of the cable. It allows the light to move freely through it.
The other end of the cable is attached to a receiver. The receiver receives
the light waves and translates them back to an electronic digital signal.
Finally, the electronic signal is translated back to information the device
can understand.
https://pixabay.com/photos/technology-fiber-optic-light-cable-
2749586/
A visible light ray travelling through a fibre optic cable via internal
reflection, adapted from image by Chris Woodford CC BY 3.0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M9AT3hrb35o
Waves Transfer Information Duration: 1:53
170
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Design solutions for a given problem
Students in the last set of lessons, you would have learnt about a number
of ways to communicate over distance. Some examples include the use
of smoke signals, drums, light signals and Morse code, etc.
Divide the class into small groups of about three to four members. Ask
each group to conduct research on the different ways to communicate
you have done thus far, plus other possible ways of communicating using
patterns over distances.
In your group, work collaboratively to design and build a device or a
communication system for communicating information over a distance.
Some examples could include:
● Using drums to send coded information through sound waves.
● Using a flashlight to convey information using a pattern of on and
off.
● Using Morse code to send information.
● Building an instrument that can be made to produce sounds of
different pitch in a pattern to communicate information.
● Use musical patterns on a xylophone or tuning forks, etc. to
convey information.
An example of how light can be used to Communicating
To give you an example of how your task can be done, observe how a
group of children use light to communicate over a distance in this live-
action video produced by WGBH.
171
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Use the video to observe strategies for using light to communicate
across a distance as well as to design a light signal code to help to
communicate to solve a problem.
https://www.pbslearningmedia.org/resource/buac18-k2-sci-ps-
communicatelight/communicating-with-light/universe/
As you watch the video keep the following questions in mind.
● Why did the children in the video use different shapes as light
signals to represent the different activities?
● How many different ways did the students send a signal using
light?
● Did the video make you think differently about using light to
communicate? How?
Use the video to observe strategies for using light to communicate across
a distance as well as to
design a light signal code to help them to communicate to solve a
problem.
Problem:
Imagine that you are stranded on an island without electricity. Your boat
has become untied and has drifted out to sea. How would you signal for
help?
Create a communication system from your island to the persons who
might rescue you.
Possible criteria that could be included:
● Groups must communicate information using patterns.
172
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Design solution must communicate over a predetermined
distance and
● Groups must be able to describe how patterns were used in the
design to communicate over a distance.
Possible constraints that might be included
● Materials available to build/create a device.
● The amount of time available to design and build the device.
● Different safety issues.
● Working with your partner, develop the code that you will be
using, decide if you will be using light or sound waves in patterns
to transfer your codes.
● Make instructions and a key for transferring the signals and
decoding the messages.
● After you are finished designing and building your device, or
communication system, put together a presentation that
includes an explanation of how patterns are used to
communicate information.
● You would need to include your communication system in your
presentation and how the messages will be sent.
● After observing each design solution,
● Students will investigate how well the solutions perform under
a range of likely conditions.
● All tests that are planned and carried out should be fair tests in
which variables are controlled.
● Students then compare the solutions, determining which can be
used to successfully communicate information over a distance
using patterns.
173
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Lead a discussion about the different ways that students used to
send their signals.
● What do you think makes a coded system “good”? (It should be
complete enough to solve a problem or to make something usable.)
● State two things that you can use to tell whether or not a signal
works or doesn’t work? (If a code works, the receiver will be able
to decode the message).
● Why is it important to follow the criteria and constraints? (The
criteria and constraints help make sure that the code can be used
for the use that is intended).
● How are these signaling methods similar? (They communicate a
message.)
● How are these signaling methods different? (Possible answer:
Some methods use light, some use color, and some use sound.)
● Which signaling method do you think is best? Why? (Students
should explain their rationales for stated preferences.)
● How do you think the other signaling methods could be improved?
(Students may point out ways to make the messages or instructions
clearer.)
● How well could your classmates decode your message?
● How far could your message travel?
● Which method of communication did you find easiest?
● Which method of communication did you find hardest?
174
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Patterns Transfer Information - 3 Easy Science Activities (enjoy-teaching.com)
Coding in Scratch :
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rxoppbm-y8k&list=PLNIdDxctsZe9gVqjHHj_TxzHfElHszdst (6:08 mins)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D-nW4jvzRr8 (15:37 mins)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Morse code
Before the advent of Morse code, the only way to communicate with people in far-off places was via horseback, carrier pigeon, or mail.
The invention of Morse code changed all that. It enabled people to communicate quickly, even if they were thousands of miles apart. Rather than using words and
sentences, Morse code uses dots and dashes, usually in the form of electrical pulses, to communicate messages
An operator would send the message, using the telegraph machine, to an operator at the receiving end who would decode the dots and dashes.
The dots make up the short sounds, and the dashes are the long sounds. In order to see this on paper, the dot sounds are written as a period (.), and the dash sounds
are written with a dash (–).
SOS is an internationally recognized distress single established using Morse code.
Morse code is not as widely used as it once was, the U.S. Navy and coast guard continue to use signal lamps to send messages via Morse code today. Amateur radio
operators and aviators also still use it to communicate with one another.
Information transfer
Information transfer is the way information is turned into a code and transferred from one place to another. Patterns are used to send and receive information.
175
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Information is transferred from devices through signals. These signals are analog signals and digital signals. Analog signals are made of waves with a continuous
pattern. Sound waves and radio waves are examples of analog signals that transfer information from one device to another.
Digital signals carry binary data i.e. 0 or 1 in the form of bits. Examples of devices that use digital signals include digital watches, digital video signals, CDs, DVDs
and computers. Information sent by digital signals is not continuous—it is broken down into digits, or millions of individual bits of information.
How electronic devices transfer information
All electronic devices, from computers to mobile phones to smart home appliances, use binary code as their communication language. Computers and other electronic
devices transfer information in the form of patterns containing 1’s and 0’s That is, all information stored and processed by a computer is represented internally in
binary form Each letter, number, or symbol is converted into a sequence of bits. Each bit represents an on or off state, which translates to a 0 or 1 respectively.
Digital pictures also use electronic patterns. The patterns are used to turn pixels on or off. Pixels are simply tiny lights.
By sending a pattern of information telling a device which pixels to turn on and off, an image can be made. Images with more pixels have more detail.
Although music is not text or image it can also be stored and transferred as patterns of 1’s and 0’s.
How mobile phones work
Cell phones send signals in the form of radio waves. These are received by nearby cell towers. These transmit these signals to another cell tower or to the phone
directly.
Cell towers
Cell towers are structures that are designed to receive and transmit radio signals. Cell towers are connected to mobile networks, which are a series of interconnected
towers and switches that allow mobile phones to communicate with each other.
A traditional telephone depends on wires to send sound
When the caller speaks into a telephone, the microphone changes the sound of the person’s voice into an electric signal. The base sends out the signal through its
wire. The signal can travel as an electric current, travel through thin glass fibres in the form of light or the signals can be changed into radio waves and sent through
the air by antennas and satellites. When the signal reaches the telephone at the other end, its loudspeaker changes it back into the sound of the caller’s voice.
176
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
How GPS works
GPS satellites circle the Earth twice a day in a precise orbit. Each satellite transmits a unique signal and orbital parameters that allow GPS devices to decode and
compute the precise location of the satellite. GPS receivers use this information and trilateration to calculate a user's exact location.
How radio and television work
Both a car radio and a TV receive a signal that has been broadcast. To broadcast means to transmit, or transfer, a signal in some form of a wave. Broadcast stations
such as radio and television stations send signals in the form of waves to receivers in TVs and radios. The signals transmit information such as symbols, pictures, and
sounds, and often they do so in the form of waves.
TV remotes send information as patterns of light pulses. The pulses tell the TV when to change the channel, increase or decrease volume, or when to turn the power
on and off.
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the curriculum)
English Language
● Use both print and digital sources, to build their understanding of the use of waves to communicate over a distance
● Present information to their partner and class using different methods.
● Record observations using their smartphones.
● Provide definitions of different concepts related to the transfer of information.
● Discuss information at the group or class level.
Mathematics
● Taking measurements of distances that sound can be transferred using string phones.
● Measuring materials to make devices that transfer information.
● Writing binary codes for different images given
Agriculture
● Different types of digital resources are used to transmit information in agriculture: Examples include: The use of drones to monitor crop diseases, to track
animals, in marketing of agricultural produce.
● Sensors on farms can be used to help to reduce predial larceny.
177
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
TVET
● Different digital resources are used in the teaching of TVET
●
Social studies
● We communicate with each other using several methods such as symbols, signals and gestures.
● Signals are used in communicating information in our everyday life such as traffic lights.
● Morse Code is used by persons with certain challenges to communicate information.
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Elements from Local Culture
1. Examples of information being transferred
● Conch shell used to make sound
● The beating of drums
2. Lights are used to guide airplanes and boats
3. The use of symbols in certain religions
Technology
● Waves are used to transfer information in almost all of the devices we use today.
● Certain inventions use waves to enhance our senses, like our hearing and sight.
● Waves are used to study volcanoes and other natural disasters
● The use of digital solutions in TVET
● The use of smart technology in TVET training
TVET
Many tools used in TVET utilize waves in their operation.
Environment that are integrated
178
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
● Loud sounds can be dangerous to animals.
● Underwater signals can affect the migration patterns of animals such as whales.
● Cell towers can cause potential harm to birds and other organisms.
179
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Structure and Function
Strand (Topic): Structure and Function
All living things have features that allow them to interact and survive in their environment. Understanding the function linked to such structures allows us to
better care for living things and also adapt as humans.
Essential Learning Outcome 1: Develop a model to describe that light reflecting from objects and entering the eye allows objects to
be seen.
[Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include knowledge of specific colours reflected and seen, the cellular mechanisms of vision, or how the retina
works.]
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Terminology and Comprehension The Sun and Moon: An Example of Reflection
(specular, absorbs, smooth, reflected, rough, glare Students Already Know
Knowledge diffuse, retina)
• Define the terms: Students, you know that the sun is very bright. It gives off a
o reflect Fill in the blanks with the correct term chosen from lot of light and heat energy. After the sun goes down in the
o specular reflection the list above. sky and it becomes dark, the moon appears.
o glare
o diffuse reflection The only reason we see objects is because light is Does the moon give off heat? (no)
o translucent ____________ off the object back through a lens in Does the moon have its own light? (no)
o lens our eye with an image formed on the back of the eye Where does the moon get its bright light?
o retina called the ________. Light reflected off of smooth (from the sun)
o absorb objects like the surface of water can generate a
o white light ___________ because of the intensity and singular Yes, the light of the sun bounces off of the moon and
o luminescent direction of the light. This is called comes to our eyes. The science word we use for bounce is
o bioluminescent __________reflection. Surfaces that are ________, reflect.
o law of reflection tend to reflect light in many directions. This is called We would say the moon reflects the light of the sun.
o protractor ___________reflection. Dark colored clothing tends
o telescope to be hotter in direct sunlight because it ________all What does the moon look like? (at different times of the month it
o laser the colors of white light the energy being converted can have different shapes)
o periscope to heat.
180
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Demonstrate they What Happens in Ecosystems When there is no Depending on the position of the moon, the earth and the
understand the difference Light to Reflect?? sun, we see different portions of the moon reflecting the
between specular and suns light. We call these the phases of the moon.
diffuse reflection. Why, in the deepest parts of the ocean might some
animals need bodily structures that glow? Investigating Reflection
• Compare the reflectivity of (Very little light gets to the bottom of the ocean. If there is no "Today, we will explore how we see objects around us. Have
objects in the real world. light to reflect off objects, we couldn’t see the animals) you ever wondered why you can see things like your
Fact: favourite toy, your textbooks, or the beautiful sky? It's all
As many as 90% of all deep-sea animals are because of light! Let's dive into the world of light and
• Account for the glare we
luminescent (create their own light in the absence of discover how it helps us see."
experience off of water or
sunlight using biochemical processes in their bodies.
shiny smooth objects.
Activity 1: Let's Play with Light
Some of the most common functions of Gather students in a well-lit room. Get them to notice an
• Explain why black objects
bioluminescence in the ocean are for defense against object like a chair or a desk in the room.
heat up when subjected for
predators or to find or attract prey. Turn off the lights. Students, do you see the chair. (no teacher
prolonged periods to direct
it is dark in this room)
sunlight.
Students should do research to discover at least three So the chair doesn’t have its own light? (no teacher)
animals that use bioluminescence in the absence of
• Distinguish reflection and
reflected daylight/sunlight. What if I shine a flashlight on the chair. Can you see it now?
absorption of light.
(yes teacher) So the only reason you see the chair is because
Teacher resource: the light from the flashlight reflects off the chair and comes
• Identify two parts of the eye
https://latzlab.ucsd.edu/bioluminescence/biolumine to your eyes. We say that the chair becomes visible, we can
that help us to gather light
scence-questions-and-answers/ now see it.
and make an image for our
brain to process.
Activity 2: Exploring Reflection
Law of Reflection Just as we talked about the sun and moon, when light hits an
• Identify phases of the moon object, it can bounce off, just like when you throw a ball
(ST 2 ESS SS 4) This law states that the angle that the light hits a against a wall, it bounces back.
plane
• Outline the relationship mirror (called the angle of incidence (i)) equals the Can you draw a picture of how the light might bounce so
between the earth, moon angle of reflection (r) that you see yourself in a mirror?
and sun. (ST 3 ESS SS 1) (the light leaves the source reflects off your body, reflects off the mirror
and returns to your eyes.)
181
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Skills
• Observe how objects reflect Light
source
light to different extents.
• Infer why white clothing is
preferred in hot climates.
Mirror
• Measure angle of incidence
& reflection.
Different Surfaces
• Measure temperatures.
A mirror is a very smooth surface, so it reflects light very
Students should use a protractor to measure the well. We can move a mirror around and direct the light from
• Classify glass as plain clear
angle of incidence and angle of reflection in the a flashlight quite easily. (Teacher: Shine the flashlight onto the
or translucent.
following diagram. mirror and observe how the light reflects off the mirror and onto the
surrounding walls)
• Design a periscope.
Reflection of light off of smooth surface has the property
that the angle of impact on the surface is the same as the
• Construct a periscope.
angle of reflection. The reflected light tends to be focused as
a result. This is called specular reflection.
• Investigate and If you look at a puddle in the road or the surface of still
communicate your research water like a pond, it also is very smooth and reflects light
findings on the use of well. When we look at those water surfaces or smooth glass,
mirrors. we sometimes refer to the glare of the light off the surface
Diagrams retrieved from: because it is so direct and intense. Humans have invented
• Draw a diagram of a light https://byjus.com/physics/angle-of-incidence/ sunglasses to battle that glare - something we will learn
beam that allows you to see about elsewhere in our science class.
yourself in a mirror.
Technology Research Some types of glass are not so smooth; they have a rough
• Classify through research at surface When the light hits that surface it reflects in many
least three animals with Students can choose one of the three technology directions at many angles. This is called diffuse reflection.
bioluminescent ability. advances below to research and report in a one-page You may have seen translucent glass used for shower doors
description including a picture. and bathroom windows.
182
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Interpret results from a light 1) The use of mirrors and reflection in
reflection/absorption telescopes
experiment. 2) The use of mirrors and reflection in laser
research
• Use a thermometer to 3) The use of mirrors and reflection in the
measure temperature (ST 3 periscope
ESS EW 9) for submarines
Rubric:
• Examine past inventions in • Clear description of the value of mirrors for
their historical context. (ST reflection in the technology (5 marks)
3 TE NT 1) • Grammar and punctuation (5 marks)
Retrieved from:
• Clear picture depicting the utility of mirrors
https://www.flickr.com/photos/drew_makepeace/3705825
• Formulate problems and do for the invention (5 marks)
219
research in development of
technological devices. (ST 3 Applications of Mirrors: Build a Periscope.
Because the reflection of light is diffuse or spread in many
TE TM 1) As a technology design activity, have students design
directions, it is difficult to see images through the glass.
and build a rudimentary periscope.
Humans invented that glass for the specific purpose of
• Demonstrate giving
giving privacy in bathrooms!
examples that some Teacher see materials/process here:
materials reflect, transmit, or https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GsuJZufaGcU
absorb light. (ST 4 PS MM (1:36 mins)
3)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B5NCqIBM34
o (5:57 mins)
• Describe with examples,
Specular
materials that are
Protect Your Eyes From Reflected Sunlight Reflection
translucent. (ST 4 PS MM 5)
(Sources of UV exposure)
Direct light from the sun is extremely damaging to
• Design and construct
eyes, but indirect reflected UV rays from the
objects to satisfy human Diffuse
ground can be even more dangerous. The table
needs and to make life Reflection
below shows the UV radiation reflection levels for
easier. (ST 5 TE TM 2)
several common indirect sources. The higher the
Retrieved from: https://www.americanlaboratory.com
percent, the more risk of eye damage.
183
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Attitudes/Values I want you to think about throwing a rubber ball at a solid
Surface Type UV wooden wall. How would it bounce back?
• When conducting practical Reflection Now think about throwing a rubber ball at a wire
and group work, display Grass, Open water 2-8% fence…how would that be different?
sensitivity and offer Asphalt 4-9% (The wire fence would make the ball bounce in many different directions
assistance to peers who may Light -colored concrete 8-12% like diffuse reflection. I could throw the ball at the smooth wooden wall
have physical or learning Dry beach or sand 15-18% in such a way that it always bounces back to me where I want; that
challenges. Sea surf/foam 25-30% would be more like specular reflection- it has specific and consistent
Snow Up to 80%
direction)
• Participate actively in
Activity 3: The Eye Accepts Light and the Brain Processes
classroom discussions.
Data Retrieved from:
(Teacher note: the specific anatomy and process of image formation in
• Appreciate that science https://www.yourtracktohealth.com/WellnessPageC
the eye is not necessary at this grade level)
informs how we design ontent.aspx?MenuId=181
everyday objects that make
Our eyes are like cameras. They have a lens that takes in
our lives easier. Consumer Research Project: Choosing the Best
light. The light travels through the eye and forms an image
Product
at the back of the eye called the retina.
• Collaborate with peers Teacher note:
The retina sends signals to the brain, allowing us to see the
productively in design The information below would allow students to visit
object.
challenges. a local store and assess the availability of best eye
wear for screening out reflected UV rays and
reporting back to the class on relative availability.
• Identify and appreciate that
the gadgets, tools and
Information Supplied by:
structures used in their
https://www.yourtracktohealth.com/WellnessPageC
homes and community are
ontent.aspx?MenuId=181
made by humans. (ST 3 TE
UT 1)
“While sunglasses are definitely a good idea when it
comes to eye protection, not all sunglasses are
Retrieved from:
created equal. It’s highly recommended that you
https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/testbookje/chapter/seei
choose sunglasses that limit transmission to no more
ng/
than 1 percent of UV rays. When purchasing
sunglasses:
184
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Closure of Activities
• Look for a label on the lenses that
indicates 99 percent of the UV rays are "Today, we learned that light helps us see objects around us
blocked. by reflecting off them and entering our eyes. We also
• Consider wrap around sunglasses or discovered how mirrors reflect light and explored how our
lenses large enough to completely cover eyes work like cameras. Keep observing the world around
the eye and to help prevent as much light you; remember, light makes everything visible!"
as possible from entering through the
edges of the glasses. Extension Activity- Reflect or Absorb?
Did you ever notice how cars in warm climates are more
• Consider darker lenses, particularly if you
often white in color? Why do you think white cars may be
are more light-sensitive. Gray lenses
more popular?
provide the least color distortion but do
not offer any better protection than other
A white car tends to be cooler than a black car, but why?
colored lenses.
Fact: The sun gives off white light that is a combination
• There are also UV-blocking contact
of all the colors of the rainbow! We can see those colors if
lenses for added protection. Talk to your
we shine the white light through a prism, slow down and
eye care professional for more
bend the light into its components.
information about UV-blocking contact
lenses. “
A white object reflects all colors of white light equally.
A black object takes in (absorbs) all colors of light. When a
black object absorbs all of that light energy it causes the
object to get very warm.
If an object absorbs all colors but one, we see the color it
does not absorb. i.e. a red object is an object that absorbs
very other color but reflects only red light.
Experiment or teacher demonstration.
1. Obtain three 2 L plastic soft drink bottles
2. Cover one bottle with aluminum foil, one bottle
with black paint and one bottle with white
paint.
185
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3. Remove the cap from each bottle and use a
thermometer to measure the internal
temperature of the bottles.
4. Shine a high-powered flood lamp on each
bottle sequentially for 10 minutes at the same
distance.
5. Measure the temperature once again.
You should find that the black bottle temperature increases
the most because of light absorption. The foil covered
bottle should reflect most of the energy and remain near
initial temperature value. The white bottle will also be cooler
than black bottle because it reflects the light rather than
absorbing.
Additional Resources and Materials
Translucent: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wL_yVzBH40Q (6:16 mins)
Reflection and absorption: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LAbAk5Ab674 (3:15 mins)
Anatomy of the eye: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=axpCN6Vj9p0 (4:16 mins)
Bioluminescence: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fYsAK24le6U (3:29 mins)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Moon phase simulation: https://sepup.lawrencehallofscience.org/space-unit-moon-phases/
Light reflection simulation: https://simpop.org/reflection/reflection.htm
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics: measuring angles of incidence and reflection/measuring temperatures
186
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Language Arts: Researching information and communicating the research in the written and visual forms (project work)
HFLE: protecting our eyes from reflected light
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
• Technologies that use reflection are part of the research n the assessment column.
• Building a periscope is part of design and problem solving.
187
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 2: Construct an argument that plants and animals have internal and external structures that function to
support survival, growth, behavior, and reproduction.
[Clarification Statement: Examples of structures could include thorns, stems, roots, colored petals, heart, stomach, lung, brain, and skin.] [Assessment Boundary:
Assessment is limited to macroscopic structures within plant and animal systems.]
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Animal Parts and Functions to Survive Looking for Prior Knowledge on Survival Features in
Students will research each of the following animals Humans
Knowledge and their particular feature that allows them to survive. Students, I want you to think about the way our bodies are
• Define the terms: They should enter their research results in the table designed to help us survive, especially in the early days when
o survive below. humans didn’t have all the machines to help us with our work
o seed dispersal or stores to buy our food!
o ejected Description Survival Function
o evaporation Teeth on a Hutia Rodent What do our teeth help us do? (cut food, chew food, grind food for
o transpiration Changing colors on a eating)
chameleon lizard
• Demonstrate with examples, Heavy hair on a What do our long strong arms help us do? (reach for food like
they understand that animals Highland cow apples in high branches, swim across waterways and lift materials to build
and plants have special Rockfish spines shelter)
features that allow them to Thick fat on an Artic
survive. seal What do our strong legs and upright stature help us to do?
Changing colors on a
(chase/hunt animals for food, escape from predators)
• Recall the names of organs in chameleon lizard
What does our nose help us do? (smell food to see if it is spoiled/safe
the human body and state Quills on a porcupine
to eat, smell animals that may be warning us)
their inherent function for Venom of jelly fish
survival. Grit in a bird gizzard
What do our ears help us do? (hear danger in our vicinity like
Shell on a tortoise
predatory animals, impending storms,)
• Explain how some features of Spots on Owl Butterfly
organisms enable their wings
What does our sense of taste help us do? (taste food to see if it is
survival in their habitats. (ST
spoiled/safe to eat, avoid bitter or foods that upset our digestion)
2 LS ECS 5)
188
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Explain with examples what Courting Features and Behaviors What do our special hands help us do? (with opposing thumbs our
are endangered species. (ST 2 For animals to produce their own offspring, a male and hands allow us to grasp things so we can build shelters and use tools and do
LS ECS 12) female of the species will often form a parenting many daily requirements for surviving)
couple. This often means the male will try to attract the
• Draw and label the main female with colorful displays and sometimes even What about Internal Structures of Humans?
dances! Review with students the function of internal organs. How do
eternal parts of a plant. (ST 2
they work together to help us survive as a living thing?
LS SF 1)
The following “bird of paradise” puts on a colorful
display to attract a female parenting partner.
• Define the term dispersal and
list the agents of seed
dispersal. (ST 6 LS DC 10)
• Describe the physical features
of the parts of a plant, relating
these features to their
functions. (ST 3 LS SF 1)
• Describe the eternal features
of animals relating these
Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/nPhVOZiPokA
structures to their functions in
(2:05 mins)
the animals. (ST 3 LS SF 2)
Have students research a Caribbean animal that uses a
• Identify that the transport
courting display (using external body features) in order
Retrieved from: https://binged.it/2RJrJXI
system is a major system in to attract a female thereby ensuring reproduction of
plants and describe the offspring and survival of the species. Students should
For internal organ explanation see:
function of its parts. (ST 5 LS create a poster with pictures of the display and a
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yv0YKjgNKaA (2:43
SF 3) description of the animal species.
mins)
Rubric:
Skills Poster pictures (5 marks)
• Observe pictures & videos Description of species habitat (3 marks)
Heart (pumps blood throughout the body via the circulatory system,
that allow you to make Description of survival function (2 marks)
supplying oxygen and nutrients to the tissues and removing carbon dioxide
inferences about the link Grammar and punctuation (2 marks)
and other wastes)
between features and
function,
189
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Plant Survival Kidneys (maintaining overall fluid balance. regulating and filtering
• Infer what advantage these minerals from blood. filtering waste materials from food, medications, and
internal or external structures How do you think the plant structure in this picture toxic substances)
have in promoting survival. helps this tree produce offspring and survive?
See: https://mynaturenook.com/helicopter-seeds/ Liver (filters blood from intestines and removes harmful chemicals)
• Tabulate and classify the (wind carries the seeds like a helicopter)
animal features and their Lungs (oxygenates blood to feed muscles; In respiration, oxygen
impact. from incoming air enters the blood, and carbon dioxide, a waste gas from
the metabolism, leaves the blood).
• Research instances of body
Stomach (intestines) have 3 functions:
parts having specific functions
for survival.
• temporary storage for food, which passes from the
• Communicate understanding esophagus to the stomach where it is held for 2 hours
by creating a poster. or longer.
Importance of Water to Plants • mixing and breakdown of food by contraction and
Have students sketch a picture of a plant, label the relaxation of the muscle layers in the stomach.
parts and use the picture to explain the process of
Attitudes/Values • digestion of food
transpiration.
• When conducting practical So you see students, we have many bodily features that help us
Internal Organs Help Us Survive: Donation?
and group work, display to stay healthy and continue living.
sensitivity and offer assistance Read Aloud Books to Support Function of Animal Parts
Teacher should introduce topic of organ donation and
to peers who may have Sandra Markle Authored Books
elicit opinions from students on the ethics and viability
physical or learning What if You Had Animal Teeth?
of the practice. (see information below)
challenges. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_vLAx4veHhc (9:15
• Many countries have programs that allow
mins)
families of perished accident victims to donate
• Participate actively in
organs to those that have diseased organs but
What if You Had Animal Eyes?
classroom discussions.
are otherwise healthy.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_vLAx4veHhc (13:16
mins)
• Investigate the physical,
• Also, because we have two kidneys it is very
emotional and social
common for a family member to donate a What if You Had Animal Ears?
adjustments that occur with
kidney to another family member whose https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tWV0SEnI7gc
organ donation.
kidneys no longer function. (9:33 mins)
190
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• This can allow the person with kidney problems to Plant Features for Survival
live a normal lifestyle. In all organ transplants the
donator and recipients must have very similar blood Did you know that plants also have parts and that have a
characteristics in order for the new organ to work function to help them grow and protect them so they can
properly in the recipient body.
survive? Let us look at some examples:
Have learners recount a story of friend or family
How do the thorns on a rose bush function to help it survive?
member who may have had an organ transplant. Ask
(animals that get too close to the plant that might destroy its flowers will get
them to identify the lifestyle change before and after
prickled and decide to stay away)
the transplant.
Some plants (poison oak, poison ivy, stinging nettle) have oils
in their leaves that are very irritating to animals. How would
Endangered Species
that help the plant survive?
Some animal parts like the tusks of elephants have
(animals would not want to brush up against the plant to hurts its leaves
important functions Digging holes, moving branches,
or eat it for food as it would cause the animal great discomfort)
accessing food) (d. They are however valued by
humans for other reasons like making jewellery or
Some plants have small hairlike structures that sense an animal
house decorations etc.)
like a housefly on them and react. The Venus flytrap actually
captures the fly and digests the fly for food- a form of survival.
Write a one-page essay about an endangered species in
eth Caribbean whose body partis highly valued for
reasons other than what was intended for the plant or
animal.
Rubric:
Description of the Problem (5 marks)
Grammar & punctuation (5 marks)
Pictures if included (3 marks)
How to solve the issue (2 marks)
191
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Other Examples of Bodily Function Venus flytrap picture retrieved from:
https://www.nature.org/en-us/about-us/where-we-
Students may do research on the uniqueness of work/united-states/north-carolina/stories-in-north-
certain species in their respective countries. carolina/pitcher-venus-flytrap-carnivorous-plants/
• Students may research the St Lucia whiptail
lizard (Cnemidophorus vanzoi) or other local See the flytrap in action here:
species of the lizard found in their island. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O7eQKSf0LmY (2.50
• The armoured body of crabs and the use of mins)
their claws for digging.
Other plants will close or move if they are touched. (e.g.
• Snakes make use of the fangs
mimosa pudica) to protect against being eaten or to avoid
• Scorpions make use of their stinger and
losing water through their leaves (dehydration)
claws.
• Turtles use their back flippers to dig a nest in
the sand.
See the mimosa pudica moving here:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xEQJ0byHMXw (6:14
mins)
Plants can also ensure their survival by making sure their seeds
get to fertile ground. This is called seed dispersal and it
happens by many processes.
Sometimes their seeds are ejected from a pod, carried by the
wind or by water or by animals (on coats or in stomach) to
other locations where they flourish. They have special features
likes wings, waterproof seed coverings or sticky burrs that allow
them to move to better locations for surviving.
192
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Examples: Tetraberlinia moreliana (Leguminosae —
Caesalpinioideae) Pea Family (Leguminosae)
Transpiration: Plants Need Water!
Sun shines of the leaves of plants and warms them up. The
liquid water in those leaves gest additional energy and begins to
jump into the air as a gas in a process we have already studies
called evaporation. The departure of the water from the leaves
has the impact of drawing more water up from the soil through
the stem. This process is called transpiration and plants could
not survive without it. The process works properly because of
the specialized parts in the plant.
Retrieved from: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/transpiration/
Additional Resources and Materials
Ejection of seeds
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OB0P3mx_lxY
Water transpiration:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5jJLfwTkGe8
Animal camouflage:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YOIRci0CKzg
193
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Opossum plays dead:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UpGwt_baExk
Bird digestive system: https://www.pgc.pa.gov/Education/ForEducators/Documents/Bird%20Digestive%20System.pdf
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Description Survival Function
Teeth on a Hutia Rodent Digging for food or shelter
Changing colors on a Hiding from predators
chameleon lizard
Heavy hair on a Highland Staying warm in cold
cow weather
Rockfish spines Use a sting to ward off
predators
Thick fat on an Artic seal Keeping warm through an
insulating coat
Quills on a porcupine Warding off predators with
sharp spines
Venom of jelly fish Stinging predators
Grit in a bird gizzard Grinding up food in the
absence of teeth
Shell on a tortoise Protecting soft body
Spots on Owl Butterfly Mimicking a larger animal to
wings ward off predators
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts: Research and communication of topics understandings (posters, writing etc.)
HFLE: concerns associated with organ replacement.
Social Studies: The ethics of killing endangered species for their body parts. The ethics of organ donation.
194
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcomes 3: Use a model to describe that animals receive different information through their senses, process it in
their brain and respond to it differently
[Clarification Statement: Emphasis is on systems of information transfer.] [Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include the mechanisms by which the
brain stores and recalls information or the mechanisms of how sensory receptors function.]
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Which Senses are Used? Review of Senses and Sense Organs
Students let’s review our senses – sight, smell, hearing, taste and
Knowledge touch.
• Define the terms:
o senses Which body organ is used for each sense?
o nervous system
o nerves Why do we need these senses?
o spinal cord (interact safely in the world, satisfy basic needs of food, warmth, shelter)
o braille
• Identify the five senses. Now let’s play a game to see which sense we use for each activity.
• Account for the importance
of each of the senses in
human survival.
• Give at least three examples
of how animals use their
specialized senses.
• Draw a diagram to show
they understand the input of
Retrieved from:
sensory information to the
https://www.baamboozle.com/slideshow/1138071
brain and an output of
Retrieved from:
bodily response.
https://www.exploringnature.org/db/view/Informat Animals Use Their Senses Too!
• Infer from a scenario, the ion-Processing-in-Animals-Matching Just like humans, animals gather information from their
steps involved in going from environment through different sensory organs.
195
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
a sensory input to a bodily The Sense of Touch
response. Have students explain in a paragraph or a diagram, Have students look at the following pictures and suggest how the
the steps of sensory processing for each of these animals use their senses to receive information and respond.
• Classify sensory inputs. human activities that involve touch.
➢ A blind person reads a book written in How do you think owls find their prey at night?
• Classify brain outputs. braille. (Owls use their perfect night vision and hearing to find prey.)
➢ A physician feels an arm to see if it has a
break.
• Calculate % of global spinal
➢ A violinist places their fingers on the
injuries.
fingerboard of their violin to play a song.
➢ A baker kneads the dough as they prepare a
• Communicate your research
loaf of bread.
of animal use of senses in
the form of a poster.
What is so special? A Research Project
Students should choose three of the following
• Construct a simple robot.
animals and prepare a poster and explanation why the
(extended based on
animal’s sensory systems are especially useful for their
resources) for the purposes
survival.
of mimicking sensory input
Retrieved from: https://hawkwatch.org/raptor-id/raptor-id-fact-
and brain output.
1) What special sensory ability does a housefly sheets/great-horned-owl/
possess that makes it so difficult to capture
• Record data using bar
them? (peripheral vision)
Why do you think dogs make good police assistants?
graphs. (ST 2 ESS ER 2)
2) What special sensory ability does a female
(Dogs have a powerful nose and an amazing sense of smell. Police and
mosquito have that allows them to find their
military service dogs are trained to detect drugs and explosives.)
• Outline what stimulates each next blood meal? (detecting carbon dioxide-
of the five senses. (ST 2 LS breathing animals)
ECS 14) 3) What special sensory ability does a colossal
squid (Mesonychoteuthis hamiltoni) have that
• Name the organ that is helps with hunting in the ocean? (large eyes to
stimulated by sound. (ST 2 receive minimal light in deep water)
LS ECS 15) 4) What sensory property does the Caribbean
white-lipped frog take advantage of in
Retrieved from:
attracting a mate? (the frog sings but also creates a
https://www.customs.go.jp/moji/english/canine/canine.html
196
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
vibration in the earth to accentuate the impact of How do you think snakes and lizards find prey?
Attitudes/Values attracting a female) (Snakes & lizards use their tongue for sensing prey)
5) What sensory property does the Blue-footed
• Appreciation of the many Boobie take advantage of in attracting a
senses animals access to mate? (the sight of the bright blue feet elicits a
function in the world safely response in the female bird)
and survive. 6) What sensory property does a pod of whales
access when they migrate as a group to other
• Interest/Curiosity in waters? (water temperature is sensed and whales will
move for better feeding or giving birth to offspring)
animal’s unique senses.
Spinal Cord Injuries
• Safety and care to avoid
Retrieved from:
spinal cord injuries.
The spinal cord is a crucial component of the nervous https://www.petmd.com/reptile/pet_lover/evr_rp_why_
system that allows animals to transmit sensory snakes_use_tongue
• When conducting practical
information to and from the brain.
and group work, display
It is very important to protect against injury to the How do you think bats are able to fly in the dark of night?
sensitivity and offer
spinal cord because the results can be very dramatic. (Bats use echolocation to navigate and find prey. They send out waves of sound
assistance to peers who may
If our brains can’t receive information about our from their mouths or noses, which bounce off their surroundings right back to
have physical or learning
sense of touch we have difficulty operating our arms their ears. By listening to the echoes, bats can build up a picture of exactly
challenges.
and legs which can seriously affect our mobility. what’s around them.)
Dangerous activities that can lead to spinal injury
• Participate actively in
include but are not limited to:
classroom discussions.
➢ Jumping from high locations
➢ Diving into unknown bodies of water
➢ Driving in vehicles without seatbelts
➢ Riding bicycles in dangerous terrain without
a helmet
Statistics: (2019) retrieved from:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC95
54757/
Retrieved from: https://www.britannica.com/list/5-surprising-
Globally 900,000 cases of spinal injury facts-about-bats
197
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
How do you think mice avoid cats?
Have the students calculate the % of each region of (Animals have a sense of smell to sense dangerous predators)
the total global incidence of spinal injury. From this
data they should create a bar graph of country vs. %
of spinal injuries globally. e.g. ((incidence/900000) x
100)
Location Incidences % of total
(number of Global
cases)
Caribbean 3000 Retrieved from: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/House_mouse
Esat Asia 236000
Central Europe 17000 Why do you think animals have whiskers?
Central Latin 25000 (Animals brush, or whisk, their whiskers against objects to guide them,
America measure things, and find food).
North Africa & 53000
Middle East
Response Paper
Students should write a one-page essay about how
their school can be made accessible to students who
Retrieved from: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whiskers
may be confined to a wheelchair because of spinal
cord injury or other debilitating injury/disease.
How Do Animals Respond to Information from the Senses?
Engineering Project: Students may decide to build a
The nervous system in animals is made up of sensory organs
wheelchair ramp for the school which would access
that collect information and use biochemicals in our bodies and
their mathematics and construction skills.
specialized signaling anatomy to pass messages to the brain. The
brain interprets the information then sends a message back
Extension Activity- Robotics
through the nerves to tell the animal how to respond.
Most rudimentary robots accessible to schools have
(e.g. we touch something hot with our hand and the brain tells us
built in sensors that can be programmed around
to pull our hand away)
visual cues to stop, turn, reverse etc. These systems
mimic processing undertaken by animal’s brains
based on sensory input.
198
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
School Projects
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iCc4Di3ycNc
(2:46 mins)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dDQThRpDe1
A (3:23 mins)
Retrieved from:
https://childsuccesscenter.com/home/resources/sensory-
processing/
In many animals the sensory information is collected and
transferred using something called a nerve receptor. The
information can then be passed along a spinal cord to the brain.
Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=12Cez7IFD
Y8 (11:52 mins)
199
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://www.twinkl.nl/teaching-wiki/nervous-
system
What Is the Response from the Brain?
Discuss with students what happens when you give a stray dog
some food.
Have students explain the steps in that scenario?
Dog sees food > brain signals it resembles food > dog moves closer
Dog smells food > brain signals it isn’t spoiled > dog begins to eat
Dog tastes food > brain signals it doesn’t taste spoiled > dog continues eating
200
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://milaap.org/fundraisers/support-feeding-
street-dogs
Another example for students to map out the stepwise response.
Scenario: A cat spies a large dog coming towards them from afar
and then as it gets closer, hear sit growling
Retrieved from:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cat%E2%80%93dog_relationship
Possible student answers:
Cat sees dog > brain signals it could be a danger > cat tenses up & watches
for aggressive behavior
201
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Cat hears growling > brain signals the dog could attack> cat raises back to
appear larger
Dog recoils >cat brain signals to be more aggressive> cat hisses loudly
What else might the cat do to protect itself?
(move forward or lunge at the dog)
Additional Resources and Materials
Animal Adaptation: Super Senses | Science: https://youtu.be/-cHB9dvtp_I (1:04 mins)
Animal Senses - Visual Perception, Hearing, Taste, Smell: https://youtu.be/zS_DXg8QKOE (3:29 mins)
Animal senses / Super senses in animals: https://youtu.be/3jW08wCQOWw (7:32 min)
Sensory Organs: https://www.generationgenius.com/videolessons/senses-video-for-kids/ (12:23 mins)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
How do nerve signals get transferred? https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6qS83wD29PY (1:47 mins)
Bird Mating Rituals which take advantage of visual sensation to elicit a brain response:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dhX8TI1bcy4 (4:55 mins)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lcPHFQP9GN0 (2:24 mins)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nPhVOZiPokA (2:05 mins)
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts: Research, reading of primary source materials, and communication of results in written and graphical forms.
Mathematics: Calculation of statistics around spinal injury
Social Studies: Care of endangered species, care & access issues re: humans with spinal cord injuries.
HFLE: healthy choices to avoid serious injuries
202
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Earth Systems: Processes that Shape the Earth
Introduction to the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of caring
not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic study of the structure and
behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from leveraging and evaluating available
technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it
Strand (Topic): Earth Systems: Processes that Shape the Earth
We live in a world where we watch natural processes shape the landscape. While we can’t always prevent small and sometimes catastrophic events, our children
should understand enough of these earth changes to be prepared to cope with the inevitable consequences.
Essential Learning Outcome 1: Identify evidence from patterns in rock formations and fossils in rock layers to support an explanation
for changes in a landscape over time
[Clarification Statement: Examples of evidence from patterns could include rock layers with marine shell fossils above rock layers with plant fossils and no shells,
indicating a change from land to water over time; and a canyon with different rock layers in the walls and a river in the bottom, indicating that over time a river
cut through the rock.] [Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include specific knowledge of the mechanism of rock formation or memorization of specific
rock formations and layers. Assessment is limited to relative time.]
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Knowledge: Terminology 1: Complete the worksheet on how Students, look at these two pictures of rocks. Which one would
Define the terms: rocks are formed by filling in the key wors in the you prefer to use for a bathroom shower wall or a tidal break?
Igneous rock appropriate blanks in the diagram.
They have different properties which make them better suited for
Sedimentary rock
solving problems that humans have in their everyday life.
Metamorphic rock
Weathering
Minerals
Erosion
Deposition
Fossils
Slate Retrieved from: https://www.stoneadd.com/Bianco-Carrara-White-Marble-
Granite Blocks-Italian-Marble-Rocks-P27450
203
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Limestone
Marble
● Demonstrate an
understanding of how layers
of rocks are formed (layers
and heating processes).
Retrieved from: https://www.zmescience.com/feature-post/natural-
sciences/geology-and-paleontology/rocks-and-minerals/granite/
● Recognise how rock
formations result in the
Students, did you ever wonder why rocks have so many different
changes in the landscape.
characteristics and properties? It is because they are formed
● Create a representation of a differently.
canyon to illustrate how a
river changes the landscape Looking at the rock cycle you will come to understand that there
overtime. are actually only three different classifications of rocks (igneous/
sedimentary/metamorphic) and they are a part of cycle that
● Illustrate changes in the
Retrieved from: https://www.sciencefacts.net/wp- involves short and long term events involving heat and pressure.
landscape.
content/uploads/2021/04/Earth-Science-Rock- Let us walk through the parts of this cycle.
● Outline how soils are made
Cycle-Worksheet-Label-the-Diagram.jpg
from a variety of rocks. (ST
Terminology 2
3 ESS ER 3)
Complete the Frayer Square by placing “Fossil “in the
● Collect and classify rocks in center and filling in the four squares.
their country. (ST 4 ESS ER
1)
● Describe with examples how
people use rocks for
different purposes. (ST 4
ESS ER 2)
204
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Define the term soil erosion, “The rock cycle is the natural, continuous process that forms,
listing the types of soil breaks down, and reforms rock through geological, chemical, and
erosion, and ways and means
physical processes. Through the cycle, rocks convert between
of preventing it. (ST 5 ESS
igneous, metamorphic, and sedimentary forms. It is a dynamic
ER 1)
system that recycles Earth’s materials in different forms, from
molten magma deep below the surface to solid rock formations
and sediments. Understanding the rock cycle is not only crucial
for geologists but also provides insight into Earth’s history,
Skills climate change, and the availability of natural resources.”
● Investigate how layers of
Picture and verbatim description retrieved from:
rocks are formed.
https://sciencenotes.org/the-rock-cycle-diagram-and-
● Observe how fossils in layers explanation/
of rocks and rock Terminology 3 See also: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vp_S3BDiR-I
formations indicate a change Fill in the blanks with the following words. (5:27 min)
in the landscape. oldest / sediment / weathering /ecosystem/ igneous/
environment/ youngest/ sedimentary Some examples of the different types of rocks in each category.
● Communicate effectively
how landscape changes
1) Fossils most often form in ______________
● Interpret what fossils and
rocks.
rock formations may suggest 2) Fossils suggest to us what the _______________
about past environments. was like in a particular time frame.
3) _______________ of rocks tell us the likely
● Research information about
climate that the landform existed in.
landscape changes caused by
4) We can tell something about the past
glaciers and volcanoes.
______________ from fossils of plants and
Attitudes/Values
animals.
5) Animal fossils are often formed from the weight
of ____________ layers on top of bones that
were encased in mud.
205
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Express desire to find 6) In weathered and eroded rock faces, the bottom Retrieved from: https://sciencenotes.org/types-of-rocks-
answers in patterns through layer is likely to be the ___________ and the top igneous-sedimentary-metamorphic/
exploring.
layer may contain organic material because it is
the ___________. Students, I want you to look at the following two pictures.
● Willingly work with others,
What do you notice is similar? (layers within the rock)
regardless of their age, their
Distinguishing Rocks
gender or physical or cultural
characteristics. The teacher should show students three common
rocks and ask them to place them in categories of
● Keep the work area clean igneous, metamorphic and sedimentary. (Samples
and uncluttered, with only
should be obvious based on the table you presented
appropriate materials
in class: e.g. marble, mica, granite, slate, shale,
present.
sandstone, pumice.)
● Willingly contribute to group Possible Field trip
activity. Students are taken on a field Trip to a river/site
where students can collect and identify the different
● In group work, demonstrate types of rocks. Students will sort the rocks correctly
sensitivity and assistance to according to the 3 groups of rocks given in the
Retrieved from: https://www.khanacademy.org/science/middle-
students with physical checklist below.
school-earth-and-space-science/x87d03b443efbea0a:the-
challenges.
geosphere/x87d03b443efbea0a:fossils-and-rock-layers/a/fossils-
Rock Checklist
Let students use a chart/pictures/samples of rocks to and-rock-layers
classify their rocks based on color, texture and layers.
See possible classification table here:
https://i.pinimg.com/originals/ee/68/c4/ee68c440f
0fb48148a65680204afcbb1.jpg
Students should take pictures with phones and create
a PowerPoint presentation of their findings.
Rubric:
At least 3 Sedimentary rocks - 10 point
At least 3 Igneous rocks - 10 points
At least 3 Metamorphic rocks - 10 points
206
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
PowerPoint field notes- 5 points Retrieved from:
https://www.varsitytutors.com/4th_grade_science-help/earth-
What Do Rocks and Fossils Tell Us? and-space-science/patterns-and-fossils
1. What type of fossil do you think a
paleontologist would find if they thought a These layers that we see are characteristic of sedimentary rocks
tropical climate may have existed on the dig which are formed in a special 4 step process.
site? (rain forest plants, cold blooded animals,
spiders, snakes, seeds from tropical plants)
2. What evidence can you suggest that a
volcano may erupt in a certain region?
(pumice, hardened lava flows)
3. What fossil evidence can you suggest that
might indicate an ocean ecosystem? (shells,
fish, aquatic plants)
4. How can water change the shape of the land?
(through weathering and erosion)
5. What evidence do you think might have
appeared to paleontologists those dinosaurs
and men never lived together? (no fossils
showing they co-existed in same layers of rock)
Research Essay
Glaciers from the ice age were said to have had a
great impact on the landscape.
Retrieved from: https://www.sciencefacts.net/sedimentary-
Have students do research and bring back to class rocks.html
examples of glacier movement.
Canyons are formations with deep and steep sides. At the
bottom of the canyon, we often see rivers or streams. We know,
Tracking Landscape Changes in our Lifetime from our previous studies, that water can erode the walls of such
a deep gorge.
207
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The pictures show a landform that has changed over
thousands of years. Use the pictures to answer and
complete the task.
Retrieved from:
https://rwu.pressbooks.pub/app/uploads/sites/7/20
19/05/figure13.3.3-1.png
See also: Erosion and sedimentation: How rivers shape the
landscape - YouTube (3:04 min)
“This is a graphic of a canyon, which is a type of rock formation.
Changes can be noticed in the formation as it progresses
upwards. The colors are light, almost gray color towards the
bottom of the canyon closest to the water. The canyon is darker
and burnt orange as it moves upwards. As the canyon changes in
age, it also changes in colors. A canyon like the one pictured is an
obvious way to see how the Earth has changed over the years.
Scientists look for these changes and study how the Earth has
changed over time.”
Graphic and description retrieved verbatim from:
Questions: https://www.varsitytutors.com/4th_grade_science-help/earth-
1. How did the shape of the landform change? and-space-science/patterns-and-fossils?page=2
2. Did you think water or wind changed the
What is in the layers?
landform more? Explain your answer.
3. Draw a picture to show how the landform
When sediments from different sources are compressed to form
might look after many more years.
layers, the bottom layer will always be the oldest layer that was
formed. By inspecting those layers, we not only know something
208
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Volcanoes: Picture and Video Search Assignment of the relative age, but the composition sometimes tells us about
Search the internet for pictures/video of how what the environment would have been.
volcanic activity has shaped landscape across the
Sometimes plants and animals from many years ago died and
world.
remained in a mud layer on land or in the ocean perhaps. Those
layers were then covered with new layers and an imprint was
Research the types of fossils they have found of
made (much like a footprint on the beach) in the mud that then
humans and animals at the site of Mount Vesuvius in
Pompei. hardened. With pressure and additional sediment layers on top,
Why are these fossils unique? (many humans were caught that imprint was forever made in a stone and recorded as a period
by surprise, possible families and animals huddled together) in time.
A fossil is an imprint of a plant or animal in a rock, usually
sedimentary.
See: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZKtkrqOpECI (4:31
mins)
Also: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QPIDE_VWxsI
(10:41 mins)
209
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://www.smartfrogeducation.com/files/gallery/pg-
340/fossils-rocks-soil-1.jpg
Sample Fossils
What do they tell us?
Fossil 1
These fossils tell us that this rock layer was in the ocean at one
time. Since it is now uncovered, perhaps that body of water dried
up? This would change the landscape.
Retrieved from:
https://www.varsitytutors.com/4th_grade_science-help/earth-
and-space-science/patterns-and-fossils?page=3
https://www.wonderopolis.org/wonder/where-can-you-find-
fossils
Fossil 2
This fossil tells us that this rock layer was near a forest with ferns
at one time. Plants are a good indicator of the environment of the
past. Certain types of plants, for example, require specific
temperature and moisture conditions in order to thrive.
210
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://www.bgs.ac.uk/discovering-
geology/fossils-and-geological-time/fossils/
Fossil 3
This fossil was found of two animals fighting. For that layer of
rock, we know that these animals existed in a predator/prey
relationship at a particular time. Sometimes fossil scientists
(paleontologists) find large and small skeleton fossils and or
younger animals or eggs indicating a parent caring for offspring at
that period of time. We know then that, those animals existed in
that time frame and were reproducing.
211
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://www.economist.com/science-and-
technology/2023/07/19/a-spectacular-new-fossil-shows-a-
mammal-making-a-meal-of-a-dinosaur
“Most fossils are formed when an animal dies and gets buried in
mud or silt. Over time, sedimentary rock forms on top of the
animal’s bones, creating a fossil.
This is evidence of change to the landscape because we can age
the fossil-based on the different layers of sediment in which it is
encased, which also gives us insight into the changes that have
occurred in that area of the world over time.”
Quote from: https://www.varsitytutors.com/4th_grade_science-
help/earth-and-space-science/patterns-and-fossils
What do rocks tell us?
Indicators of erosion and weathering of rocks can tell us
something of the environment change after the rock was formed.
“This sandstone on the beach shore demonstrates the patterns of
change that can be seen in rock formations. The rock changes
colors as it progresses; there are stripes of different oranges, tans,
and reds. Some sections are covered in holes, and those parts are
grey, black, and white. There are changes in textures throughout
the rock formation. Some parts are smooth, and others are
covered in holes. As rocks are weathered and eroded with wind
and water over the years, there are visible changes to the
formations and structure.”
212
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Picture and description retrieved verbatim from:
https://www.varsitytutors.com/4th_grade_science-help/earth-
and-space-science/patterns-and-fossils?page=2
Information from the Layers
The earth’s layers of rock arise from different places and
processes. This gives us indicators of the environment.
213
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
“This table shows the different layers of rocks, how they are
formed, and what they are created from. What is noticeable about
the changes in the rock layers is that each one is built from
something different, has unique characteristics, and is formed in
its ways. There are no two layers that are the same. Each layer is
different, which demonstrates there is a change in the formation
as well as the environment with the creation of each new layer.”
Table and description retrieved verbatim from:
https://www.varsitytutors.com/4th_grade_science-help/earth-
and-space-science/patterns-and-fossils?page=2
Other Indicators of Landscape Change
Example #1
Teacher presents the picture below to generate discussion with
pupils.
Retrieved from: https://www.geographyrealm.com/rivers-
change-landscape/
Questions
1. What are some of the changes observed in the picture?
214
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. What do you think causes the changes?
3. What do you think it would be like in ten years from now?
Example #2
How Canyon and Gorges are formed
Pupils watch the video on how the Canyon was formed and
answer questions.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8gCQv7Fzt6Q (3:44 mins)
Guided questions for discussion
The rock layers of the Grand Canyon were formed by volcanic
rock and layers of: (Sediments)
The erosion that formed the Grand Canyon was mainly caused
by what? (water)
What was Grand Canyon probably like, that very first day, where
the water started to flow before visible erosion was happening? (a
very flat massive piece of land) or (It looks like a massive river that dried up
over millions of years, the erosion is visible on the rocks, it used to be filled
with water all the way up).
215
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Some Useful Websites
Earth Layers:
https://www.sciencefacts.net/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/Layers-of-the-Earth-Worksheets-212x300.jpg
https://imgv2-1-f.scribdassets.com/img/document/198385534/original/05b653776d/1590021817?v=1
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Answers for above worksheets
https://ecdn.teacherspayteachers.com/thumbitem/Rock-Introduction-and-Investigation-Activity-Center-1807462-1507719974/original-1807462-4.jpg
Answers for above worksheet at https://ecdn.teacherspayteachers.com/thumbitem/Rock-Introduction-and-Investigation-Activity-Center-1807462-
1507719974/original-1807462-3.jpg
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
● Mathematics: Sorting types of rocks using a table
● Language Arts: Research glaciers and volcanos as landscape changers. Write a composition on types of rock and fossils.
● Social- Science: Pupils identify different rocks in their environment and places where they can identify changes in the landscape.
● Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
216
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcomes 2: Make observations and/or measurements to provide evidence of the effects of weathering or the rate of
erosion by water, ice, wind, or vegetation
[Clarification Statement: Examples of variables to test could include angle of slope in the downhill movement of water, amount of vegetation, speed of wind,
relative rate of deposition, cycles of freezing and thawing of water, cycles of heating and cooling, and volume of water flow.] [Assessment Boundary: Assessment
is limited to a single form of weathering or erosion.]
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Demonstrate that you know the difference Introduction
between weathering and erosion by completing Students did you know that the earth is made up of several layers? We
Knowledge: the Frayer squares below. know from volcanic activity in the region, that there is molten rock
Define the terms: called magma in the core of the earth and that sometimes bubbles to the
top, overflowing over the outer layer called the crust.
Core
Crust
Mantle
Weathering
Mechanical /Physical weathering
Biological weathering
Weathering
Chemical weathering
Erosion
Sediment
Deposition
Deforestation
Delta
Meandering river
Identify the layers of the earth: crust,
mantle and core. Retrieved from: https://www.worldatlas.com/upload/0f/ae/ca/earth-
Demonstrate an understanding of s-four-layers.png
weathering and the factors that See also: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eXiVGEEPQ6c (3:12
contribute to the same. mins)
217
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Demonstrate an understanding of Ask students: On what part of the Earth do we live?
erosion. (crust)
The crust is subjected to all kinds of forces including what we call
Describe the factors that increase or weathering and erosion. Have you heard these words before? What do
reduce the rate of erosion in a they mean to you?
particular area. Sometimes people use these words to mean the same thing but actually
they refer to two separate processes.
Identify meandering rivers in the Erosion
Caribbean Changes we have seen in the crust
Look at these pictures, do you think these rocks always looked this way?
Define the term soil erosion, listing (probably not).
the types of soil erosion, and ways What caused them to change? (pic1 wind, pic2 water)
and means of preventing it. (ST 5
ESS ER 1)
Make drawings below to explain the different
Name and describe methods of soil types of weathering.
conservation. (ST 5 ESS ER 2)
Skills:
Observe
(a) the layers of the earth
(b) evidence of weathering and
erosion in a particular area.
Make inferences about the factors
that contribute to weathering and
erosion.
Classify the types of weathering as
mechanical/physical and chemical
218
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Investigate the factors that Retrieved from: Retrieved from: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weathering
contribute to weathering and https://www.worksheetplace.com/mf_pdf/W
erosion. eathering-printable.pdf
Compare and contrast weathering Guided by the teacher, students are asked to
and erosion. complete the worksheet below.
Observe and account for erosion
behaviours in a water table. Recall Questions True/False
Write True or False for each statement.
Use a model to investigate the
variables that may impact the extent 1. There are three different types of
of erosion. weathering.
true or false (true)
Communicate experimental results
by making a model. 2. Frozen water through rocks causes them to
crack. true or false (true)
Retrieved from:
3. Mechanical weathering happens when the https://www.reddit.com/r/geography/comments/98rnc3/rock_weathe
minerals inside the rocks experience chemical red_by_waves/
Attitudes/Values change. true or false. (false)
Sometimes the forces of nature can cause dangerous conditions like this
When conducting practical and Name some living things that can cause road where the foundations have fallen away.
group work, display sensitivity and biological weathering. (trees/ roots, worms, rabbits
offer assistance to peers who may etc.)
have physical or learning challenges.
Classification of Weathering
Express the desire to explore the Let students classify the examples below for
factors that contribute to weathering the different types of weathering.
and erosion and contribute solutions
to erosion challenges in your 1. A plant growing in a crack - (biological)
community. 2. Rain reacts on mineral grains in a rock to
form new minerals and salts. (chemical)
219
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Show concern and present 3. A rabbit/worm burrowing in the crack of a Retrieved from:
community solutions to the rock - (biological) https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/5e/Eroded_Roa
problems of deforestation which 4. The breaking down of rocks by waves. d_at_Whatarangi_Bluff%2C_Palliser_Bay-2.jpg
leads to erosion, and eventually (mechanical)
global warming. 5. As rocks become hot and cold, they expand What are the Processes?
and break down into smaller rocks. This picture shows a rock at the top of a hill that gets broken up and the
Consider solutions to solve the (mechanical) pieces deposited at the bottom of waterfall.
problem of flooding/run-off that
washes away arable lands. Practice with Terminology Students, there are three processes outlined in this diagram 1)
weathering, 2) erosion and 3) deposition
Participate actively in classroom Students will complete a cloze passage We will look at each one separately, but the basic sequence is: the rocks
discussions. on weathering. are broken into pieces-the rocks are transported and the rocks are laid
down as sediment (deposition)
Retrieved from:
https://www.worksheetplace.com/mf_pdf/W
eathering-worksheet.pdf Retrieved from
https://images.app.goo.gl/VyR3FvcCC8kjD5pg7
Students will complete a cloze The following video is an excellent introduction to weathering. Students
passage on erosion. should be posed with the following questions in advance to promote
active listening.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mQAOe-0vxdc (6:32) mins
220
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1. What is weathering?
Weathering is the process of breaking down or dissolving rocks and
minerals.
2. What are the three types of weathering?
(Mechanical or physical weathering chemical weathering and biological
weathering.)
3. What factors contribute to weathering?
Mechanical weathering:
Flowing water and blowing wind can chip away at rocks and
minerals,
Water when it freezes in the cracks of rocks can expand and
Retrieved from
break them.
https://worksheetplace.com/mf_pdf/Erosion-
Animals can trample rocks under foot and chip off pieces. They
worksheet.pdf
can also burrow holes through soft rocks or in cracks of rocks.
Plant roots can form around rocks and open cracks. The weight
Game-based Practice with Terminology
of large plants can cause breaks in rocks.
Students will be engaged in interactive word
wall games on weathering, erosion and
Chemical weathering
deposition.
Oxygen can react with metals in the rock to cause a chemical
See:
change (think of rusting of your bicycle)
https://wordwall.net/resource/12800870/scie
Salt in the water can react with certain rocks and break them
nce/weathering-erosion-deposition
down
Rainwater can contain mild acid from industrial gases from
factories. This reacts with rocks like limestone etching them.
Individual Project: Students will create a
Ground water can leach (wash through) rocks and dissolve
booklet on weathering and erosion regarding
chemicals in the rocks.
their community. Their booklet will include
221
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
descriptions and drawings/pic of examples in Biological weathering
their own community. Plants can grow up through existing cracks in rocks and make
them bigger.
Include 3 pictures (drawn or digital) of Root systems of plants can push through cracks underground
weathering in their community and label them and disturb the rocks in the soil.
as one the three types (mechanical, chemical or Root systems on hillsides may help hold soil together but if the
biological) (6 marks) weight of a plant is too great, it may topple rocks and cause
them to break.
Give an example of chemical weathering in Deforestation (removal of trees) can weaken riverbanks and
their community where rocks may have turned lead to physical weathering.
color from exposure to oxygen? (2 marks)
Students, the second process in our waterfall diagram is erosion.
Include 3 pictures (drawn or digital) of erosion In that diagram, water causes the rock pieces to be moved. This is the
in their community. (6 marks) key difference from weathering, the movement of the rock pieces after
they are broken.
For each of those 3 community examples,
explain the factors that may have led to the Erosion occurs when tiny pieces of the Earth’s surface are moved from
erosion. (6 marks) one place to another. This is usually caused by moving water, wind, ice
or gravity.
For those community examples of erosion,
what efforts have been made to prevent further As a review of erosion, the teacher may wish to access a read-aloud
erosion? Or what would you suggest should be book online posing “watching questions” before the read-aloud begins.
done to prevent further erosion? (5 marks) See: EROSION read aloud for kids! (9:04 mins) (by Robin Cooks)
Presentation - 5 marks
Content - 25 marks Students will answer the following questions.
Total - 30 marks
1. Where do we see three examples of erosion in the book? (crack in the
building/crack in the road/crumbling building in the hillside)
2. Give examples of erosion that happen quickly and slowly. (rocks
Research and Response tumbling down hillsides, rivers washing pebbles to a valley)
In a single page response, which may include a 3. List three things which cause erosion?
picture, answer the two following prompts.
222
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Why might deforestation be a contributing (heavy rain, roaring rivers, melting of glaciers, crashing waves, tsunami,
factor to erosion? wind)
4. Name two factors which increase the rate of erosion. (heavy rains and
What causes landslides and why are high wind)
they an example of erosion? 5. Name a human action that promotes erosion.
(cutting down of trees/ removing plants with extensive root systems)
Writing About Landforms 6. What natural sources/disasters can cause erosion?
Choose a landform in your region that (floods, hurricanes, tsunami)
is particularly notable due to the 7. How can we help reduce or slow down erosion?
weather and or erosion that has (Building drains to allow water to run away, planting trees along slopes.)
shaped that landform.
Draw or capture a digital picture of the The final process in our initial diagram is deposition.
landform so the reader can appreciate Deposition occurs when collected sediment having being eroded, is
the subject of your writing. deposited in a resting place where it may form layers or a bed of
Write a short 5-stanza poem that sediment.
describes how that landform has been
shaped over time and the forces that Probably the best example is when particles of rock are broken off and
are responsible. are washed down a hillside and end up at the mouth of a river or stream.
Rubric: When we have storms and heavy rainfall there is more erosion and the
Picture 5 marks build up of deposited sediment is more noticeable.
Descriptive poem 5 marks
Creativity 2 marks When large amounts of sediment are deposited at the mouth of a river,
Spelling/Grammar 3 marks a delta is formed. The river slows down at the mouth, so it doesn't have
the energy to carry all the silt, sand, and clay anymore.
These sediments form the flat, usually triangle-shaped land of a delta
and can form very fertile soil.
Another Example of Erosion and Deposition:
The meandering river
223
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Let students view and compare the diagram of two rivers and generate a
discussion.
Retrieved from
https://images.app.goo.gl/ijadAkUZJMVX3Abd7
What do you notice about the flow of water in
picture 1 and picture 2?
(The water in picture 1 flows in a straight path, but the water in picture
2 flows in a curved path).
What do you think caused the curve in picture 2?
(When soil and stones erode along the riverbank this causes the water to
shift its course and form curves).
What effects will that have on the river? (The river will become
shallower and flow slower. An oxbow lake might be formed - An
oxbow lake is a U-shaped Lake or pool that forms when a wide
meander of a river is cut off, creating a free-standing body of water.).
Students may view a video on a river meandering and how weathering
can potentially begin the process.
https://youtu.be/8a3r-cG8Wic?si=kA-nChkbO6bz_F8R
(2:57 mins)
224
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Possible Field Trip
Take students on a field trip to observe weathering and erosion in an
area. They will use a worksheet to record their observations. They will
report on their findings.
1. What are the factors/agents of weathering in that area? (wind, water,
ice, plants, animals)
2. What effects does weathering have on the rocks? (The rocks will get
smaller, smoother, and can take different shapes).
3. What caused the land to erode in that area? (moving water, wind)
4. What do you think will happen to the natural landscape if it continues
to erode?
(Mountain: It will get smaller and smaller and the roads will become
narrower/ beach: the rocks will change shape, there will be more sand
on the seashore.)
Rate of Erosion Experiments
You will need to create a water table from a pan r wooden box to do
these experiments (see picture below and watch video.
These experiments have been adapted from the following website:
https://www.maine.gov/dacf/mgs/education/lessons/act15.pdf
Retrieved from
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=-MFLgtti51I
225
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
(3:34) mins
You will need the following:
A wooden box or pan with a hole in the bottom end.
A watering can with at least 6 litre capacity
A protractor to measure angles
A pail to catch the water as it runs off the end of the water table
Wooden blocks to elevate the table at the upper end.
Packed soil to apply to the upper half of the water table.
***You can choose to vary the soil type for each experiment.
Mulch such as hay, leaves, pine needles, shredded paper etc.
A small pail of pebbles
Note: In each of the following tests, approximately the same amount of
water will be poured near the top of the table to simulate a heavy rainfall
falling on the soil.
The soil should be packed approximately 5cms from the top of the
table.
Experiment #1 The Effect of Incline of the Field
Raise the upper end of the water table with wooden blocks to 4
cms and use the protractor to measure the angle of the table to
the horizontal.
Pour 0.5 litres of water and record in your own words, the
effect of erosion on the soil.
*be sure to place the pail at the bottom to collect the water run-
off.
Use wooden blocks to raise the table end to heights indicated
below and repeat the experiment completing the data table
below.
226
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Table Height Angle in Description of
(cms) degrees Erosion
4
7.5
11.5
15
19
Note: 19 CMS should give you an angle close to 30 degrees which is
close to the limit for row crop farming.
Experiment # 2: The Effect of a Check Dam
By the end of experiment #1 you should have created a gully or
depression down the middle of your soil. If not, you should add
a larger amount of water in a spot near the top to make a gully.
Add pebbles across the gully to make a dam.
Add 0.5 litres of water to your table at the top and describe the
impact of the dam on the erosion.
Experiment # 3: The Effect of Contour Plowing
Elevate the upper end of the water table to 15 cms
Smooth out all previous signs of erosion in the soil.
Makea series of 0.5 cm furrows (2.5cms apart) parallel to the
direction of the water flow down the table.
Pour 0.5 litres at the top of the table and record your
observation with respect to the erosion observed.
Smooth out the soil once again
Make a series of 0.5 cm furrows (2.5cms apart) perpendicular to
the direction of the water flow down the table.
Pour 0.5 litres at the top of the table and record your
observation with respect to the erosion observed.
227
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Experiment # 4: The Effect of Mulching
Elevate the upper end of the water table to 15 cms
Smooth out all previous signs of erosion in the soil.
Spread your first mulch type evenly over the soil.
Pour 0.5 litres at the top of the table and record your
observation with respect to the erosion observed.
Repeat the above with a range of mulch choices and complete
the table below.
Mulch Type Observation of Erosion
Hay
Leaves
Shredded paper
Other?
Summative Questions for Students to Answer
At what angle did the slope begin to cause severe erosion?
How effective was contour plowing in slowing erosion? Which
approach seem to work the best and why?
What affect did mulching /ground cover have on the erosion process?
Did some mulches work better than others?
If you or your peers tested more than one type of soil, how did the
results compare? Did some soils resist erosion better in your testing?
Which ones and why?
228
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
The difference between weathering and erosion. See: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QJUs4e2X5Uo (7:14 mins)
Building Stream tables:
https://sciencelessonsthatrock.com/stream-table-erosion-lab/
https://gislab.utk.edu/outreach/diy-stream-table/
Four Types of Water erosion: https://study.com/academy/lesson/water-erosion-lesson-for-kids.html
Preventing Soil Erosion: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jYjJktQeUVA (8:37 mins)
The Erosion Song: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xBqFq88Bcp4 (1:03 mins)
Weathering and Erosion worksheet: https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/natural-science/1261918
Cracking up- A Read Aloud About Erosion https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V-g30sNrI7k (12:13 mhttps://brainly.com/question/24650448
Storyboard the Weathering /Erosion /Deposition process: https://www.storyboardthat.com/storyboards/isabella2507/my-weathering--erosion-and-deposition-
journey-
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Weathering and Erosion: https://www.generationgenius.com/weathering-erosion-and-deposition-for-kids/
Weathering/Erosion/Deposition Resources:
➢ https://educatorpages.com/site/Riversideschoolscience/pages/weathering-and-erosion-images
➢ https://slideplayer.com/slide/60736
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Mathematics: measuring angles. Predicting water flow. Tabulating observations.
Language Arts: Vocabulary building word list related to weathering and erosion. Write poems related to erosion and weathering, comprehension passages on
erosion. Write a composition/report on weathering and erosion and their effects.
Social- Science: Weathering and erosion – the impact of weathering and erosion on our daily activities and the environment.
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
229
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Creativity in designing solutions to reduce the impact of erosion.
Awareness of the solution to other parts of the country and the world.
230
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 3: Analyze and interpret data from maps to describe patterns of Earth’s features
[Clarification Statement: Maps can include topographic maps of Earth’s land and ocean floor, as well as maps of the locations of mountains, continental
boundaries, volcanoes, and earthquakes.]
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Students will play the “continents and oceans” Introductory lesson
game. Teacher will present a large map and/or globe which displays the
Knowledge:
How to play: world's oceans and continents.
● Teacher will provide game cared which
Define the following terms:
include the names of either “continent”
(North America, South America, Africa,
➢ Map
Asia, Australia, Antarctica, Europe) or
➢ Globe
“Ocean” (Arctic, Southern, Pacific, Indian,
➢ Boundary
Atlantic)
➢ Continent
● Each student will get the opportunity to
➢ Mountain Retrieved from: https://www.etsy.com/dk-
choose a random card and then locate that
➢ Mountain Range en/listing/269559657/labeled-world-practice-map
feature on a blank map as well as tell the
➢ Volcano
class whether this is a continent or ocean.
➢ Ocean Teacher will generate discussion by asking students the following
➢ Ocean trenches questions:
Students will complete the following worksheet on
➢ Crust identifying the continents and oceans. Question: what do you think this image represents and why
➢ Ridge do you think it is important?
A map is a drawing of all or part of Earth’s surface. Its basic purpose is to
➢ Earthquake
show where things are. Maps may show visible features, such as rivers and
➢ Features
lakes, forests, buildings, and roads.
➢ Landscape They also show more complex structures such as continents, oceans, mountain
➢ Pangaea ranges, volcanoes and even where earthquakes may occur.
➢ Continental drift
A map displayed on a round surface is called a globe.
➢ Tectonic plates
What are some of the Earth’s features which can be found on
231
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
➢ Complementary shapes a map?
➢ Lithosphere
What is meant by Earth Features? (the various landforms which can be
➢ Oceanic crust
seen such as: mountains, continents, oceans, volcanoes, etc.)
➢ Continental Crust
➢ Convergent Boundaries Let's discuss some of these features:
➢ Divergent Boundaries
A focused segment of the lesson can be given in which the map
➢ Transform fault
of the world or globe is presented again.
➢ Mountain ranges
Teacher will introduce the words: continent (a large body of
➢ Summit
land) and ocean (a large body of water) by writing them on the
➢ Base board.
➢ Folded Mountains Teacher will ask the students to gather round the map and point
out a “large body of land” and a “large body of water”.
➢ Fault Block Mountain
Students will be asked to guess how many continents and oceans
➢ Dome Mountains
there are by looking at the map.
➢ Continental Shelf
Teacher will point to the map and identify the seven continents
➢ Oceanic Trench and ask students to repeat each name. The same can be done for
Retrieved from:
➢ Abyssal Plain the oceans.
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/social-
➢ Continental Slope studies/413955
Students will watch the following video on the continents and
➢ Continental Rise
oceans and answer the following questions:
➢ Elevation
➢ Contour lines Video #1
www.youtube.com/watch?v=VGxssWl99U8 (5:54 mins)
● Identify on a world map and
diagram: mountains, 1. How many continents and oceans are there? (7 continents,
continents, oceans, ocean 5 oceans)
floor structures, volcanoes 2. Name the seven continents. (Africa, Asia, North America,
and earthquakes areas South America, Antarctica, Australia, Europe)
3. Name the five oceans. (Pacific, Atlantic, Indian, Arctic,
● Identify patterns in the Southern)
location of the earth’s 4. Which is the largest continent? (Asia)
232
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
features, e.g. locations of Students can play the following game to explore 5. Which is the smallest continent? (Australia)
mountain ranges, ocean how tectonic plates affect our planet: 6. Which continent has the largest population (Asia)
floor structures, earthquakes 7. Name two animals found on the continent of Africa
and volcanoes (zebra and giraffe)
8. The Amazon rainforest is found on which continent?
● Explain the concept of (South America)
continental drift. 9. This continent has no human residents (Antarctica)
● Relay the evidence and logic Students will also learn the following song:
that continental drift of the Song: Continents and Oceans
tectonic plates is a viable Tune: London Bridge
theory. There are seven continents,
Continents, continents
● Demonstrate an Retrieved from: There are seven continents,
understanding of the use of https://www.amnh.org/explore/ology/earth/plate On the earth.
the terms tectonic plate s-on-the-move2/game North and South American,
continent, ocean, mountain Africa, Asia
range, volcano, earthquake, Europe and Antarctica
ocean trench, ocean floor, Don’t forget Australia!
etc. by using drawings and There are also five oceans,
descriptions Five oceans, five oceans
There are also five oceans
● Explain that mountains, On the earth.
volcanoes, earthquakes and Indian, Atlantic,
ocean trenches are formed Arctic, Pacific.
because of the movement of Then there is the Southern
tectonic plates. Ocean. That makes five!
Rubric:
● Explain how the knowledge Continents Moving?
1 mark per question- 5 marks total
of the location of There is a theory that the continents were once altogether as one
mountains, earthquakes and land mass (called Pangaea) and they slowly over millions of years,
Retrieved from:
volcanoes affects the lives of began moving apart (called continental drift). The map below
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/social-
people. shows how the current continents could have been together like
233
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
studies/332305 puzzle pieces.
● Describe an earthquake as a
natural occurrence and Students will complete the following live worksheet
explain what causes it. (ST 5 on labelling a mountain:
LS ECS 15) https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/social-
studies/332305
● Identify volcanic activity as a
natural process and explain
how volcanoes are formed,
as well as the likely impact
on the environment. (ST 5
LS ECS 16)
● Identify ways in which
earthquakes impact the
environment. (ST 6 LS ECS
16) Retrieved from: https://www.worldatlas.com/articles/what-is-
continental-drift.html
● Describe the safety measures This was not just an idea because of complementary shapes
to be put in practice during (pieces that fit together), scientists found evidence that this theory
an earthquake, explaining had substance.
the need for each measure.
(ST 6 LS ECS 17) What did they find? Scientists found identical fossils on and
across the borders of where continents were once joined! Unless
● Explain how volcanoes are they were actually once together as one continent (Pangaea) this
formed and discuss the finding is highly unlikely.
impact that these eruptions Students will complete the following mountain
cause. (ST 6 LS ECS 18) ranges quiz:
Retrieved from:
● Outline useful and harmful https://www.geoguessr.com/vgp/3131
effects of the presence of a
volcano in their
234
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
environment. (ST 6 LS ECS Dome mountain formation activity
19)
Materials for pairs of students:
Skills
● tube of toothpaste
● Draw diagrams or formulate ● one large index card
models to represent some ● pencil
features of the earth, e.g. an ● dried grass
ocean floor, continents, etc. ● scissors
● Procedures:
● Predict locations where
earthquakes or volcanoes 1. Punch a small, pencil size hole in the index
could take place. card.
2. Cover the surface of the card with finely Retrieved from:
● Use crayons/markers/seeds cut dried grass to represent rock layers and https://education.nationalgeographic.org/resource/continental-
to locate features of the earth the surface of the earth. drift/
on a blank map, e.g. 3. Have one student hold the index card
continents, mountain ranges, while the other student places the tube of A useful overview of continental drift here:
volcanoes, trenches, etc. toothpaste under the hole and slowly https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AqrInJ8_Nes&t=1s (6:53
squeezes until the grass is pushed up into a mins)
● Draw diagrams that show small dome over the squeezed toothpaste ‘
that you understand three
ways plate boundaries can (alternate method – take the cap off the tube of As we learned before about earth’s layers, the crust of the earth
interact (divergent, toothpaste, drill a hole in the cap, place the index that we walk on each day covers the mantle. That mantle is made
convergent and transform). card hole over the neck of the toothpaste tube, and up of plates that can actually move around due to the molten core
place the cap back on so the card is fastened beneath.
● Account for how plate between the cap and the tube).
interactions can create Retrieved from: https://geology.utah.gov/map- Tectonic plates are pieces of Earth's crust and uppermost
mountains and furthermore pub/survey-notes/teachers-corner/teachers- mantle, together referred to as the lithosphere. The plates are
cause earthquakes and corner-geological-features-and-processes-in-utah- around 100 km (62 mi) thick and consist of two principal types of
volcanoes. dome-mountains/ material: oceanic crust and continental crust. In the diagram
below, the 7 tectonic plates are labeled with black lines.
● Students can also follow the YouTube video below:
235
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Identify mountains and/or https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KL8fAnK
volcanoes in your country 6y6k
and account for why
volcanic activity is prevalent Students answer the following questions based on
in the Caribbean region. the activity.:
● Effectively communicate 1. What does the toothpaste represent?
information based on (Magma)
observation of patterns of 2. What could happen inside the earth that
the earth’s features would create the same effect? (Magma can
squeeze and move like toothpaste).
Attitudes/Values 3. What does the grass represent? (Rock layers
and the surface of the Earth). Retrieved from: https://earthhow.com/7-major-tectonic-plates/
● Actively participate in class 4. How is this landform different from a
discussions. volcano? (The magma does not erupt onto the
surface of the earth). What Happens at the Boundaries of Tectonic Plates?
● When conducting group
work, display sensitivity and Students complete the following diagram using When the boundaries of tectonic plates are moving, they can
offer assistance to peers who the words below: cause big changes on the land and under the sea.
may have physical or
learning challenges They can be moving apart (divergent) and cause deep rifts in the
Andes Rockies Appalachian Alps
ocean floor and sometimes magma can move upwards in these rift
Himalayas Atlas Urals
● Work respectfully with each valleys and form volcanoes underwater.
other while analysing maps
and charts and videos to The plates can be colliding (convergent) causing volcanoes and
describe patterns of earth’s new mountain ranges.
features.
If the plates are moving horizontally across each other it puts
● Develop awareness that great stress on the crust and a transform fault may form with
earth events and changes in earth movement that could culminate in an earthquake.
earth’s feature can affect the
environment and the lives
and habitats of living things
236
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://theory.labster.com/plate_boundaries/
See also: Have students work in pairs as they explore the
Mechanisms of Plate Movement media gallery
(https://contrib.pbslearningmedia.org/WGBH/conv16/conv16-
int-mmes-1/index.html).
Rubric:
1 mark per question- 7 marks total
Retrieved from: Mountains, Volcanoes and Earthquakes
https://www.madebyteachers.com/products/geogr
aphy-worksheets-label-the-mountain-ranges/
Extension Assessment- Topographic Maps
If you were given the following topographic map,
and told you could hike the mountain B from the
front or from the right, which would be the easier
hike and why?
Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=PufrYH3xeu
A B
8
Mountains: A mountain is a landform that rises high above its
surroundings. Taller than a hill, it usually has steep slopes and a
rounded or sharp peak. Mountains are rarely found alone. Groups
of mountains are called mountain ranges
237
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Teacher: This is the 3d equivalent to show students
afterwards. The contour lines on the right are Students will look at the following YouTube video and answer the
further apart so the slope is more gradual than following questions:
those on the front and that is reflected in the 3d https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZgvAaTZdpLo (4:33)
representation.
1. What are groups of mountains called? (ranges)
2. What are the top and bottom of a mountain called?
(summit, base)
3. What are two ways which mountains can form? (volcanic
eruptions, plate tectonics)
4. Where are mountains typically found? (on every continent and
beneath the oceans)
5. What is a mountain system? (A group of mountain ranges)
Retrieved from: The inner chain of the Lesser Antilles developed along a line of
https://www.rei.com/learn/expert-advice/topo- weakness in the earth's crust. A series of submarine volcanoes
maps-how-to-use.html formed which rose above sea level to form the islands. These
islands are known to be very mountainous.
Teacher will generate discussion by asking students the following
question:
Can you name any mountains found in the Caribbean region?
Students will be presented with the following map of mountains
found in different Caribbean islands.
238
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Photo retrieved from:
https://www.freeworldmaps.net/caribbean/map.html
Using the map above, students are to complete the following
table:
Mountain Island
Pic Du Paradis Saint Martin
Mount Gimie Saint Lucia
Mount Sage British Virgin Islands
Blue Mountain Jamaica
239
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Types of mountains
Folded Mountains
Pupils are shown the following diagram of folded mountains.
They are formed when two plates move towards each other. This
causes the plates to buckle and pushes the crust upwards, forming
a mountain.
● Every student is given a piece of paper
● Each student is asked to push the two ends of the paper
towards each other. This will create an upward fold in the
paper,
● This is similar to how a fold mountain is formed
● The Himalayas are good example of a range of folded
mountains
240
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Fault Block Mountain
These are formed when two plates move towards each other.
Students are asked how they think a mountain gets it “mountain
shape”(Erosion changes the shape of rocks and land)
Activity
● Have a chocolate bar that represents the rocks in the
Earth’s plates.
● Break it in half by pulling the two sides apart.
● What happens to the ‘rocks’ in the middle? Have all the
‘rocks’ moved downwards?
● How many have moved upwards?
● What would happen if you tried to push the plates back
together again?
Photos retrieved from: https://www.freepik.com/free-
vector/four-different-types-mountains_35822393.htm
241
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Dome Mountains
Photo retrieved from: https://prepp.in/news/e-492-dome-
mountains-classification-of-mountains-geography-notes
Dome mountains are the result of a great
amount of molten rock (magma) pushing its way up under the
Earth’s crust.
Mountain Ranges:
A mountain range is a series of mountains that are connected
together generally to form a long line of mountains.
There are several mountain ranges which we should know:
Himalayas
● Andes
● Alps
● Rockies
● Atlas
● Appalachian
● Ural
Students are given the assignment to research the continent where
these mountain ranges are found.
242
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Volcanoes
Class poll: before the lesson, students are asked the questions
below. students will raise their hands to answer. the teacher will
write their answers on the board to generate discussion.
1. What is a volcano? (A volcano is an opening in the Earth's
surface. Usually found in a mountain, the opening allows gas, hot
magma and ash to escape from beneath the Earth's crust)
2. Can you name any famous volcanoes in the Caribbean?
(La Soufriere, Morne Watt, La Grande Soufriere)
3. Do you know where volcanoes occur? (along fault lines)
Teacher will show students the following map and ask them to
answer the following questions to generate discussion.
Retrieved from:
http://www.scienceclarified.com/landforms/Ocean-Basins-to-
Volcanoes/Volcano.html
243
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1. What is the first thing you notice about this map?
(continents, oceans, black lines around the continents)
2. What do you think the black lines and triangles on the
map represent? (triangles-volcanoes, black lines- plate boundaries
or fault lines)
3. What do you notice about the location of all the
triangles/volcanoes? (they are mostly found along the black lines
or fault lines)
Teacher will explain to students that this map details the location
of volcanoes around the world. Most volcanoes usually occur
along the fault lines that separate the tectonic plates that make up
the Earth’s crust.
Volcano formation:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oPZS6U2thyI (1:53)
Earthquakes
Students are presented with the following image and are asked to
discuss amongst themselves what might have caused the
occurrence seen.
Photo retrieved from: https://www.ready.gov/kids/disaster-
facts/earthquakes
244
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Based on their discussion, the teacher will guide students towards
creating their own definition of the word “earthquake”.
Earthquakes: Earthquakes are the shaking, rolling or sudden shock of the
earth's surface. They are the Earth's natural means of releasing stress
Students can also discuss their own experiences with earthquakes.
Teacher will explain to students that we cannot predict when
earthquakes will occur, but we can make some kind of prediction
as to where they may occur. Most earthquakes occur along fault
lines as we discussed in the formation of volcanoes and
mountains.
The Ocean Floor Structure
To introduce the topic, the teacher will present the students with
the following image to generate discussion.
245
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww
.wsj.com%2Farticles%2FSB123748748295986887&psig=AOvVa
w3HEP49znGjGOddvm840KK7&ust=1703973919558000
Teacher will use the following questions to probe students’
general knowledge:
● What do you think this picture is about?
● Can you imagine a red-hot volcano under the water?
● What do you call an underwater volcano?
There are hills, mountains, valleys, and volcanoes on land.
● Did you know that these structures also exist on the
ocean floor?
The ocean floor has many interesting structures that are also a
part of the Earth’s crust.
● Can you name any of these underwater features?
Let's look at the following diagram of the ocean floor. How many
features can you see?
246
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://hi-static.z-
dn.net/files/d61/24f6631a3015d191971dc9806ad4ac90.jpg
Students will watch the following informative video and answer
the questions which follow:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KirNCAjA6KY 3:18
mins)
1. What are some of the various landscapes which we can
find on the ocean floor? (mountains, valleys and plains)
2. Place the following ocean floor structures in the order
they are found.
Continental shelf, oceanic trench, abyssal plain, continental
slope, continental rise.
(continental shelf, continental slope, continental rise, abyssal plain, oceanic
trench)
3. What is one of the flattest places on earth called? (abyssal
plain)
4. ____________ is the name given to large underwater
mountains or volcanoes (seamounts)
5. What is an ocean trench? (a “V shaped” valley that is long and
narrow and the deepest part on Earth)
Extension Activity- Reading Topographic Maps
Students, the following is an example of a topographic map. What
do you notice that is different from other maps? (it has lines that
join to enclose an area, they aren’t circles or ovals, but they join and they never
cross)
247
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://www.rei.com/learn/expert-advice/topo-
maps-how-to-use.html
What do you think these lines mean? (maybe they have something to do
with the height of the land?) When are describing the height of land
we use the word elevation. The lines are called contour lines,
and they make sort of a wobbly circle!
248
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Look at the following diagrams. You should note a few important
features of this type of map tool.
1) The inner wobbly circles are the highest elevation.
2) If the wobbly circles on the outside are close that means
the hill is steep.
Retrieved from: https://www.rei.com/learn/expert-advice/topo-
maps-how-to-use.html
249
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Earthquakes: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dJpIU1rSOFY (3:42 mins)
Retrieved from: https://oceanexplorer.noaa.gov/facts/media/plate-boundaries-800.jpg
Plate tectonics: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bVn04eJRjV4&t=1s
Divergent/Convergent/Transform Plates see: https://theory.labster.com/plate_boundaries/
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Plate tectonics and earthquakes: https://www.pbslearningmedia.org/resource/ess05.sci.ess.earthsys.lp_earthquakes/earthquakes/
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the curriculum)
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
● Mathematics: creation of models and analysis of data to describe earth features and their formation. Reading and interpreting contours on maps
● Language Arts: Develop and use vocabulary words to describe various earth features and their formation over time in essay type questions.
● Social- Science: Analyzing maps to locate and name the various Earth features such as mountains and volcanoes around the region and the world.
250
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
● HFLE: Understand the importance of map reading skills as it relates to the impact of volcanoes and earthquakes
● Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
251
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 4: Generate and compare multiple solutions to reduce the impacts of natural Earth processes on
humans
[Clarification Statement: Examples of solutions could include designing an earthquake resistant building and improving monitoring of volcanic activity.]
[Assessment Boundary: Assessment is limited to earthquakes, floods, tsunamis, and volcanic eruptions.]
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Community Solutions to Combat Flooding Students will observe the following picture:
Students to be presented with the following
Knowledge: scenario, which they will research and work on
and present to the class:
Define the terms: Imagine that a community in your country keeps
Earthquake flooding every time it rains. This poses a safety
Flood risk for the people living there and when it rains
Volcanic eruption heavily people’s property gets damaged also. You
Tsunami would like to address this flood problem. Create
Hurricane a plan for dealing with this, considering factors
Mudslides such as land use and building construction. How
Risk assessment would your plan help to reduce the impact of
Risk reduction floods in your community?
Answer Key:
Describe causes of land use (Any 3 properly explained-6 marks)
Earthquakes Restriction of construction in flood prone areas-
Hurricanes Reduces risk to people and their property as they Retrieved from:
floods will less likely experience flooding https://reliefweb.int/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/ima
tsunamis Proper drainage- Reduces accumulation of water ges/reports/df/bf/dfbf354c-8a09-35ce-8136-b283c9cc3086.jpg
volcanic eruptions Building levees- Prevents water from the sea and
mudslides rivers reaching the land
252
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Building dams and reservoirs-Store excess water Ask students: “What do you think of when you see this?”
Describe mechanisms of during periods of heavy rainfall, reducing the (students to discuss based on prior knowledge –
Earthquakes impact of flooding (Hurricane/damaged houses/strong winds)
Hurricanes Structures (Any 1 properly explained- 2 marks
floods Building elevated structures- Prevents water Ask students: “Have you ever experienced an earthquake,
tsunamis from easily accumulating in buildings hurricane, flood, volcano or tsunami?” “Have you heard of
volcanic eruptions Using waterproof materials-Prevents water easily anyone else who has?” “What was the experience like?”
mudslides going into structures (students to discuss, based on prior experiences)
Assess risks associated with natural earth Hurricane Resistant House
processes (hurricanes, floods, tsunami Draw a picture of a hurricane resilient house or Students will create models (using paper/cotton/foil/ play
and earthquakes) an earthquake resilient house, including features dough) depicting earthquakes, flood, volcano and tsunami.
that would allow the house to have this Students will be asked to describe model and its causes and
Demonstrate an understanding of characteristic. mechanisms
monitoring systems used for detection
of different natural earth processes Example of tsunami model:
Explain the significance of early warning
signals in reducing the impact of natural
earth processes
Demonstrate an understanding of
structural factors that contribute to the Retrieved from:
stability of buildings https://acropolis-wp-content-uploads.s3.us-
west-1.amazonaws.com/hurricane-proofing-
Apply understanding of structural hero.gif
principles to ensure that buildings can
withstand seismic forces
Describes methods of reducing flooding
and the impacts of flooding
Apply understanding of structural
principles to designing of buildings that
253
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
are able to withstand the force of a Earthquake resilient house Retrieved from:
tsunami https://pbs.twimg.com/media/EHbjEGPXkAA_ku8?format=j
Describe methods of reducing the pg&name=medium
impacts of mudslides
Important points:
Describe an earthquake as a natural Causes and mechanisms of natural earth processes:
occurrence and explain what causes it. Earthquake-Forceful shaking of the earth caused by movement
(ST 5 LS ECS 15) of tectonic plates beneath the earth’s surface
Volcanic eruption-A release of magma from the earth’s crust as
Identify ways in which earthquakes a result of a build up of pressure
impact the environment. (ST 6 LS ECS Tsunami-Massive Ocean waves caused by underwater
16) earthquakes or volcanoes
Retrieved from:
Hurricane- A powerful tropical cyclone that develops because of
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/2929
Describe the safety measures to be put warm ocean temperatures. They bring heavy rainfall and strong
82602/figure/fig2/AS:391364413018148@1470
in practice during an earthquake, winds
319955592/Principles-of-conventional-and-base-
explaining the need for each measure. Flood-Build up of excess water on land. Floods typically occur
isolated-structure.png
(ST 6 LS ECS 17) because of heavy rainfall or storms
Mudslide-A rapid downslope movement of water, soil and rocks,
Include:
Explain how volcanoes are formed and often occurring due to heavy rainfall
Hurricane resilient house-window shutters,
discuss the impact that these eruptions
elevated house, gently sloping roof, roof secured
cause. (ST 6 LS ECS 18) Flooding
to house, walls made of concrete or treated
wood
Outline useful and harmful effects of Students observe the following picture:
the presence of a volcano in their
Earthquake resilient house-
environment. (ST 6 LS ECS 19)
House containing pads placed between
foundation and building, house made of flexible
Skills
material (e.g. wood or steel)
What has your community done?
Brainstorm with peers the ways to
Interview community leaders to determine the
reduce the impact or prepare for forces
precautions they have put in place in the extreme
of nature such as hurricanes, volcanoes,
likelihood that hurricanes will invariably impact
mudslides etc.
the Caribbean region. Write a report outlining
254
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Identify the problems in their the precautionary strategies you found n your Retrieved from:
community with respect to the natural various interviews. https://dominicanewsonline.com/news/wp-
forces. content/uploads/2011/09/flooding-in-Dominica5.jpg
Create posters highlighting the importance of
preparedness and early warning systems in The Teacher asks: “What do you observe here?” (destruction by-
Problem solve solutions to the mitigating against the risks associated with a flooding)
challenges that arise form natural forces. hurricane, tsunami or volcanic eruption. “How can flooding affect us (flood waters damage property,
may pose a danger to people)
Secure feedback from leaders of the Scoring Rubric: “How can we reduce the impact of flooding?” (building stronger
community on how to prepare for and Content: 5 marks houses, putting barriers along waterways, moving away from
mitigate problems. Visual appearance: 5 marks flood prone areas)
Creativity: 5 marks
Predict how a building’s design would What do you see in this picture that may help prevent flooding?
affect its ability to withstand the effect Response to Impending Natural Event
of natural earth processes Students may assume different roles and work
together simulating a response to one of the
Observe and identify features of natural earth processes.
buildings that make them resilient to Students are placed into groups of 6 to work on
natural earth process the following:
Imagine that a hurricane/ volcanic eruption/
Design a simple earth-resistant structure flood/tsunami was likely in the next 48 hours.
using everyday material work together as a group to simulate an
appropriate response. Persons in the groups are Retrieved from:
Design a simple structure that would be to be assigned various roles e.g. government https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cCZWkMXJwQE (1:11
appropriate for a tsunami prone area official, citizen, police, national disaster mins)
coordinator
Based on the picture or the complete video, groups should
Include: Activation of early warning system, assemble responses to the following questions:
Attitudes/Values Activation of disaster plan, securing of property, How does this method reduce the impact of flooding?
Develop a sense of concern for persons ensuring that surroundings are appropriate, Do you think it would be effective?
affected by natural earth processes opening of shelters, evacuation Is there anything else that could be done to further reduce
impacts?
255
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Appreciate the importance of Students will complete the following worksheet Each group will present one method to the class
developing resilient structures that can about natural earth processes
withstand the effects of natural earth Important points
processes
Effect of flooding:
Appreciate the importance of paying Floodwaters may damage property, be a danger to persons and
attention to early warning signals so as cause contamination of our drinking water
to reduce the impact of natural earth
processes We may reduce the impact of floods by:
Building levees and floodwalls along rivers and the coast to
Value practices that lead to flood prevent water from reaching the land
prevention Building dams and reservoirs that can store excess water during
periods of heavy rainfall and then reduce it gradually
Recognize the importance of teamwork Preventing people from building in flood prone areas
and collaboration in mitigating against Building elevated buildings, above the expected level of water
the effects of natural earth processes during a storm
Using waterproof materials in building
Having proper drainage to allow water to leave the affected area
Having early warning systems to allow persons to plan for floods
or evacuate from flood prone areas if necessary
Dredging rivers- Removes debris from river beds, improving the
flow of water reducing the likelihood of it overflowing its banks
Hurricanes
Students to observe the following picture again:
Retrieved from:
https://www.canva.com/design/DAF4MrZ1-
nA/c9oJezDa8CVQ7Uvj2ADAJQ/edit?utm_co
ntent=DAF4MrZ1-
nA&utm_campaign=designshare&utm_medium
=link2&utm_source=sharebutton
256
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Project: Students will choose topics related to Retrieved from:
resilience and present to the class. https://reliefweb.int/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/ima
ges/reports/df/bf/dfbf354c-8a09-35ce-8136-b283c9cc3086.jpg
Topics include:
My future disaster resilient house- (Explain Ask students: “What are some risks associated with hurricanes?”
how you are going to design your future house. (Hurricanes bring strong winds and rain that can damage houses,
Include special features that would allow it to crops and injure people)
withstand a particular natural earth process) “Do you think that we can build a house that is able to
How my community became hurricane, withstand a hurricane?” (maybe with the right design and
flood, tsunami resilient- (Discuss mechanisms materials)
that can be put in place in a community to “What special features should these (hurricane resilient) houses
ensure that it is more resilient to one of the have?” (made of strong materials, secure roofs, protected
natural earth processes. Include-early warning windows, elevated to reduce flooding)
systems, building codes, structures such as drains
and levees, processes such as river dredging) Those are great ideas…let us look at what professional builders
The reason why we were so badly affected by suggest in this diagram: (review each point with the students)
the last major flood/ volcanic eruption/
hurricane/ mudslide/earthquake in my
country-(Include methods of risk reduction for
the particular disaster and what was lacking in
the particular case that resulted in so much
damage being done)
Scoring Rubric:
Content; 10 marks
Organisation: 5 marks
Use of language: 3 marks
257
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: http://www.ccearch.com/hurricane-resistant-
design.html
Students to listen to the following read-aloud story:
Tree House in a Storm | a Book about Hurricanes for kids
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YZqsQji-Jpo (0-12:00
mins)
Students to discuss how the impact of hurricanes can be
reduced, following from the story.
Questions:
How did the family try to minimize the impact of the storm?
(reinforcing structures, protecting windows, evacuating)
Is there anything else that they could do to prevent or reduce
damage? (cut down trees)
Is there anything that made the hurricane shelter stronger? (It
was built out of brick)
Are there any other features that could make a house more
hurricane resilient? (houses with secured roofs, elevated
structures)
Why were some of the houses damaged? (Made of weak
materials, uncovered windows)
Do you think having early warning systems helped? How? (Yes,
as it gave time for preparation)
258
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Important points
Risks associated with hurricanes:
High winds-Damages houses, throws down trees
Storm surge- May cause flooding, damage structures, injure
people
Flooding-Damages structures, may injure people
Landslides- Damages structures, causes loss of crops, may injure
people
Features of a hurricane resilient house:
Window shutters and impact resilient glass to prevent debris
shattering windows
Walls made of concrete or specially treated wood which would
be stronger
Elevated house to prevent flooding
Gently sloping roofs that are strongly secured to the rest of the
house to prevent its removal during high winds
Students in groups will be provided with the following materials:
play dough, straws, popsicle sticks, toothpicks, paper clips,
straws, aluminum foil, manila paper, construction paper, glue,
tape, scissors.
Students will discuss in groups how they would design their
house to be hurricane resilient. Groups will first sketch their
design and then work together to construct the hurricane
resilient house.
259
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Example of structure:
Retrieved from:
https://images.app.goo.gl/XLibvswJiZvdfug97
Students will present their work to the class, they may use a fan
of varying speeds or a spray bottle to show how their house is
able to withstand the effects of wind and rain. Students should
explain why they chose their particular design
260
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Earthquakes
Students observe the following picture:
Retrieved from:
https://www.dpsninc.org/images/Earthquake-Portsmouth2.jpg
Ask students:
“Can an earthquake really damage a house in such a manner?”
(Expected answer-yes)
“What can we do to prevent this?” (build stronger houses that
can withstand earthquakes)
Students to view the following video (on constructing
earthquake resilient houses):
Earthquakes for kids |Earthquake proofed buildings explained
|Earthquake Facts for Kids |Earthquakes
261
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PHaiuE028AI (1.01 min)
Testing Earthquake Resistant Structures with a Teacher -built
Tester
A construction project for teachers to make from an overturned
table and bungee cords. The structure can be place on the
platform held up the bungees on four corners. Students can
build and test “earthquake-resistant “buildings.
Photograph of a Classroom Model for Testing Structures
Used with permission (G MacKinnon)
Testing The Earthquake Resistant House with a Phone App
Students to complete the following worksheet where they
construct and test a model of an earthquake resilient house:
262
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://www.sciencebuddies.org/Files/8636/25/ScienceBuddie
s-Earthquake-worksheet-phyphox.pdf
Testing the structures:
Earthquake-Resistant Building Lesson Plan with Google's
Science Journal app
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FfrFYW4TDQQ (2.36
mins)
263
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://encrypted-
tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcREGqbotRbXto6Tzft
0lVLbX98CQhyOREbAQ4Y2OzeenXgMhjd6rlis1ZPiNB4d7C
EklfE&usqp=CAU
Students will present their structures to the class, explaining their
choice of design
Important points
Effect of earthquakes on houses:
Forces may cause the walls or roof to collapse
Features of an earthquake resilient house:
264
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Contain isolation pads that are placed between the building and
foundation that are able to absorb seismic energy and reduce the
amount transmitted to the building.
Are built with flexible structures such as wood and steel that are
able to bend and move without breaking
Contain strong foundations that are properly anchored in order
to withstand seismic forces
Volcanoes and Tsunamis
Working individually, students will observe the following videos:
Vincy Voices - Lessons From La Soufriere Short Film
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cz-GYXemZKs (7.46
mins)
NTCES CH6 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami Lessons Learnt
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jrKaH0jjAYs (1.53 mins)
They will then write a passage describing how they would
prepare to reduce the risks associated with an imminent volcanic
eruption and tsunami in their country –
What should the government do? (Notify citizens when a
disaster may be more likely to occur, provide shelters that
citizens may access if evacuation becomes necessary)
What should the citizens do? (Act fast when a warning is given,
secure property, evacuate properly)
Students should emphasize the need for early warning systems
(Allows for efficient preparation to reduce the risks associated
with these disasters).
Important points:
265
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Reducing the risk of volcanoes and tsunamis:
Scientists use instruments such as seismometers to detect
earthquakes and they observe and measure volcanic gases. These
can provide an indication of an impending volcanic eruption.
Underwater earthquakes and volcanic eruptions can lead to
tsunamis. We are therefore able to determine beforehand that
an event may be approaching.
Early warning systems are important in reducing the risks
associated with volcanoes and tsunamis. These allow for
procedures such as evacuation and securing property that reduce
injury and property damage. It also gives communities the
opportunity to take necessary precautions such as opening
shelters. Citizens should have an emergency plan that come into
effect when warnings are given
Mudslides
Students will observe the following picture
266
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://media-cldnry.s-
nbcnews.com/image/upload/t_fit-
760w,f_auto,q_auto:best/ap/645d2dd6-c0ce-4d81-bdaf-
ca9db4afa53f.jpg
Students to discuss the picture.
Questions
“How can mudslides affect us?” (Mudslides may damage homes,
cause loss of crops and threaten human life)
“How can we reduce the impact of mudslides?” (Do not build in
mudslide prone areas, plant trees/ do not cut down trees on
slopes/ build retaining walls)
Important points
The force of following mud can pose a danger to people,
damage structures and cause loss of crops. It can also result in
blockage of roadways and interruption and delays in
transportation.
In order to reduce the impact, we should not build in areas
prone to mudslides. We should also ensure that there is adequate
tree cover on the slopes by planting and not cutting down trees.
This reduces the impact of erosion. Retaining walls can also be
built as barriers to the passage of substances. Finally, early
detection is also important to allow for plans and evacuation if
bad weather such as heavy rainfall is expected.
267
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
New Ways of Flood proofing Homes https://www.chiefscientist.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/image/0027/49662/property-modification-lrg.jpg
Eight Tips for Building Hurricane Safe Homes: https://www.dth.com/our-learning-center/homeowner-tips/8-tips-for-building-hurricane-safe-homes/
Child’s Project (Earthquake proof building): Earthquake Proof Buildings? Science Fair Project with Justin (5:57 mins)
Earthquake proof buildings: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9N8iQ9Ch8nw (5.57 mins)
Pinellas County fifth graders learn about the STEM of building hurricane houses!
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7CLiOMqPJ50 (2.22 mins)
5 Methods of Flood Protection - Flood Control Asia
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-0e2wZ32CAA (3.08 mins)
How to Prepare for a Volcanic Eruption: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z-w_z9yobpE (133 mins)
How to Prepare in Case of a Tsunami | Disasters
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m7EDddq9ftQ&t=13s (2.08 mins)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
NASA Resource for Earth Systems Lesson Planning: https://mynasadata.larc.nasa.gov/all-earthsystem-lesson-plans
Unit Plan:
https://nj02202607.schoolwires.net/cms/lib/NJ02202607/Centricity/domain/39/ngss%20science%20maps/4th%20grade%20science%20curriculum%20201
7.pdf
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the curriculum)
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
● Mathematics: Creation of graphs showing seismic activity or hurricane data over a period of time
● Language Arts: Develop and use vocabulary related to resilience and these natural earth processes, use these topics for writing assignments (e.g.
descriptive writing where students are asked to describe the scene after the occurrence of one of these natural earth processes
● Social- Science: Mechanism of development of these natural earth processes, response of communities to those processes
268
Grade 4 Science Curriculum
● HFLE: Examine the psychological impact of these processes on individuals living in affected areas
● Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated: Construction of structures that are able to withstand
these natural earth processes
269
