‘
March 2024
OHCP GRADE 3 SOCIAL STUDIES
Grade 3 Social Studies
Strand: Historical-Cultural Thinking: Our Ancestors
Introduction to the Strand:
This strand builds on the knowledge gained in earlier levels regarding the different ethnicities and cultures that make up Caribbean
society. Knowledge of this kind is critical because it helps students recognise the different cultures and ethnic groups in their country; learn
about the events and circumstances that led to the multiple ethnic groups present in the Caribbean today; and the role each group of people
played in our collective history.
Strand (Topic): Historical-Cultural Thinking: Our Ancestors
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand the ways in which our island’s peoples’ nurtures respect for diversity.
Grade Level Expectations:
Students would be able to:
1. Name the earliest inhabitants of our island.
2. Explore evidence of early settlements.
3. Discuss the Indigenous cultures of our island.
Focus Questions:
1. What evidence is there to show the settlement of the early inhabitants in our islands?
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
3-HCT K-1 • Conversation (Pre-assessment): Are Pre-Assessment:
Identify the earliest students able to identify the earliest • Students view pictures of different inhabitants and identify
inhabitants of our inhabitants from pictures and give reasons the earliest ones (Tainos and Kalinagos). Students give
island. for their responses? reasons for their responses.
• Students state what they know and what they want to know
Observation (KWL strategy Pre- about the earliest inhabitants on the Mentimeter App or
assessment): other digital tools.
2
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
• Can students state what they know and what Interactive presentation software - Mentimeter (Individual/
they want to know about the earliest group activity)
inhabitants on a Mentimeter app?
(See link: Interactive presentation
software - Mentimeter)
•
Retrieved from kwl chart template - Bing images
3
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
3-HCT-S-1 - Use • Product - Project-based: Can students Investigation:
digital tools to make digital replicas of artifacts to show • Students visit historical sites to investigate the evidence of
investigate the evidence of early inhabitants ? early settlers (museums, libraries, petroglyphs, reserves etc.).
evidence of early Students can also engage in a virtual field trip.
settlements of • Students use digital tools (cellphones, tablets) to record
Indigenous peoples. information and take photographs.
• Product - Presentation: Can students
share at least two pieces of evidence that Journaling:
show the early inhabitants’ settlement? • Students create a journal using notebook or digital
(Prezi, Screenr, Exit slip, journal entry, application (e.g Book Creator app) that presents information
video/audio recording, powerpoint) (images, text and audio) on the earliest inhabitants of their
island. Students should state:
i.One thing that they like about the early settlers and why.
ii.One thing the early settlers used that can be found in
• Conversation: Are students able to list their households/community.
places where evidence of early settlers • Share journals via the school’s website/social media page or
can be found? school library.
Project (Create replicas of artifacts):
• Students use materials from their environment or create 3D
• Product - Poster: images of artifacts using Prezi (Presentations and videos with
Can students create a poster depicting engaging visuals for hybrid teams | Prezi Present) or
ways people can protect the Screenr(Login - Screener). Examples of replicas: canoe,
environment/artifacts/ historical sites? paintings/petroglyphs, tools, jewelry, hammocks, huts, etc.
Peer Interviews:
• Students guided by the teacher will interview each other to
report their findings from the field trip.
• Generalization: The early inhabitants loved nature and
worshipped the environment.
4
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
3-HCT-V-1 Journal Writing:
Appreciate • In their journals, students write one or two sentences in
Indigenous cultures response to the following questions:
and respect their i.How did the early inhabitants make use of the natural
views of the environment?
environment and ii.How did the early inhabitants show respect for the
society. environment?
Poster: (Protecting Our Historical Sites)
• Create posters (digital or handmade) highlighting ways
people can protect the environment/artifacts/historical sites.
• Display these inside/outside the classroom and share with
parents during the report card period.
Additional Resources and Materials:
Videos:
1. https://virtualcarib.com/artefacts?page=1
2. Science Journal for Kids and Teens
3. https://www.khanacademy.org/humanities/whp-origins/era-5-the-first-global-age/52-old-world-webs-betaa/v/pre-colonial-
caribbean
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
• The first two major groups of people to settle in the Caribbean were:
i.The Taino People
ii.The Kalinago People
• The early inhabitants used materials [wood, stones, bones and cotton ] from the environment to make their tools.
• Evidence of early settlers:
5
Grade 3 Social Studies
i.Tools & Weapons - pots, jars, knives, axes, spears, bows and arrows
ii.Furniture - stools, hammocks
iii.Accessories & Crafts- headdress, loin cloth, jewelry, baskets
iv.Buildings - huts
v.Transportation - canoes
vi.Music - Shak Shak, drums
vii.Religion - zemi, petroglyphs
• The early inhabitants loved nature and worshipped the environment.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
• Language Arts: journal writing, KWL strategy
• Science and Technology: types of materials
• Arts and Crafts: creating posters, creating replicas
• Maths: measurement
6
Grade 3 Social Studies
Strand (Topic): Strand: Historical-Cultural Thinking: Origin of our Island People
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand the ways in which our island’s peoples’ nurtures respect for diversity.
Grade Level Expectations:
Students would be able to:
1. List the origins of the inhabitants of our island.
2. Locate the origins of our peoples through map work
3. Discuss the positive and negative impact of migration on our region.
Focus questions:
1. Why did the early inhabitants settle in our islands?
2. How did the settlement of our people affect the region?
Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Specific Curriculum
Outcomes
3-HCT-K-2 - State the • Conversation: Introduction : Think/Share:
origins of the various Are students able to recall one to three facts • Students write (using Padlet) and/or state orally
peoples of our about the earliest inhabitants who came to their or draw one [1] to three[3] facts they know
island/territory and island? about the various groups of people who came to
discuss the reasons why their island. Students share their responses with
they came. the class.
• Product-Word Art:
Do students’ word art accurately depict origins
of the earliest inhabitants? Mini-Research/Video Analysis:
• Students view a video of the origin of the
various immigrants to the Caribbean.
• Students create a word art (see Word Cloud
• Observation - Role play: Generator - WordArt.com) depicting the origins
Using an observation checklist, are students able of the various early inhabitants.
to identify the location of the places the early • Students then share work for discussion.
7
Grade 3 Social Studies
Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Specific Curriculum
Outcomes
inhabitants are thought to have come from
through role play?
Role Play:
• Students and teachers work together to draw
and label an outline of a world map on the floor
of the classroom.
• Students are randomly placed in small groups
representing the various ethnic groups.
• Students representing each ethnic group then
make their way from the designated areas (e.g.
South America, Europe, West Africa, Asia) to
the Caribbean portraying the different forms of
Retrieved from: OECS Education Reform Unit Primary transportation used (e.g. replicas of canoe,
Social Studies Grades K-6 Teachers Guide. sailing ship).
• Students then state which group took the
longest and the shortest time to get to their
• Product-Avatar Activity: Are students able to destination, and why.
accurately convey the reasons why the early
settlers came to our island? Guided Discussion:
• Students view a video that focuses on reasons
why the early inhabitants came to the Caribbean.
The Early Settlers of the Caribbean
• Students state reasons why the early inhabitants
came to their island. Students can create an
interactive avatar that voices the reasons why the
early inhabitants came to their island. (using the
ChatterPix app or other digital tools.) (See links)
Android: http://tinyurl.com/yc25hj7u
iPhone/iPad: http://tinyurl.com/yc7nyjpu
• The avatars should represent the different early
inhabitants.
8
Grade 3 Social Studies
Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Specific Curriculum
Outcomes
3-HCT-S-2 Locate the • Product - Map Work: Can students locate the Drill and Practice:
geographic origins of geographical origins of the early inhabitants on a • Students guided by teachers will identify
our various peoples. globe or an interactive map? the continents on a world map.
(Interactive map or physical map )
• Students will then label a blank map of
the world highlighting the continents
from which the people originated or
identify the geographic origins on a
globe.
Map Work:
• Students label a map of the world showing the
origin of the different groups of people who
migrated to our island/territory.
3-HCT-V-2 - • Product- Infographic Poster: Guided Discussion:
Recognise that Do the info-graphic posters show the negative • Students read an excerpt or view a video clip on
migrations to our region and positive effects of migration? the positive and negative consequences of
had both positive and migration.
negative consequences. • Students discuss the positive and negative
impacts of migration on the region.
• Guiding questions can include:
i.What are the benefits of the early
inhabitants migrating to our region?
ii.What are the negative consequences of migration on our
region?
9
Grade 3 Social Studies
Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Specific Curriculum
Outcomes
Create Infographic Poster:
• Students use information gleaned to create an
infographic poster. What is an Infographic +
Downloadable Templates
Additional Resources and Materials:
Videos:
• What is an Infographic + Downloadable Templates
• The Early Settlers of the Caribbean
Texts:
• Albertin, M & Brathwaite, M.(2020) Caribbean Primary Social Studies: Our Country Community. (Third edition). Hodder Education,
London. (p. 14-26)
• Carman, L. (2018). Primary Social Studies For the Caribbean: Level 3. Macmillan Publishers, London.(p. 7-9)
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcomes:
• The main groups who came and the locations from which they came:
i.Amerindians - South America
ii.Europeans - Europe
iii.Africans - West Africa
iv.Indians and Chinese - Asia
• They came by sea:
i.Canoes - Amerindians
ii.Sailing ships - Europeans and West Africans
iii.Steam ships- East Indians and Chinese
Reasons why they came:
i.Amerindians - to find food and new lands to settle on.
ii.Europeans- to become rich and discover new lands.
10
Grade 3 Social Studies
iii.West Africans- forced to come as enslaved Africans.
iv.East Indians & Chinese - to work as contract workers.
Our islands/territories would not have been the same had it not been for the arrival of the early inhabitants:
Positive consequences -
i.Brought new plants, animals, new technology (weapons, tools, etc), new building styles, languages and foods.
ii.Villages, towns and cities were developed
iii.New cultures and customs (religions, languages, artforms)
Negative consequences -
i.War and conflict between groups.
ii.Decrease of the indigenous population.
iii.Conflict over ownership of land.
iv.Indigenous peoples and Africans lost their independence/freedom.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
• Language Arts: oral expression
• Science: environmental changes, creating avatars
• Arts and Crafts: poster creation
• Maths: estimating distances
11
Grade 3 Social Studies
Strand (Topic): Historical-Cultural Thinking: Culture and Heritage
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand the ways in which our island’s peoples’ nurtures respect for diversity.
Grade Level Expectations:
Students would be able to:
1. Discuss key features and aspects of our island’s culture and heritage that shape our identity.
2. Present information on special cultural events, activities or practices in which our people participate.
3. Develop interest in practicing aspects of our culture.
Focus questions:
1. How do the different aspects of culture influence our identity?
2. Why do we participate in different cultural events and practices?
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
3-HCT-K-3 - • Observation - Picture Inferencing: Can Concept Map/Web: (Culture)
Discuss key students identify aspects of culture and • Students complete a simple concept map highlighting
features and heritage that shape their country’s identity? unique aspects of their families (see example below).
aspects of our
island’s culture
and heritage • Product - Jigsaw Activity: Are students able
that shaped our to accurately present information on aspects
identity. of their island’s culture and heritage using
different modalities? Teacher uses a checklist
or rubric where necessary.
(E.g. role-play)
• Product-Crossword Puzzle: Can students
complete a crossword puzzle on their island’s
• Students share similarities and differences about their
culture and heritage? See example below:
families.
12
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
• Teacher explains to students that every group of persons is
different and that our differences make us unique and
special.
• Teacher then tells students that today they will be looking
at all the things that make our island special and unique.
Picture Inferencing/song/poem:
• Students view pictures of aspects of culture. (Electronic or
hard copy) E.g. food, festivals and celebrations.
• Students then select those that are common to their
country.
• Students are then encouraged to give the name to describe
what was discussed. The teacher then simply defines the
concept ‘culture’.
Jigsaw Group Activity:
• Students are placed in groups.
• Each group is assigned an expository piece on one aspect
of the island’s culture and heritage.
• Student groups will then share their findings on the topic
they were assigned using a mode of their choice (e.g. role-
play, song, poem, models and drawings).
3-HCT-S-3 - • Product - Charts: Do the bar graphs or Class Survey:
Present pictographs created by the students accurately • Students question classmates about the cultural activities
information on depict the various cultural activities/events they participate in and record their responses using a tally
special cultural they participate in using the responses from table.
events, the survey?
activities or
13
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
practices you • Based on the answers to the survey, students complete a bar
participate in. graph or pictograph, to show the number of children who
• Product - Poster Presentation: Can students participate in the different cultural practices/activities.
present at least three aspects of their island’s
culture and heritage depicted on their poster?
Infographics/Posters:
• Students create a poster or collage (digital or traditional)
with at least three[3] aspects of their national
heritage/culture that they are proud to celebrate.
• Students present their findings orally.
Interactive game (Hangman):
3-HCT-V-3 • Students play a game about different aspects of culture on
Develop their island. (See https://wordwall.net/resource/62667424)
interest in
practicing Potluck/Show & Tell:
aspects of our • Students research the ingredients and steps involved in
culture. making one of their favourite dishes/drinks, as well as its
connection to their heritage. (E.g. fried plantains, pelau,
sorrel, ginger beer, mauby)
• Students share findings on their chosen dish with the class.
• Students may also be encouraged to bring the dish/drink as
part of their presentation.
Additional Resources and Materials:
Videos: (Display excerpts or snippets of videos, rather than the whole films where possible, to save time and engage students
visually.)
1. Understanding Traditions and Cultures for Kids
2. Our Caribbean Culture (Primary Social Studies)
14
Grade 3 Social Studies
3. Sorrel Drink, refreshing & delicious!
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
• Culture: is the way we live.
• We express our culture through:
1. Festivals
2. Religions
3. Music
4. Foods
5. Dress
6. Language
7. Sports/Games
8. Customs
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
• Language Arts: Oral expression, Expository writing
• Arts and Crafts: Models and drawing
• Maths: Statistics, tally, bar chart
15
Grade 3 Social Studies
Strand (Topic): Strand: Historical-Cultural Thinking: Local Island Dialects
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand the ways in which our island’s peoples’ nurtures respect for diversity.
Grade Level Expectation:
Students would be able to:
1. State the origins of our local island dialect(s).
2. Communicate confidently and for different purposes using the local island dialect(s)
3. Appreciate the importance of the local island dialect in shaping our culture.
Focus questions:
1. Why do we use the local dialects to communicate?
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
3-HCT-K-4 - State the • Conversation-Introduction: Are Introduction:
origins of our local island students able to use, appropriately, • Students are greeted in the local island dialect.
dialect(s). terms or phrases from the local • Students are encouraged to respond in local island dialect.
island dialect to communicate? • Students are then greeted by the teacher in Standard
English. He/She will ask the following:
1. What do you notice about the different greetings?
• Conversation - Can students state 2. Do you know why we speak the way we do?
the origins of our local island • Students are introduced to the topic and objectives of the
dialects? lesson.
Mini-Lecture/Talk:
• Students listen to a brief talk which explains the:
1. Origins of local island dialect. (See “Useful Content
knowledge”)
2. Value of the local island dialect. (Teachers should emphasize
here that nothing is wrong with our local dialect and it has its place in
our Caribbean identity and heritage.)
16
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
3-HCT-S-4- • Observation - Interpretation Guided Research/Video Analysis:
Communicate with Game: Can students interpret their • Students listen to a short story in their local island dialect.
confidence and local island dialect expressions? (E.g.)See video: (23) Wa Mek Daag No Laik Pus | Why
competence for different Dog Don’t Like Puss | Jamaican Kids Stories - YouTube)
purposes with different • Students then identify at least 3 dialect phrases/words in
dialects. the video.
• Students interpret the selected local island dialect
words/phrases. E.g.
1. Nyam- eat
2. cyan - can
3. wah mek- why
4. dem bin - they were
5. we ah go see- we will see
• Students should then be encouraged to give their own
examples of our local island dialect words/phrases and
interpretation.
Interpretation Game:
• Students interpret (give meaning of) given expressions.
Example:
1. Forward and out tah place - disrespectful
2. Sense mek before book - don’t depend on book knowledge solely
3. How yuh mek yuh bed, ah so yuh ah lie down - bear the consequences
of your action
4. Who nuh hear, go feel - bear the consequences of your action
5. Marning! Howdy! - greetings
6. Pickney naygah - children
3-HCT-V-4 - Respect the • Product - Dialogue/Role Play: Dialogue/Presentation:
value of local island Can students work in small groups • Students create a brief oral dialogue based on scenarios
dialects in shaping and to create a dialogue using words, given.
defining our cultural phrases and expressions from their • Students present dialogue using roleplay, puppet show,
identity as a people. local island dialect? video etc. This can be promoted to the students as a
17
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
celebration of their culture and heritage and bolstered by
the sharing of special local traditional snacks/drinks.
Ideally done at the end of a weeklong preparation.
Additional Resources and Materials:
Videos:
1. Wa Mek Daag No Laik Pus | Why Dog Don’t Like Puss | Jamaican Kids Stories
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Definitions for the term “dialect”:
1. A particular form of language which is unique to a region or social group.
2. A form of language spoken within a local community.
• The Caribbean dialect is also referred to as the Creole Language.
• The various local island dialects in the Lesser Antilles today are a result of the historical influence of various ethnic groups that
settled in the region. These groups, including Amerindians, Europeans, West Africans and East Indians, brought their own
languages and dialects. Over time, these languages and dialects blended together to form the unique dialect spoken in the Lesser
Antilles today. For example:
i.In Dominica and St. Lucia, the dialect reflects a strong influence from African and French languages due to the history of slavery and
colonisation in those islands. There are also traces of indigenous words that were adopted by European settlers.
ii.In St. Vincent and the Grenadines and Grenada, the dialect spoken on these islands has a distinct blend of African and English languages,
with influences from the native Carib language as well.
• Africans who came from different parts of West Africa and spoke different languages had to create a common language to
communicate with each other as they were forbidden from speaking their own language. Creole languages, such as Kwéyòl and
patois developed as a result of this forced linguistic fusion. Today, they continue to be spoken by the local population and are an
integral part of the cultural heritage in these islands.
18
Grade 3 Social Studies
• Purposes for/value of the local island dialects:
1. Communication
2. Preserve your culture and heritage
3. Promotes unity
4. Tells where a person is from
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
• Language Arts: Story telling, vocabulary, reading
• Arts and Crafts: puppet making
19
Grade 3 Social Studies
Strand (Topic): Strand: Historical-Cultural Thinking: Cultural Contributions
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand the ways in which our island’s peoples’ nurtures respect for diversity.
Grade level expectations: Students would be able to:
1. Describe the cultural contributions of various people to our food, religion, dress, arts, language, and economy.
2. Present evidence of the origins of ethnic contributions to our cultural heritage and national identity.
3. Appreciate the contributions made by the various peoples to our culture and heritage.
Focus questions:
1. How did the various peoples contribute to our culture?
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
3-HCT-K-5-Describe the • Conversation & Observation Pre-assessment: Are Pre-assessment: (The pre-
cultural contributions of students able to correctly match the early settlers to assessment activity can also be used as
various peoples to our food, their cultural contributions? (This can be an oral or the post assessment activity to gauge
religion, dress, arts, language, written activity) learning and progress.)
and economy. • Students complete a simple pre-
Product: Are students able to correctly match the early assessment on the early settlers and
settlers to their cultural contribution? See example their cultural contributions using an
below: interactive board.
• Students categorize pictures of the
various cultural contributions for each
ethnic group in the table given.
• Teacher assists students to place the
pictures under the correct ethnic
group who brought them to the
Caribbean.
20
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
21
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
3-HCT-S-5 - Gather • Product/Conversation: Can students present Guided Research/Oral
information from various findings on the cultural contributions of the various Presentation:
sources and represent it to ethnic groups based on research? • Students state the names of the early
show evidence of the origins settlers to the Caribbean.
of ethnic contributions to • Students (Groups) conduct research
our cultural heritage and using various sources on the cultural
national identity. contributions of the various ethnic
groups (online, magazines, books,
interviews etc.)
• Groups present findings to class
(multimedia presentation)
• Students engage in discussion about
the cultural contributions by different
ethnic groups
3-HCT-V-5 - Show • Observation - Heritage Day: Can students describe Heritage Day:
recognition of the their cultural wear, state other cultural contributions • Students wear cultural outfits on a
contributions made by (food, musical instruments, replicas and/or pictures) designated day dubbed ‘Heritage Day’.
various peoples to our and which ethnic group brought them? • Students bring examples of cultural
cultural heritage and national contributions of different ethnic
identity. groups.
• Students should be encouraged to
describe their cultural wear and other
cultural contributions (food, musical
instruments, replicas and/or pictures)
and which ethnic group brought them.
Additional Resources and Materials:
Texts:
1. Caribbean Educational Publishers (2011). New Primary Level Social Studies Lower Primary Book 2 Caribbean
Educational Publishers, pp. 61 - 70
2. Carman. L., (2018). Primary Social Studies for the Caribbean Level 3 Macmillan Education, pp. 12 - 26
22
Grade 3 Social Studies
3. Albertin. M & Brathwaite. M., (2020). Caribbean Primary Social Studies: Our Country Community (3rd ed.) Hodder
Education, London. pp. 16 - 43
Videos: (Display excerpts or snippets of videos, rather than the whole films where possible, to save time and engage
students visually.)
1. Caribbean Culture & Heritage
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcomes:
• Each ethnic group that migrated to our island brought with them aspects of their culture:
1. Amerindians - Tobacco, corn, pepperpot, language, farming methods, weaving (baskets), hammocks, pottery.
2. Europeans - Christianity, domestic animals (donkey, chicken, pigs, etc), food (breadfruit, sugar), clothing
(jacket, tie, pants, shirts).
3. Africans - Story telling, religion (Spiritual Baptist, voodoo, Santeria), drumming, calypso, reggae, food
preparation (jerk chicken; smoking), dance.
• Today, our culture is a blend/fusion of the cultures of all the ethnic groups that make up the country.
• The influence of the various ethnic groups can be seen in:
1. Language
2. Religious beliefs
3. Foods.
4. Farming and fishing techniques
5. Songs/Music
6. Dress
7. Dance
8. Sports/Games
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
• Language Arts: oral expression
• Arts and Crafts: cultural expression
23
Grade 3 Social Studies
Strand (Topic): Historical-Cultural Thinking: Music Changes Over Time
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand the ways in which our island’s peoples’ nurtures respect for diversity.
Grade level expectations: Students would be able to:
Focus questions:
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3-HCT-K-6- Identify ways our island Observation: Can students identify Introduction: Analysis of music/songs
traditional cultural music and dance have instruments used to create music? Students will listen to two songs from two
evolved over time. different eras. Example: Mighty Sparrow-
Education and Skinny Fabulous, Machel
Montano, Bunji Garlin - Famalay
Students respond to the following:
Do you know what type of music/song it
is?
Have you ever thought about where this
kind of music or song came from?
Do you and your parents/grandparents
listen to the same music?
Teacher will then explain that music just
like people has evolved over time. For
example:
Kaiso →Calypso→Soca.
Reggae → Dancehall
Video/Picture Analysis:
Students view pictures or video clips of
traditional and contemporary
instruments. For example:
24
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Traditional: bongo drums, tambourine,
shak shak, bamboo flute, harp, trumpet,
banjo.
Contemporary: steel drums, steel pan, e-
pan, keyboard, recorder, electronic music
apps
Students then sort pictures into
traditional and modern instruments.
Creative Expression: (Song):
In small groups, students remix a
Product - Creative Expression: Are traditional song from a genre, or a
students able to remix a simple traditional dance assigned to their
traditional song using groups. Students should be encouraged
traditional/contemporary instruments of to bring musical instruments.
their choice? Students then present their items to the
rest of the class.
Students may also construct simple
musical instruments such as bongo drums
or shak shaks.
3-HCT-S-6 - Explore how traditional • Product- Research/Scrapbook:
cultural music and dance have changed over Can students present on the Dialogue:
time. evolution of traditional island music • The teacher will compose a dialogue
and dance. Assessment is done between two musicians, and two
based on their research, renown dancers, about the changes
organization, and communication which they have seen in traditional
skills. music and dance over the last
twenty years. For example:
25
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Oral Presentation- Rhianna: “Mr. Marley, you are a
Research/Scrapbook: Can Caribbean superstar. What was the music
students present orally on the back in your days as a young musician?”
evolution of traditional island music
and dance. Bob Marley: “Child, you are young, and
you may not know alot but I will tell you
briefly.” “During my time, reggae music
and dancehall were popular in Jamaica.”
Product-Dance-off: Can students in small “Calypso and Soca were popular in
groups create a dance that will match with a Trinidad, Grenada, St. Vincent,
particular musical genre? Dominica, and Antigua just to name a
few.”
Rhianna: “What is different about those
types of music and the ones we are hearing
today?’
Bob Marley: “the difference has to do with
the pace of the rhythm, it is now faster
than before, some new instruments have
been included in creating music, and there
are other differences which are there”.
Students will answer questions based on the
dialogue.
Students will compare and contrast the
components of musical genre, and dance in
the Caribbean traditionally and currently.
Research/Scrapbook:
• Students will design a scrapbook
(digital or physical) to show how
music has evolved over time.
Scrapbook can include:
26
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1. Song(s) my grandparents listened to.
2. Song(s) I listen to.
3. The date and genre of each song.
4. The instruments used in each song/genre.
5. The updated version of each genre (if
applicable).
• Students present findings to class.
Discussion/Video Analysis:
• Students view clips of traditional
dances.
• Students discuss their observations
and impressions of the different
dance styles.
Dance-off:
• Students, in groups, demonstrate
their own dance moves,
incorporating elements they
observed from the clips.
Field Trip/Peer Reflection:
• Students participate in a
physical/virtual Field trip to a
cultural museum/site to view and
experience some of the ways in
which traditional cultural music and
dance have changed.
Peer reflection: students share what they
have learnt.
27
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3-HCT-V-6 - Appreciate the contribution • Product-Thank You Note: Are Mini-Lecture: Cultural Figures:
of specific individuals to shaping our students able to express their • Students listen to short
cultural development over time. appreciation to individuals who presentations by the teacher or
have contributed to shaping our guest speakers on specific
cultural development? individuals who have been
instrumental in shaping their
island’s cultural development.
(Guest speakers may be the figures
themselves or experts in their
respective fields)
• During presentations, students will
then have the opportunity to engage
in a discussion and ask questions
about the cultural figures.
• Students will be given a writing
assignment where they will choose
one of the cultural figures discussed
and write a short paragraph about
their contributions to society.
RolePlay: Cultural Figures:
• Students will be assigned to groups
named after influential figures
discussed in class.
• Each group will use class notes or
prepared resources (e.g. textbooks,
newspaper articles) to research and
gather information about their
assigned influential figure.
• After, students create a brief
presentation in which they will
assume the role of the allocated
28
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
figure and talk about their
contributions and influence.
(Students should be encouraged to
bring clothing any other props that
can enhance their presentation and
make it more engaging for their
classmates)
Thank You Note: (Culminating
Activity)
Students will create a note (letter, card,
voicenote, email) addressed to a cultural
ambassador/contributor thanking them for
their contribution to the development of
culture in their country.
Additional Resources and Materials:
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
• As time and circumstances change, so do aspects of our culture (i.e. music genres, dance styles, and instruments).
• Over the last two decades, traditional cultural music and dance have undergone significant changes in pace. Example:
i.Kaiso → calypso → soca, zouk, ragga/groovy soca, jab jab
• The introduction of new instruments and technologies has further shaped the evolution of our cultural music and dance forms.
Example:
i.E-pan
ii.Steel drums
iii.Electronic keyboards
29
Grade 3 Social Studies
iv.Digital music apps such Garage Band, Audacity, Cakewalk by BandLab are used for creating and editing music.
• Additionally, globalization has played a role in the spread and adoption of new cultural expressions. Example:
i.country music,
ii.hip-hop,
iii.reggae beats.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
• Language Arts:
• Science:
• Arts and Crafts:
• Maths:
30
Grade 3 Social Studies
STRAND: Spatial Thinking
Introduction to the Strand: This strand builds students preliminary understanding of relative location by assisting students to see their
island’s geographic location and connections to nearby neighbours. Students will also explore how their islands are shaped by climate
and environment and natural hazards. Students will understand how important water bodies are to the everyday life experiences of
Caribbean citizens. Students also discuss how these bodies of water keep the region connected socially, politically and economically.
Strand (Topic): Spatial Thinking: Relative Location
Essential Learning Outcomes: To appreciate how our people are shaped by geographic factors such as our tropical climate,
island environment and natural hazards
Grade Level Expectations:
3-ST-K-1 State the relative location of our island/country/or territory within the Caribbean region
3-ST-S-1 Locate and label your island on a map of the Caribbean
3-ST-V-1 Recognize that our island/territory is connected geographically to the Caribbean region
Focus Questions:
What makes your island part of the Caribbean region?
How is the Caribbean region similar to a neighbourhood?
31
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies
3-ST-K-1-State the Observation:
location of our Map Skill
island/country/or Are students able to locate their 3-ST-K-1 Students will explore a map of the Caribbean Region using
territory in relation to island on a map, globe or using an atlas, globe or google
their nearest neighbours google map? maps.https://www.google.com/maps/place/Caribbean/@18.3484323,
in the Caribbean region -
82.9718448,5z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m6!3m5!1s0x8eb9e309d5a038b7:0xc67
3-ST-S-1- Locate and Conversation: ecf32cac5dbdc!8m2!3d21.4691137!4d-78.6568942!16zL20v
label your island on a map Can students describe the location Have students discuss what they observe. Establish that the Caribbean
of the Caribbean of their island/territory in relation includes a chain of islands bordering the Caribbean Sea. Have students
to their nearest neighbours in the zoom in to identify their island/territory on the map. Students will
Caribbean? describe the location of their territory/island, using words such as
above, below, left, right, north, south, west and east in relation to other
islands.
Put students in groups. Provide silhouettes of the islands. On the
Observation: Are students playground, students will position the islands correctly to create a floor
positioning the silhouettes puzzle map. Use the link below for instructions to create a puzzle map
correctly? https://www.weirdunsocializedhomeschoolers.com/make-puzzle-
map/
Product:
Are students able to create a Have students put together their puzzle and take turns giving relative
representation of the location of directions for other students to jump to their closest neighbours. For
the islands in the Caribbean? example, jump on the island that is to the near, east of, far from, over,
under their country.
Observation:
32
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies
Are students following the
directions given and jumping on
the correct islands?
3-ST-S-1 3-ST-S-1-
Observation: Teacher projects a map of the Caribbean on the board and uses
flashcards to poorly label the neighbouring islands. Students will
Can students identify the errors in identify errors and go to the board to correctly label the map.
labelling?
Can students correctly place labels
on the map?
On a blank map of the Caribbean Region students will locate and label
Product: their island and their closest neighbouring islands/territories.
Can students locate and label their
island/territory on a blank map?
Can students correctly label the
islands to the north and south of
their territory on a blank map of
the Caribbean region?
33
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies
3-ST-V-1-Recognize that 3-ST-V-1 3-ST-V-1
our island/territory is
connected geographically Observation: Students will have a discussion about what it means to be part of the
to the surrounding Do students recognize that their Caribbean region. What islands have they been to and why did they go
Caribbean region island has connections with other there? How did they get there? What did they do when you visited?
islands that are their closest How was it similar to and different from their island? Where do they
neighbours? have relatives? What do they like about being part of the Caribbean?
Students will understand that we do not exist alone-that the Caribbean
R egion is made up of many islands.
Conversation:
Are students able to identify
connections to other islands? Do
students show positive attitudes or
feelings towards being part of the
Caribbean region?
Additional Resources and Materials
(Additional material and resources that are not included in the Inclusive Learning and/or Inclusive Assessment Strategies that may be useful for lesson planning )
https://mapmaker.nationalgeographic.org/
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher such as reading
material at a lower or higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
Explain the concept of island
Remember that this topic focuses on relative location and not cardinal location. Relative location is a description of how a place is related
to other places. Students may use above, below, beside, left, right, north, south, west and east. For instance, teachers can show the
students that Barbados for example, is East of St. Lucia but the exact cardinal location is SE. The goal is to take them from what they
know and get them to begin using cardinal direction as we go along. Students do not yet need to know intermediate location at this stage.
34
Grade 3 Social Studies
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other
subjects in the curriculum)
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the discretion
of the Team Leads and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
35
Grade 3 Social Studies
Strand (Topic): Spatial Thinking: Water Bodies
Essential Learning Outcomes: To appreciate how our people are shaped by geographic factors such as our tropical climate, island
environment and natural hazards
Grade Level Expectations:
3-ST-K-2-Name the water bodies of that surround the Caribbean region
3-ST-S-2-Locate and label the water bodies on a map of the Caribbean
3-ST-V-2- Recognize that our surrounding seas and ocean have connected us as diverse Caribbean peoples
Focus Questions: How have the surrounding water bodies contributed to the diversity of Caribbean people?
How do the surrounding water bodies keep us connected?
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies
3-ST-K-2
Name the major water View a Video View a Video and Discussion
bodies that surround their
island and the rest of Conversation: Have students view a video on types of water bodies.
Caribbean region Are students able to identify https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U-rUl_OFBq0
water bodies that are in or near Probe students to identify the water bodies that they know and those
3-ST-S-2-Locate and their island or the Caribbean that are in or near their island or the Caribbean Region. Tell students
label the major water Region. that they will be focusing on the main water bodies that are located in
bodies on a map of the the Caribbean Region. Have students talk about their experience with
Caribbean Are students able to describe the water bodies that surround their island. Have they ever gone to the
their experiences with water beach? have they bathed in the sea or ocean? What is different about
bodies? the beaches on the sea and ocean sides of their island? How do they feel
about the sea or ocean? Have them use descriptive words that they
What words do students associate associate with the water bodies.
with these water bodies?
Map Exploration
Map Exploration Have students explore a map of the Caribbean using their atlas, globe or
google map. Have them talk about and identify the water bodies that
36
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies
3-ST-K-2
Conversation: surround the region. Have them name the water bodies that surround
Are students able to locate and their island.
name the water bodies that https://www.google.com/maps/place/Caribbean/@13.4612207,-
surround their island and the 77.9191578,4.09z/data=!4m6!3m5!1s0x8eb9e309d5a038b7:0xc67ecf32c
rest of the Caribbean region? ac5dbdc!8m2!3d21.4691137!4d-
78.6568942!16zL20vMDI2MW0?entry=ttu
Simulation
Simulation
Observation:
Do students position Give students one label each with either the name of their island or one
themselves correctly to locate of the water bodies that surround the island. Have students come up in
their island in relation to the groups to discuss and position themselves based on the location of their
water bodies that surround it? island in relation to the water bodies.
Map work Map work
Have students sketch their island and label the water bodies that
Product: surround it.
Can students correctly sketch Provide students with a blank map of the Caribbean region. Have
their island and label the water students colour their island and colour and label the main water bodies
bodies that surround it? that surround the Caribbean. Have students Create a word collage on
the maps with the words that they associate with the water bodies.
Can students correctly label
the water bodies that surround Model
the Caribbean Region? Make a model of your islands in playdough. Use different colours for
the Caribbean Sea, Atlantic Ocean and 1 main river or stream in your
M odel country.
Field Trip
37
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies
3-ST-K-2
Take students on a tour around the island. Show them the various water
bodies that surround their island. If possible, help them see one of
more of the Caribbean Sea, Atlantic Ocean and a main river or stream.
If it is not possible to visit, the teacher can show film clips of these
water bodies.
3-ST-V-2- Recognize that 3-ST-V-2 3-ST-V-2
our surrounding seas and
ocean have connected us Discussion Discussion
as diverse Caribbean
peoples Conversation: Engage students in a discussion of how water bodies help people to
connect. Ask students if they have relatives in other islands? Have they
Do students recognize that or any of their relatives travelled by boat to other islands or other parts
they can visit nearby islands by of their country? What are the reasons for them travelling by boat?
water? How Often do they visit and what may prevent them from doing so?
This section may also include Are students appreciative of Do they prefer travelling by boat or plane and why? How does the
relevant content related to each the fact that they’re situated in Caribbean Sea/Atlantic Ocean connect persons from different countries?
outcome. the Caribbean region? How do these water bodies affect the economy of the country?
Do students acknowledge the
diverse cultures that make up Data Collection
the Caribbean?
Conduct a survey to find out how many people in the class have
Data Collection travelled to neighbouring islands by boat or plane? Record and chart
the results and create a pictograph or a bar graph to show the results.
Product: Have students compare and analyze the data. Have more people
38
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies
3-ST-K-2
Are students able to collect and travelled by boat or plane? How many more people have travelled by
chart data? boat or plane? Which is the most popular form of travel within the
region?
Conversation
Summary Statement
Can students analyse and make Based on the data, write one sentence about how the water bodies
conclusions based on the chart? connect people in the region.
Summary Statement
Product
Do the sentences logically express
how the water bodies connect us?
Additional Resources and Material
Caribbean Maps, Maps of your island, Readings, Videos/clips and Worksheets
Oceanographers, map makers, etc such as resource persons
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
There are many types of water bodies.
The water bodies most prevalent in the Caribbean are seas, oceans, rivers, waterfalls and streams.
The two major water bodies that surround the Caribbean region are the Caribbean Sea, located to the west of the chain of islands and the
Atlantic Ocean, located to the east of the region.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
3-ST-K-2: (Math -Number Concepts) – Gather information in regards to the number of main water bodies.
(Science-Climate) – provide opportunity to experience how cold, hot or warm (temperature) of at least two (2) water bodies.
3-ST-S-2- Science connection in terms of sink and float. Objects float in salt water and sink in fresh water.
Writing a friendly letter about the location of water bodies and their importance
39
Grade 3 Social Studies
Mathematics- Data analysis- Make a bar graph presenting how many types of water bodies are found in two (2) countries.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the discretion
of the Team Leads and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Observation
Comparing and contrasting size and use of water bodies
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
3-ST-S-2: Invite someone from the shipping industry to come and show students how they navigate the different bodies of
water in the Eastern Caribbean.
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
3-ST-V-2:
40
Grade 3 Social Studies
Strand (Topic): Spatial Thinking: Importance of Water Bodies
Essential Learning Outcomes: To appreciate how our people are shaped by geographic factors such as our tropical climate, island
environment and natural hazards
Grade Level Expectations:
3-ST-K-3-Explain the importance of our water bodies (seas, oceans, lagoons, and rivers) to our people
3-ST-S-3-Investigate how our human activities affect these water bodies
3-ST-V-3-Appreciate the need for responsible actions to protect our water bodies
Focus Questions: How do the actions of human beings affect our water bodies?
Why should we protect our water bodies?
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies
3-ST-K-3-Explain the 3-ST-K-3 3-ST-K-3
importance of our water Virtual Field Trip: Water bodies and Their Importance
bodies (seas, oceans, Observation: Can students state Have students engage in a virtual field trip/view a video of water bodies
lagoons, and rivers) to our from observations, how that are significant contributors to their country’s economy.
people resourceful water bodies are to https://www.google.com/maps/place/Caribbean/@13.4612207,-
our/ their people? 77.9191578,4.09z/data=!4m6!3m5!1s0x8eb9e309d5a038b7:0xc67ecf32c
ac5dbdc!8m2!3d21.4691137!4d-
Conversation: Can students 78.6568942!16zL20vMDI2MW0?entry=ttu
explain how the observations
noted in their extracted Students can be placed in pairs or groups of 4 -6 to extract information
information shows the influences from the video as per a focused question.
of water bodies on our people?
Guided Discussion
Product: Are students able to Students can then engage in a guided discussion:
creatively produce anecdotal Why are water bodies important to us?
records of their findings, that What cultural activities are linked to our water bodies?
captures the importance of these How do we use water bodies in our daily lives?
water bodies to its people? How do people earn a living from our water bodies?
41
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies
How do water bodies help to connect us across the region?
What resources do we get from our water bodies?
How do our water bodies shape the diversity of our people?
What are the social and cultural activities related to water bodies? e.g
beach limes, family activities, swimming, fishing, snorkeling sailing etc
3-ST-S-3-Investigate how 3-ST-S-3 3-ST-S-3
our human activities Field Trip: Human effects on Water Bodies
affect these water bodies Observation: Students are provided with an opportunity to visit the nearest water
Are students able to draw from bodies to their school to observe how human activity affects these
their experiences and or water bodies. Students should take anecdotal records or drawings of
observations, situations that their observation of the negative effects of human activity. These
highlight human activity that anecdotal records can be digital in the form of a blog, video or
affect our water bodies? document with pictures. If available, students can take digital photos of
the water bodies. This can be supported by the teacher. They may also
Conversation: take handwritten notes in the form of a travel journal or a complete
Can Students explain why certain structured template provided by the teacher.
human activities affect our water
bodies? Think -Pair-Share
Students will engage in a 2 - 3-minute Think -Pair-Share Activity, where
Product: based on their observations from the tour/ their personal experience,
Are students able to create students will list at least 2 negative effects of human activity. Is there a
stories, notes, or visuals that need to protect these water bodies?
highlight human activities that t
affect our local water bodies?
42
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies
Students may also view the video, “Human Activities That Causes
Destruction of Water Bodies II Sugar TV’ and then discuss their
observations.
VIDEO LINK:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5HfaaUTC1rM
Students can work in pairs or individually, to create a poster/ brochure
/ Tik Tok video/ Instagram reel focused on highlighting and
discouraging human activity that affects our water bodies.
Students will work in groups to research via the internet, groups or
organizations in their area/ country that focus on management/
preservation/ protection of water bodies in their area.
3-ST-V-3-Appreciate the 3-ST-V-3 3-ST-V-3
need for responsible Resource Person: Taking Care of Our Water bodies
actions to protect our Observation: Are students Resource persons from relevant organizations can be invited to speak to
water bodies participating in discussion with the students on the role of their organization in protecting our water
resource persons? Are students bodies.
working collaboratively to collect Alternatively, Students may engage in independent research where
pertinent information on students can be placed in groups. Each group would be assigned an
organisations relevant to the institution where they would conduct a 3-minute interview. This can be
maintenance of our water bodies? done face to face, virtually via zoom or google meet or students can
Are students able to collectively develop a questionnaire via google form or hardcopy. In their groups,
draft questions suitable for students will develop at least 5 interview questions surrounding
generating information from protection of our water bodies.
resource persons?
Following previous decisions and activities, students will create a
Conversation: Are students able concept map or web that shows at least 2 important uses of water
to identify organizations that have bodies and actions that we can take to preserve / extend that use for
upheld public responsibility to future generations and for the purpose of economic growth. Students
protect our water bodies? can incorporate pictures or create digital concept maps/ webs.
43
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies
Product: Can students develop
questions and engage relevant
organization representatives in
meaningful dialogue surrounding
awareness for and the protection
of our water bodies?
Additional Resources and Materials
(Additional material and resources that are not included in the Inclusive Learning and/or Inclusive Assessment Strategies that may be useful for lesson planning )
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher such as reading
material at a lower or higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
Examples of ‘Land Based’ Water Bodies
Water Examples Countries Formation Uses Special Feature
Body/
Feature
Waterfalls Baleine St Vincent Sometimes a river Some waterfalls are used to produce Kaieteur Fall is a part
drops suddenly from a electricity. of the Potaro River in
Kaieteur Guyana great height. Guyana. The Kaieteur
This fall of the river Most times, locals use it for engaging in Fall is 741 feet in
Great Alps Montserrat water is called a activities such as swimming/bathing, height.
waterfall. washing, fishing and as a source of
44
Grade 3 Social Studies
Diamond St Lucia water for farming and tourist Diamond Waterfall is
attraction. fed by the Sulphur
Trafalgar Dominica springs. The mineral
deposits in the water
Big Falls Belize give it its unique
colour.
Hots Soufriere St Lucia Sometimes water They are used as tourist attraction sites. These springs are of
Springs or which springs from Sulphur may be formed near the different sizes.
Sulphur Layou Dominica the earth is hot. The springs. Some springs and the sulphur Sometimes they are
Springs water is heated by lava may be used for healing purposes. pools of boiling water.
Bath Nevis or hot gases in the People bathe in the water when it has In St Lucia, the water
earth. This hot water is reasonably cooled. Steam from the hot in these hot pools is
Galways Montserrat forced out through springs can be trapped and used for hot and black.
openings in the earth’s producing energy (Geothermal In Dominica, the water
Gales Point Belize Surface. Energy). is hot and clear but the
rocks are brown.
In Belize, the hot
springs appear during
the rainy season.
Swamps Oropouche Trinidad and Sometimes water can Some wild birds use swamps as their Most of the swamps
Tobago not flow or sink into homes. In some countries, rice is have mangrove trees.
Caroni the soil. It remains on planted in swamp areas which are These serve as a quiet
Trinidad and the surface and forms drained to allow the rice to ripen. place for birds to roost.
Tobago, a very large muddy Freshwater fish are also caught in some These are sometimes
Fox’s Bay Antigua, area. These areas are swamps. called bird sanctuaries.
Jamaica, called swamps. Swamps are homes for
Haulover Guyana some of a country’s
Road wildlife.
Montserrat
Boggs
Belize
45
Grade 3 Social Studies
Nevis
Sea Caribbean
Sea
Ocean Atlantic
Ocean
Gulf Gulf of
Mexico
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other
subjects in the curriculum)
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the discretion
of the Team Leads and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
46
Grade 3 Social Studies
Strand (Topic): Spatial Thinking: Our Seasons
Essential Learning Outcomes: To appreciate how our people are shaped by geographic factors such as our tropical climate, island
environment and natural hazards
Grade Level Expectations:
3-ST-K-4-Describe the seasons on your islands and describe how they affect our daily lives
3-ST-S-4- Make appropriate decisions for various weather conditions
3-ST-V-4-Appreciate the benefits and drawbacks of each season for our environment
Focus Questions: What seasons do we experience in our part of the world?
How do our lives change depending on the season?
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
3-ST-K-4-Describe the 3-ST-K-4 3-ST-K-4
seasons on your Map Exploration Map Exploration
islands and describe how Observation: Are students able to Present students with a map of the world. Have students circle
they affect our daily lives correctly identify that the Caribbean the Caribbean region and colour the country to which they
Region is located near the equator? Are belong. Engage students in discussion to have them gain an
students able to explain the seasons we understanding that because of the location of their island in the
experience as a result of the Caribbean’s Caribbean, the island experiences two main seasons. Link this
geographical location to the equator? with weather. Share the simple fact that countries closer to the
middle of the earth (which is called the equator) are hotter
because the sun is more intense there.
Sorting Data
Sorting Data Provide students with pictures which depict the different
Conversation: Are students able to seasons on their island. Have students sort out the pictures to
confidently describe the characteristics of identify the main seasons and describe characteristics of each
the seasons in the Caribbean? season.
Charting Data
Provide students with rainfall and temperature data for the
Charting Data
country during both seasons for given years. Students will chart
and compare the data.
47
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
Product:
Are students able to make a chart with Art work
the rainfall and temperature data?
Conversation: Have students create artwork (paintings, collages to illustrate the
Are students able to analyze the data and two seasons.
make accurate comparisons?
Art work Group Work
Assign students into groups. Probe students and have them
Product: research the seasons in relation to cultural celebrations/festivals,
Do the students’ artwork accurately agricultural crops produced, natural hazards, tourist arrivals to
depict the two seasons? the country and how these seasons affect the culture and daily
life (food, clothing, recreation etc.) of the people living in the
Group Work country. Students can also be given a calendar of events of this
country to identify the festivals celebrated during the different
Product: Are students able to discuss seasons. Provide and show images and videos of different
and explain how seasons affect our daily festivals and activities associated with each season. Discuss the
lives in the Caribbean? s ignificance of these events and how they relate to the seasons.
3-ST-S-4- Make 3-ST-S-4 3-ST-S-4
appropriate decisions for Classifying Information Classifying Information
various weather Have students complete a table whereby they correctly place
conditions Observation: Are students able to statements highlighting the season during which certain
correctly identify activities that are activities will most likely be done. Table will have two headings;
appropriate for the different seasons? “Wet Season and Dry Season”. Examples of statements:
Planning a wedding. Having a beach party etc. This activity can
also be done by creating an interactive game using the digital
tool ‘Word Wall”
48
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
Discussion
Discussion Engage students in a class discussion by probing them with
questions/scenarios where they are given the opportunity to
Conversation: Are students able to decide and justify their decision. For example: Would you go to
confidently make decisions based on the beach on a rainy day? What kind of foods would you eat on
different weather conditions? a very hot day? It is your birthday, but the weather forecast has
predicted heavy showers and thunderstorms, what activity
would you most likely do to celebrate your birthday?
Poster
Have students collect pictures depicting different
activities. Using the pictures, have students create a poster
showing what activities they would engage in on a rainy or a
sunny day. Students who love to draw can also be allowed to
Poster draw the different activities.
Product: Can students identify
appropriate activities they would engage
in during different weather conditions?
49
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
Discussion Discussion
3-ST-V-4-Appreciate the Conversation: Are students able to state Engage students in a class discussion on advantages and
benefits and drawbacks of advantages and disadvantages of the disadvantages of each season. Probe students with questions to
each season for our seasons? stimulate their thinking. Example:
environment 1. Which season is best for planting crops?
2. Which season encourages tourist to visit the Caribbean
for vacation?
3. In what ways can each season affect our natural
environment? (dry season causes drought and wet
season can cause floods and landslides)
Sorting Information
Show and present students with pictures of different natural
Sorting Information disasters or effects. Have students sort out the pictures based
on which season is related to each natural disaster or effect
Observation: Can students correctly sort (bush fire, droughts, landslides, floods, fallen crops etc.)
pictures to demonstrate the disadvantage
of the different seasons for our Concept Map
environment? Have students create a concept map highlighting the advantages
and disadvantages of each season for our environment?
Concept Map
Product: Can students correctly identify
advantages and disadvantages of each
season for our environment?
Additional Resources and Materials
https://wordwall.net/
(Additional material and resources that are not included in the Inclusive Learning and/or Inclusive Assessment Strategies that may be useful for lesson planning )
50
Grade 3 Social Studies
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher such as reading
material at a lower or higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
• The Caribbean has a tropical climate due to its location near the equator. The Caribbean therefore experiences two seasons; the
wet and dry season. The wet/rainy season is from the months June to November and the dry season is from December to May
every year.
• The wet season is characterized by higher humidity and more rainfall and the dry season is generally drier and has high
temperatures.
• The seasons can affect our daily lives in many ways including the foods we eat, the clothes we wear, the cultural festivals, the
crops we grow and the activities we engage in.
Advantages of Wet Season
• Improves air quality
• Vegetation grows
• Improvement in the quality of fresh water
Advantages of Dry Season
• Increase in tourist arrivals to the Caribbean
• Engaging in outdoor activities
Disadvantages of Wet Season
• Increase in the likelihood of natural disasters such as hurricanes, floods and landslides
• Crops being destroyed due to bad weather conditions
• Increase in diseases such as dengue fever
Disadvantages of Dry Season
• Drying up of water sources such as rivers and streams
51
Grade 3 Social Studies
• Bush fires
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other
subjects in the curriculum)
Science- Seasons, weather
Mathematics- Recording, charting and analysing data on rainfall and temperature.
Language- Writing reports
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the discretion
of the Team Leads and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
52
Grade 3 Social Studies
53
Grade 3 Social Studies
54
Grade 3 Social Studies
55
Grade 3 Social Studies
Strand (Topic): Spatial Thinking: Natural Hazards
Essential Learning Outcomes: To appreciate how our people are shaped by geographic factors such as our tropical climate, island
environment and natural hazards
Grade Level Expectations:
3-ST-K-5-Explain that the location of islands makes them prone to natural hazards
3-ST-S-5- Examine some examples of extreme natural hazards that affect our islands
3-ST-V-5- Appreciate the that we need to be aware of ways to keep safe during natural hazards
Focus Questions: What natural disasters pose a threat to people in the Caribbean?
What are the dangers posed by various natural hazards?
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies
3-ST-K-5- Recognize that 3-ST-K-5- 3-ST-K-5-
the location of islands
makes them prone to Name the Hazard Game
natural hazards Conversation: Are students able Introduction- Name the Hazard Game
to identify the natural hazards Have students watch a series of flashcards/pictures/videos depicting
depicted? various natural hazards. Make sure the pictures chosen are not too
Do students ask questions that graphic and frightening to children. Have students identify the natural
show they understand the hazards depicted.
importance of natural hazards?
Guided Discussion
Class Discussion
Conversation: Have students discuss which natural hazards usually affect the
Are students able to identify the Caribbean because of its location. Have students discuss how the
natural hazards that affect the natural hazards they identified may impact their island. Have students
Caribbean? relate any experiences and ask any questions that they may have had
56
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies
Are students able to identify the with natural hazards. It is helpful to remind them that in times of
possible impact of various natural natural hazards, there are many people that are there to help them be
hazards on communities? safe, including their families, neighbors, police, electric power workers,
Are students able to relate any fire fighters, and other community workers.
personal experience with a natural
hazard?
3-ST-S-5 3-ST-S-5
3-ST-S-5- Examine some
examples of extreme Role Play Role Play
natural hazards that affect
our islands Observation: Have students role play the sounds, actions or movements of various
natural hazards using their bodies. Give them prompts such as “You are
3-ST-V-5- Appreciate Are students able to depict the a hurricane, volcano or an earthquake what do you sound or look like?”
that we need to be aware sounds, actions or movements of Have students also play the role of parts of the environment such as
of ways to keep safe the hazards accurately using their buildings, trees, and animals and role play the impact of the various
during natural hazards bodies? natural disasters?
Are students able to depict the Artistic Expression
impact of natural hazards on the
environment? Have students select one of the natural hazards that affect the region.
Students will draw or paint what the hazard represents or means to
them. Have students state what their artwork is depicting.
Artistic Expression
Product
57
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies
Do students' artwork clearly
display their interpretation of the
hazard?
Group Work: Research and Oral Presentation
Conversation
Place students in small groups and assign each group a natural disaster.
Can students clearly express how Have students conduct online research about the natural disaster.
their artwork depicts the hazard? Students are to name the disaster, give an example of the disaster that
has affected their island or any other island in the region. They are to
Group Work give examples of the impact of the disaster on the physical environment
Observation: Are students and people. Remind them again that there are many people that are
working collaboratively? always there to help them be safe. Students are to give reasons why we
Are students applying their need to keep safe and ready before, during and after natural hazards. As
knowledge of natural hazard part of the presentation, students create a model of their hazard for
preparedness and its importance? demonstration incuding thoese that can hel them and how to stay safe.
As students are working, walk
around to observe and https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J6DYWp27X1E
conference with the groups. Take
records of how students are https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=89_pDG4DneQ
working, if they are discussing the
content, if they are using the https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HKR-2z5z_CQ
content correctly. Take note of
group dynamics: who is leading, Have other students prepare questions to ask presenters. Use a rubric to
who is being silent etc. assess the oral presentation and model.
Are students able to assess each
other’s contribution using the
group participation rubric?
Oral Presentation
Observation
58
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies
Are students demonstrating
confidence during the
presentation?
Are students speaking clearly?
Are students using appropriate
body language?
Product:
Are students presenting accurate
and relevant content in their
presentations?
Are students able to explain why
we need to keep safe and ready
before, during and after natural
hazards and who is there to help
them.
Conversation:
Are students able to respond
appropriately to questions?
Are students demonstrating
sound knowledge of the content
based on the responses?
59
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies
Model
Product:
Is the model accurately
representing the hazard?
Additional Resources and Materials
(Additional material and resources that are not included in the Inclusive Learning and/or Inclusive Assessment Strategies that may be useful for lesson planning)
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher such as reading
material at a lower or higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
• A natural hazard is an event which occurs in the natural environment which has the potential to damage property and cause loss
of life.
• The location of the Caribbean makes it prone to earthquakes, volcanoes and hurricanes.
• Natural hazards can have many negative effects on the environment and people.
• It is important to keep safe during and after a natural hazard.
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other
subjects in the curriculum)
• The teacher can use the article as a comprehension passage.
60
Grade 3 Social Studies
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the discretion
of the Team Leads and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
61
Grade 3 Social Studies
Strand (Topic): Spatial Thinking: Preparing for Natural Hazards
Essential Learning Outcomes: To appreciate how our people are shaped by geographic factors such as our tropical climate, island
environment and natural hazards
Grade Level Expectations:
3-ST-K-6-Describe appropriate preparations that need to be made for various natural hazards
3-ST-S-6- Create a simple family preparation plan for a selected natural hazard
3-ST-V-6-Appreciate the need to minimize risk in times of natural hazards
Focus Questions: How can families minimize their risk during a natural hazard?
Why is it important for families to prepare for the event of a natural hazard?
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies
3-ST-K-6-Describe 3-ST-K-6 3-ST-K-6
appropriate preparations Video
that need to be made for Conversation: Are students able Have students view or listen to a weather report about an approaching
various natural hazards to identify the natural hazard? storm. Have students identify the natural hazard that is posing a threat.
Class Discussion Class Discussion
Conversation: Are students able Have students discuss how the natural hazards identified in the
to identify the possible impact of weather report may impact their island.
various natural hazards on the Have students discuss what they would need to do to prepare for the
island? storm. what their household did to prepare for the hazard and the
Are students able to state what other people in their community that help keep them safe and ready
they need to do to prepare for the
approaching storm and how Group Work
other community members help Have students select a natural hazard, in groups of 3-4, students will
to keep them safe? conduct research, create a script and prepare a presentation in any
form that they wish (role play, brochure, poster, video etc. to educate
community members on how to prepare for the selected hazard. Have
62
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies
Group Work students present their work to their classmates then answer questions
Observation: Are students on their presentation from their classmates. Have students assess each
working collaboratively? other's contribution as a group member.
Are students applying their
knowledge of natural hazard
preparedness and its importance?
As students are working, walk
around to observe and
conference with the groups. Take
records of how students are
working, if they are discussing the
content, if they are using the
content correctly. Take note of
group dynamics: who is leading,
who is being silent etc.
Are students able to assess each
other’s contribution using the
group participation rubric?
Product: Utilizing a grading
rubric, are students able to create
a presentation which informs
persons on how to prepare for
the natural hazard, who helps
keep them safe, and present their
work orally?
Is the information accurate and
relevant to the hazard?
63
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies
Conversation: Are students able
to answer questions on their
presentation?
3-ST-S-6- Create a simple 3-ST-S-6 3-ST-S-6-
family preparation plan Read aloud and Class Family Emergency Plan
for a selected natural Discussion Read aloud and Class Discussion
hazard:(Necessities, safe Conversation: Can each student Have students listen to an article about a hurricane
places, contacts) identify at least one measure that https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/oct/03/hurricane-maria-
could be employed to mitigate the dominica-recovery
impact of hurricanes. Have students discuss
• What they believed could have been done to prepare for this
Conversation: Are students able natural hazard which in this case became a natural disaster.
to articulate why hurricane • The importance of being prepared for a hurricane.
preparedness is important? • Whether they believe their household is prepared for a
Are students able to state why hurricane and why they believe they are or aren’t.
they believe their household is Brainstorming Board
prepared/ not prepared for an Have students write on post notes three of the actions that can be
emergency like a hurricane? taken by their household to prepare for a hurricane and stick on the
brainstorming board (could be bristol board).
Brainstorming Board Have students research what should be included in the emergency
Observation: Are all students preparedness plan for hurricanes and compare it with their post it
able to identify at least two notes. This can remain on display in the classroom for ongoing
actions that can be taken by reinforcement and can be shared with parents report card time.
64
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies
households to prepare for the
passage of a hurricane? Emergency Preparedness Plan
Were students able to identify any Have students create a simple emergency preparedness checklist in the
omissions in their comparison? event that there will be a hurricane.
Conversation: Are students able
to identify what should be
included in a hurricane
emergency plan?
Emergency Preparedness Plan
Product: Are students able to
design an emergency
preparedness checklist for a
hurricane?
3-ST-V-6-Appreciate the 3-ST-V-6 3-ST-V-6-
need to minimize risk in Viewing Video and whole class Title- Minimizing Risks to Natural Hazards
times natural hazards discussion Viewing Video and whole class discussion
Observation/ Conversation: Have the students listen to a story about a hurricane.
Are students able to correctly https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K_dhoKrxTJE
answer questions about the story? After viewing the video have a class discussion. Ask students questions
Are students voicing their beliefs such as:
about the importance of natural • What was the natural hazard spoken about in the video?
hazard preparedness? Are • What were some of the activities that the characters in the story
students able to identify engaged in before, during and after the natural hazard?
the impact of improper or non • Why do you believe these actions were taken?
preparation for natural hazards • Can you identify community members that help in situations
on households and communities. like this?
• What do you believe could have happened had these actions
not been taken?
Journaling -My Natural Hazard Experience
65
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies
Have students write in their journal (a notebook) about one natural
hazard that they experienced. They are to note the natural hazard, what
actions the household took before, during and after the hazard. How
Journaling -My Natural did this preparation help?
Hazard Experience
Product: Using a checklist, note Interview a Family Member
whether each student has noted a
natural hazard/disaster that they Have students interview their family members about a natural hazard
experienced, at least three actions that they experienced. They are to find out what actions they took
that were taken to prepare for the before, during and after the hazard. and how these preparations
hazard, and one action that was helped. Ask them who else helped them in this time of need. Students
taken during and after the hazard. are to present their findings to the class.
Did this preparation minimize the
risks of the natural hazard/
disaster? Mood Board
Have students create a mood board illustrating how the whole
experience of living through the natural hazard/ natural disaster
Interview a Family Member spoken about in their journal made them feel? If students wish have
them present their mood board to the class explaining what it depicts.
Conversation: Have students indicate if they believe their household could have done
Are students presenting relevant something differently to reduce the impact of the hazard. Be mindful
information? that some students will feel afraid, anxious and/or sad. When they
Are students’ findings depicting share their feelings provide empathy and acknowledge and validate
actions that were taken before their feelings while ensuring them that in times of natural disaster the
during and after the hazard? whole community works together to help keep everyone safe.
Group Work
In groups of 3-4, have students prepare a video/poster/role play, song,
Mood Board poetry etc. for a class presentation on an assigned natural hazard. The
video must indicate why it is important to prepare to mitigate against
Oral Presentation the impact of the various natural hazards.
66
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies
Product: Are students able to Give the students a grading rubric to guide their creation and explain
explain to their peers the to students how to utilise the rubric.
depiction of their feelings about
the natural hazard and the
experience of living through it.
Group Work
Observation: Are students
working collaboratively?
Are students applying their
knowledge of natural hazard
preparedness and its importance?
As students are working, walk
around to observe and
conference with the groups. Take
records of how students are
working, if they are discussing the
content, if they are using the
content correctly. Take note of
group dynamics: who is leading,
who is being silent etc.
Product: Are students able to
produce a video that highlights
the importance of preparing for
their assigned natural hazard.
Using the rubric provided,
conduct both teacher and peer
assessment of the video presented
in the class presentation.
67
Grade 3 Social Studies
Additional Resources and Materials
(Additional material and resources that are not included in the Inclusive Learning and/or Inclusive Assessment Strategies that may be useful for lesson
planning)
• https://www.yumpu.com/en/document/read/38678429/writing-a-family-emergency-plan
• https://www.redcross.org/get-help/how-to-prepare-for-emergencies/types-of-emergencies.html
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher such as reading
material at a lower or higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
• A natural hazard is an event which occurs in the natural environment which has the potential to damage property and cause
loss of life.
• A natural disaster is a natural hazard that causes damage to property and/ or loss of life.
• Preparedness- refers to measures taken to ensure that communities and individuals are ready to respond in the event of a
disaster.
• Mitigation- refers to measures which are taken in advance to reduce the potential impact of hazards.
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other
subjects in the curriculum)
• The teacher can use the article as a comprehension passage.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the
discretion of the Team Leads and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
68
Grade 3 Social Studies
STRAND: Civic Participation: Our People
Introduction to the Strand: Students build their civic competence by exploring dimensions of national pride that shape island citizens.
This includes national symbols, anthems, emblems that help define their unique island context.
Strand: Civic Participation (CP) – National Symbols
Essential Learning Outcome: To appreciate that we shape and are influenced by national pride
Grade Level Expectations:
K-Identify the people who contributed to the creation of some of our national symbols
S-Illustrate and describe the meaning of the colours/symbols of some of our national symbols
and emblems
V- Appreciate that our national symbols help us define who we are as a people
Focus questions:
1. How do you think the national symbols of your country came about?
2. What do you know about the national symbols and emblems?
3. How do you feel when the national symbols are being showcased locally, regionally, and internationally?
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies:
3-CP-K-1 - Identify the Observe Introduction - Class Discussion:
people who Are students able to look at a Have students look at a video showcasing local (s) for example athletes
contributed to the video to identify the national representing the country on the regional or international stage.
creation of some of symbol showcased in a victory Question students on the national symbol that was used by the local
our national symbols achieved by a local? representative to represent the country
Suggested questions
Which country was (name of person) representing?
How do you know?
69
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies:
Why didn’t he/she use a picture of (use items not a part of the national
symbols) instead?
How did you feel when you saw (name of person) and the reaction of
the crowd?
Conversation Brainstorming/KWL
Are students able to list Question students on the national symbols. As they list, display the
examples of the national symbol and record their responses using the KWL chart on newsprint:
symbols and share other
information about the symbols? Brainstorming/KWL
Question students on the national symbols. As they list, display the
symbol and record their responses using the KWL chart on newsprint:
Suggested Questions
What do you What do you want to learn? What have you
know? learned?
What do national What would you like to find out
symbols mean? about the national symbols?
What are the national
symbols?
Where do we find or
see them?
70
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies:
Research
Product
• Arrange students in small groups to research information on the
Are students able to research
persons who created/designed/composed the national symbols
and present information on
(flag, Coats of Arms, anthem etc) of their country and the meaning
persons who created/designed
of these symbols.
a particular national symbol? • Allow the groups to dip for a particular symbol and direct the
groups to 1) the class library (prior to the lesson, select relevant
books from the school library to be placed in the class library. 2)
the Computer lab or students’ tablets to access links and websites
that you have shared 3) The principal or selected teachers for an
interview.
Product
Oral Presentation
Are students able to creatively
illustrate and describe the • Back as a unit, allow a representative from each group to share
meaning of the national their findings.
symbols of the country through
roleplay and artwork?
Role Play
• Based on the findings, guide students to use their imagination to
roleplay the creation and the meaning of the symbols.
Suggested prompt to activate students’ imagination
• What do you think the team of creatives under the leadership of
(the person who designed the flag) argued, disagreed, or agreed on?
• What may be some of the challenges they encountered?
71
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes Strategies:
• Possible responses: choice of colours and their meanings and including symbols
or not
Product Artwork
Are students able to admire the • Provide a variety of art products such as markers, crayons,
beauty and uniqueness of the construction paper, playdough, water paint, scissors, glue, etc
national symbols and emblems • Have students select a national symbol and present that symbol in
an artwork of their choice (collage, painting, drawing, modeling)
Gallery Walk
Product • Display student’s artwork
• Arrange students in small groups to view the artwork of their
Are students able to express how peers.
their artwork of national symbols • Encourage students to make positive comments about the pieces
shows aspects of their people and • Display these in the classroom to enable ongoing reflection and
culture? share with parents during report card time.
Poetry/Music
• Have students recite a local poem that encapsulates the love of
country and its national symbols
• Sing along and dance to a favourite patriotic song
Journal/Reflection
Product
Are students able to show the
Assign a simple reflection where students draw or write something
importance of these national
interesting or important about the national symbols.
symbols for their country?
72
Grade 3 Social Studies
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: (Links to professional sources that connect back to the Curriculum and
Assessment Principles of Learning and Principles of Assessment)
National symbols serve as a source of unity and pride among citizens, fostering a sense of national identity and belonging. They are often
officially recognized and protected by law to ensure their proper use and representation. The choice of national symbols varies from
country to country and reflects the unique history, culture, and values of each nation.
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists (texts, family &community knowledge and resources, contextually relevant
professional web resources)
Additional Resources and Materials
Labtop, bluetooth speaker, tablets, chart paper, easel, musical instruments, local poems, patriotic songs, copy paper, construction paper,
crayons, acrylic paint, markers, glue, scissors
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the
curriculum)
Language - students will get the opportunity to view, speak, listen, read and write
Mathematics and Science - Students will get the opportunity to investigate, record information and report findings
Art work - Students will get the opportunity to express themselves creatively through music/movement, poetry and art/craft
Elements from Local Culture: (References that learners might know from their local environment
73
Grade 3 Social Studies
Resources for a learner who is struggling: (Links to earlier learning activities for similar knowledge, links to resources for special education needs)
Resources for a learner who needs challenge: (Links to learning activities and resources in later grades)
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
74
Grade 3 Social Studies
Strand: Civic Participation (CP): Our National Anthem and Pledge
Essential Learning Outcomes: To appreciate that we shape and are influenced by national pride.
Grade Level Expectations:
K-Explain why we play, sing, recite our national anthem, motto and pledge
S- Sing and recite our national anthem, motto and pledge
V-Demonstrate appropriate behaviour when singing/playing or reciting the National Pledge, Motto or Anthem
Focus questions:
1. Why do you think it is important to have a national anthem and pledge?
2. How do you feel when you recite your national anthem and pledge?
3. Do you know what a national anthem and pledge are?
4. What are some places or events are the anthem or pledge used?
5. Do you know the behaviours expected when the anthem or pledge is being recited or sang?
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
3-CP-K-2 Explain why we play, Observation: Have students look at a video showing a local athlete
sing, recite our national anthem Are students attentively viewing the video receiving a gold medal for a sporting event (for e.g. at the
and pledge of the athlete, and of the crowd? Olympics, Carifta Games, world championship) and
subsequently listening to the national anthem as it is
Conversation: played. Then, show another video of a crowd of people
Are students able to identify the song reciting the national pledge.
played after the athlete received his/her After students observe the videos, ask the following
medal, and what was recited by the questions, and record students’ responses on the board
crowd? or on chart paper.
Were students able to make connections • What was played after the athlete received his/her
between the singing of the national medal?
anthem and national pride? • Why did they choose to play it and not a different
song (name a song here)?
• How do you think the athlete felt while that song was
played?
• What was the crowd reciting?
75
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
• What did you notice about them while they were
reciting it?
• How are these two things related?
• When do you normally hear them played or recited?
• From our previous lesson, can you recall who created
them?
Explain to students that the pledge, anthem, and some
countries a motto as well, are specials things citizens use
to show love and respect for their country.
Story Time: (Teacher decides on a special Visitor. The visitor
can be the principal, another teacher, student from another class, or
any other individual)
After students have finished their discussion, and have
settled down, someone knocks the door and a enters the
class. The visitor explain that he/she heard the students’
interesting discussion and wanted to give his/her views.
The visitor will read the following while students listen.
I want to tell you why it is important for us to play, sing,
recite our national anthem, and say the pledge.
I play, sing, and recite our national anthem to show
respect and honour for our country. It is a way to show
that I love where I live and that I am proud to be a part
of it. When we play, sing, or recite our national anthem, it
is a way for us to come together as a people and show
that we are united.
76
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
I say the pledge to show my loyalty to our country. It is a
way for me to promise to be a good citizen and to help
make our country the best it can be. When I say the
pledge, I am showing that I care about my country and
the people who live here.
When I play, sing, recite our national anthem, and say the
Observation: pledge, it helps me feel connected to the other people
Are students able to listen attentively as around me. It is nice to know that we are all working
the visitor reads the short story? together to make our country a great place to live.
So, when I play, sing, recite our national anthem, and say
the pledge, I am showing respect, loyalty, and love for my
country. It is great that we have these ways to come
together and be proud of where we live. Do you agree?
Word Art
Have students create a word cloud about the national
anthem and the pledge. Encourage them to use words
that explain why we sing, play and recite the anthem and
pledge as discussed by our visitor. Students may either
use paper and markers or may visit the
site https://wordart.com/create on their devices to
complete this activity.
Group Work
Divide the class into small groups of 4-5 students.
Provide each group with a copy of the national anthem
and the pledge. Instruct the groups to practice singing the
national anthem and reciting the pledge together feel free
77
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
to allow the groups to go to classroom corners or outside
(this must be manageable). Teacher should circulate among
the groups to provide support and guidance as needed.
After enough practice time, gather the class together.
Each group will take turns singing the anthem and
reciting the pledge in front of the class. Encourage the
students to sing and recite with enthusiasm and respect.
Provide constructive feedback and praise for their
efforts.
As follow up, invite students to ask their parents about
the importance of the national pledge and anthem to
them and begin the next lesson with this.
Fill in the Blanks
Give students a printed copy of the national anthem and
pledge with some words missing. Have students fill in the
missing words as best they can.
Revision:
Ask students to reiterate why we play, sing or recite the
national anthem and pledge.
Product: Resource Person: Police Officer
Are students able to create a collage of Introduce the resource person and their position.
words that explain why we sing, play and Question students on how they think citizens should
recite the anthem and pledge? behave when the pledge or anthem being sung or recited.
Invite the Officer to lead the discussion on the way
78
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
people must behave when the anthem or pledge is being
played, sung, or recited. Have students demonstrate the
correct way to stand when singing, playing or reciting the
anthem and pledge.
Conversation:
3-CP-S-2 Sing and recite our
Are students able to correctly recite the Role Play
national anthem and pledge
pledge and sing the anthem after
discussions and teacher feedback? Divide students into groups of 4 or 5 and allow them to
prepare a skit on the appropriate behaviour when singing,
playing, or reciting the anthem and pledge. Encourage
them to highlight the wrong behaviours in the skit and
then the correct behaviours.
Product:
Are students able to correctly identify
missing words from the pledge and/or
anthem on sheets provided by the
teacher?
Observation:
Are students able to correctly explain
why we recite the pledge and sing the
national anthem?
Conversation:
Are students able to listen to the police
officer and participate in the discussions?
79
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Observation:
Are students practicing the correct
behaviour demonstrated by the police
officer to be used when the pledge is
recited, or anthem is being sung?
3-CP-V-2 Demonstrate
appropriate behaviour when
singing/playing the National Product:
Anthem Are students able to correctly use a role
play to demonstrate the appropriate
behaviour for the pledge and anthem to
their peers
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: (Links to professional sources that connect back to the Curriculum and
Assessment Principles of Learning and Principles of Assessment)
When we play, sing, and recite our national anthem and pledge, we show respect for our country and its values. By singing and reciting our
national anthem and pledge, we express our loyalty and love for our nation. It is important to demonstrate appropriate behaviour by
standing and paying attention when the national anthem is played or sung.
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists (texts, family &community knowledge and resources, contextually relevant
professional web resources)
80
Grade 3 Social Studies
Strand (Topic): Civic Participation – National bid and tree
Essential Learning Outcomes: To appreciate that we shape and are shaped by National pride
Grade Level Expectations:
K-Recognize that our national bird and tree help us identify important features of our natural environment
S- Demonstrate the ways that we show respect for our national bird and flower
V- Appreciate that our national bird and flower are a precious part of our environment that need to be protected
Focus Questions:
1. What are the national bird, tree and flower of our country?
2. How do we protect our national bird, tree and flower?
3. How can you contribute to protecting our national bird, tree and flower?
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
Specific Curriculum
Outcomes Conversation: Are students able to Introduction: Class discussion
identify the national bird, tree and flower Students view a video or PowerPoint presentation on the
from the video or PowerPoint national bird, tree and flower. Students are asked the
3 CP-K-3 Recognize that our presentation, and explain why they are following questions:
national bird and tree help us protected? • What is the name of our national bird, tree and
identify important features of flower
our natural environment • Where can they be found?
• Do you think they should be protected? If so,
why? If not, why not?
Discovery learning/Map work: Group students then
Observation: Are students able to use a map (Tourism map) of the country for students to
represent the national bird, tree and flower identify the national environment of the national bird,
of their country? tree and flower. Students will shade the area and
represent it using a key.
Nature walk and photo shoot: If possible, take
3 CP S-3 - Demonstrate the
students take a nature walk in the community/or an area
ways that we show respect for
where one or more of the national bird, tree and flower is
81
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
our national bird, tree and located. The teacher encourages students to appreciate
flower the beauty they add to the environment. the teacher and
students draw or take photos videos of the national
symbols and bring them back to into the classroom for
Conversation: Are students able to discussion and display.
identify the national symbols and discuss
the beauty that these features add to the Create a WhatsApp profile or video for Facebook:
environment? students use photographs to create a WhatsApp profile
and explain to readers/viewers how to respect the
Observation: Are students able to capture symbols:
the beauty of the symbols through their
photographs? • Learn about the symbols
• Keep the environment clean
• Follow the protection laws
Tree Planting: students plant the national trees and
flowers in the neighbourhood of the school.
3 CP- V-3 - Appreciate that Product: Are students able to capture their Partner with National Natural Resources/Environment
our national bird, tree and appreciation for the national bird, tree and Ministry to identify sources of trees for planting.
flower are a precious part of our flower via the WhatsApp profile/status Examine sources such as OneTreePlanted for
environment that needs to be and video? background on tree planting and follow up care
protected. https://onetreeplanted.org/pages/school
Product: Are students able to successfully
plant trees and flowering plants at their
school?
82
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
Observation: Are students able to develop Group Communication with Ministry: Students can
questions to inquire about protection laws contact their Ministry of Natural Resources and
and other special features of the national Environment to find out about laws and other special
bird, tree and flower? features that protect their national bird, tree, flower.
Have students work in groups to develop question to be
inserted into the query. Invitee Ministry personnel to
respond and/orcome and explain their responses to the
students.
Product: Are students able to make an
oral presentation based on the information
found about the national bird, tree and Creative Writing: Students create a poem or a song
flower? showcasing how their government protects theirr
national bird, tree and flower as a precious part of the
Observation: Are students excited about environment.
creating their pieces:
Students use poems, and artwork to create flyers to print
Product: Are students able to use their and distribute in the community and upload to the
understanding and appreciation of the school's FaceBook page.
national symbols to create exciting and
meaningful creative pieces for display and Facebook posts of creative writing.
sharing? Students post their pieces on their school’s Facebook
page
Additional Resources and Materials
Lab top, construction paper, markers, hard copy/electronic pictures of national bird, tree and flower, real national symbols.
Powerpoint tutorial for children: https://youtu.be/cfhnW3bd064?si=gmcqk993Yge3k01Q
Poster of national symbols
83
Grade 3 Social Studies
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
National symbols help to form the national identity of a country. they create national pride among citizens. every country has its own
national symbols. each country creates laws to protect its national symbols.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language arts: Writing poem, song
Science: Natural features, special features of bird, tree and flower
Art and craft: collage
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
84
Grade 3 Social Studies
Strand (Topic): Civic Participation: Our National Heroes
Essential Learning Outcomes: To appreciate that we shape and are influenced by national pride.
Grade Level Expectations:
K-Name the national heroes of our country
S- Create profiles about these national heroes.
V- Show respect for the contribution made by national heroes who help to improve the lives of our people.
Focus questions:
1. Who are some of our national heroes?
2. How did these heroes shape and impact our country?
3. How should we show gratitude to our national heroes?
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
3-CP-K-4 Name the national Conversation: Are students able to Introduction: Brainstorming
heroes in our country identify outstanding personalities in their Students are invited to share who they see as popular or
country/region? outstanding personalities in the country. The teacher writes
names of the board.
Teacher guides students to group these names in a table
under sports, culture, politics, history, other? If students
Observation: Were students able to are reluctant or unable to name many individuals, the
group outstanding personalities under teacher can prompt them and share a few.
categories of their national contribution?
Introduce the concept of national heroes. Students use
Observation: Were students able to devices to research national heroes. For guidance the
conduct research on who a national hero teacher can assist students to see that many countries in
is, and state some of the common the Caribbean are now celebrating National Heroes Day
characteristics of national heroes? and/or Emancipation/Independence Day in which heroes
are recognized. From the research identify common
85
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
Conversation: Are students able to show characteristics of national Caribbean heroes. Summarise
similarities and differences of various characteristics on the board.
national heros?
Think Pair Share
In pairs students examine the list of personalities on the
board select those who could be national heroes, and
explain why. Are there other characteristics of heroes that
are important but missing?
Group work
Students use video, internet research, and class text to list
the names of the national heroes of their country. Students
write the names in their exercise book.
In groups, students create a collage of national heroes with
their names and photographs presented by the teacher.
Product: Are students able to pinpoint
Questioning
each national hero to their specific heroic
Through guided questions students express what heroic
act?
acts the national heroes are recognized for in their
country. What are some current challenges of the country
that future heroes might take on? (Egs. Might be climate
change, gun violence, women’s rights, disabilities rights,
hunger)
View YouTube Video/Read Extract
Using a YouTube video students will watch and take notes,
Conversation: After or viewing one of
discuss in small groups and then share what the national
the YouTube videos are students able to
heroes are acknowledged for in their country.
name and identify how anyone has the
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U0mpJ3rv64U
potential attributes to be an everyday
national hero?
86
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
Group discussion and presentation:
Product: Collage: Using a Venn diagram students will compare two national
Are students able to create a collage of heroes and share the differences and similarities of the
the national heroes of the country? heroes chosen.
In small groups, students can use pictures of national
heroes and create a poster displaying information related to
the chosen national hero.
Group Work
Students are divided into groups. Each Group selects one
or two national heroes. Through the (controlled) inquiry-
based approach students will explore online and written
resources and or resource persons to answer questions
1. What challenges did the country face?
2. How did the heroic act of a national hero help to
assist with the challenge?
3. In what way did this national hero shape our
country?
Using a graphic organiser students summarize their
findings:
Conversation: After or viewing one of Discussion: What issues will future heroes face?
the YouTube videos are students able to Use the above group work to lead into a discussion of the
name and identify how anyone has the sorts of issues that they as grade three children would like
potential attributes to be an everyday to see addressed. Share “A Hero Like You” to help the
national hero? children realize they can all be heroes by caring for people
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FgdKD9owv7E
Product: Collage:
Are students able to create a collage of
the national heroes of the country?
87
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
Conversation: Are students able to
recognize how the national heroes shaped
and impacted the country?
https://abstvradio.com/nellie-robinson
3-CP-S 4-Create profiles
about these national heroes. Product: Are students able to use
Create Profile
information gathered to create a profile
Students will design a profile on a national hero using
on the impact and how national heroes
information gathered from the inquiry based approach,
helped to shape the country?
which will be shared to the class (using reporting, drama,
storytelling etc).
Presentation
Students can explain in what way the national hero
impacted the country.
Students can describe how the national hero shaped the
country.
Product: Are students able to express
Letter writing
appreciation for the contributions made
Students write a letter to the living national heroes or
3-CP-V 4-Show respect for by the national heroes to the country?
families of dead national heroes thanking them for their
the contribution made by
contribution to the country.
national heroes that help to
improve the lives of our
Students post letters to heroes/deliver if possible/invite
people.
heroes or family members to receive them at school.
88
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
Write in their journal how they feel about the responses
made by the national heroes.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: (Links to professional sources that connect back to the Curriculum and
Assessment Principles of Learning and Principles of Assessment)
A national hero is an individual who is recognised and honoured for their outstanding works which have had a positive impact on the
country.
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists (texts, family &community knowledge and resources, contextually relevant
professional web resources)
Additional Resources and Materials
Pictures of national heroes, manilla, crayons, laptops, paint, markers, folders, paper, newspaper articles, summarized biographies, speakers,
past or recent radio interviews.
89
Grade 3 Social Studies
STRAND: Economic Decision Making
Introduction to the Strand: It is important that students are taught the correlation between the use of our human and natural resources
and how the use of these resources directs and impacts the growth of our economy. Economic concepts need to be taught at the earliest
possible age as the knowledge and skills developed will equip young citizens with economic decision making skills about how to effectively
and sustainably use resources to benefit all.
Strand (Topic): Economic Decision Making: Economic Activities
Essential Learning Outcomes: To understand how our natural and human resources shape our island identity
Grade Level Expectations:
K- Students learn to Identify the major economic activities on our island and their link to natural resources
S-Assess the direct and in-direct impact of these economic activities on your family well being
V-Appreciate that major economic activities of agriculture and tourism are linked to the natural resources of our island
Focus Questions:
1. What are economic activities?
2. What is the importance of import and export in driving our island’s economy?
3. Who are consumers and producers?
4. What is the importance of agriculture to the development of our island?
5. How does tourism impact our economy?
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
Specific Curriculum Conversation: Are students able to identify Concept Attainment through picture inferencing
3-EDM-K-1 what is common about the activities displayed : What do the terms economy and economic activity mean?
Identify the major in the pictures? Picture walk: Introduce the words economy and economic
economic activities on activity to the class by providing students with a variety of
90
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
our island and their link Conversation: Are students able to generate a pictures that depict economic activities. Help them infer or
to natural resources working definition of ‘economy’ that is that conclude the meaning of economy and economic activities
It's the way people spend money and the way by guiding them to identify what all the pictures have in
people make money? common, such as they all generate money, they are jobs we
do, they help us get things e need and want. Have them
use their answers to identify attributes that show the
meaning of economy and economic activity. One simple
definition of the economy: It's the way people spend
money and the way people make money.
Building Blocks: self to the world:
Through targeted questioning and discussion students are
led to identify the types of economic activity around their
immediate surroundings.
Child: buys snacks from the canteen
Family: Dad sells fish he has caught
Village: Most people in the village are farmers or fishermen
They are then led to discuss the sorts of goods that come
into our leave their Island: Egs. electronics, cars, bananas,
sugar, milk, meat, Once they have established this,
introduce the concepts of imports that come “into” and
Exports that “exit” the country. Remind them that an easy
way to remember is recall the letter I is in into-import and
Ex is in Exit or Export
Map symbols (Resources and Regions)
Students will use an atlas such as Collins Student Atlas for
the Caribbean to create
91
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
Observation: Are the students able to a map of the islands of their country and plot the major
differentiate between products that a family resources of various communities and parishes on it. Use
might buy or sells/produce? the examples of symbols used in the legend in the atlas to
design this resource map to represent the various
resources
Students could also complete a chart with the main
resources produced/harvested by certain regions in their
island and the jobs that are generated as a result of the use
of these resources.
Observation: Can students distinguish between Sample:
imports and exports to their island?
Resources Jobs
Product: Are students able to accurately name
Sand and Stones quarryman
and identify where the natural resources of their
island are located? Sea fisherman
fishmonger
fish cleaner
Farmland Farmer
fieldhand
truck driver
3-EDM-S1 Conversation: Targeted Questioning/ Critical thinking. Teachers ask
Are students ble to share how they and their questions to enable students to realise that their household
families participate in theirhome economy? is also a miniature version of the economy because they
Assess the direct and in-
use and conserve resources, which makes
direct impact of these
Product: important contributions in their home
economic activities on
Are Students able to appreciate that they form
your family’s well
part of the home economic unit and they have Sample questions:
being.
an impact on the health of the home economy? a. What ways do you help out at home?
b. What chores do you do?
92
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
c. Who pays the bills at home? What are some of the
bills they pay for?
d. What does your mammy/daddy do to help meet
your needs and wants at home?
e. Identify for the students that all these activities are
examples of your home economy meeting everyones needs
and wants.
Students will complete a graphic organizer (traditional or
online) to show comprehension of their impact in their
home economic environment.
Sample online activity:
Jamboard:
https://jamboard.google.com/d/1z3gKVUj5fSvQ5D6Yn
LiclEbkhZaG3BOxLs4SoilMIkY/edit?usp=sharing
How oururMarket is important to our Local Economy
Inferencing from Scenario cards: Create scenario cards
with a theme of Market Day
Include examples of the activities that take place on market
day and have students identify which concept is being
portrayed.
Concept examples: consumers, producers, goods, services,
imported goods, hand crafts, manufactured goods,
agricultural produce
93
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
Import and Local Products: Show and Tell
The teacher provides labels and/or, empty packaging or
samples of both local and imported products.
Have the students categorize these and display on a
Product: Are students able to identify key bulletin board, leaving room for subsequent additions
features f the goods in their immediate from students later in the week.
surroundings?
For follow up, invite students to bring in additional labels
or packages from home during the week. Each student
Checklist sample: (students are given the gets to share and then place their product on the bulletin
checklist to help them prepare for the board.
presentation)
• I gave the name of the product.
• I said if my sample product is locally
produced.
• I said if my product is a service or a
good.
• I named the producer of the product.
• I explain that this product is a need or a
want
• I gave the ways we use this product at
home?
• I said how the product benefits my
family.
• I said who benefits from the use of this
product at home?
• I explained how my family’s use of this
product helps the economy.
3-EDM-V1-Appreciate Conversation: Do students' contributions show Picture Inferencing:
that major economic that they understand the linkage between the Compare and Contrast
activities of agriculture land resources and agriculture and Tourism?
94
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
and tourism are linked Teacher presents students with two pictures to trigger the
to the natural resources discussion.
of our island
One of a barren land and one of a forested green land?
Teacher will ask questions to elicit discussion in the
direction of the objective.
Which place would you like to visit? why?
Which place would a farmer have better results growing
crops? Why?
Imagine you lived in the barren place what would lifebe
like?
Use this to lead into potential field trips to nearby
landscapes to help students see the qualities of well-kept
places. Prepare the students for these visits by asking them
to take note of and draw, take photos of the attractive
features of each place.
Field trip examples:
Farm visit:
Student visit a nearby farmer’s garden
Natural Site:
Students are taken to a famous natural site where they
become tourists for the day.
If it is not possible to take field tripsto these places, invite
parents who are farmers our tourist workers to share
images of their places with students.
Follow up discussion. What made these places attractive
and how do they help us meet our economic needs?
95
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
Teacher explains to the class how our natural resources are
inextricably linked to our economic potential in both
agriculture and tourism.
Additional Resources and Materials
https://www.teacherspayteachers.com/Product/Primary-Economics-Wants-Needs-Goods-Services-Producers-Consumers-
More-
580996?utm_source=Strategic%20Educational%20Services&utm_campaign=Primary%20Economics%20Remote%20Learnin
g
This teacher has created a resource pack that would save the teachers time and energy to create resource materials. This
resource pack must be bought.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Relevant Content
Economy:
1. The use and management of resources
2. The way in which we make and spend money.
3. The way in which our island generates cash flow and creation of employment.
Some households and countries have larger economies than others.
Definitions
Consumer: Consumers are people who buy or use goods and services to satisfy their wants.
Traditionally we physically purchase goods and services.
E-commerce is becoming mainstream. More consumers purchase goods and services online. Example On-line tutor and On-line
doctors. We can pay bills, do banking and buy and sell products online via Amazon, Dominica Online, We Buy Black.
Producer: A producer is a person, company or country that makes, grows or supplies goods and provides services for sale.
96
Grade 3 Social Studies
Producers work in various sectors of the economy. They make or grow goods.
For example: A farmer grows ground provisions and vegetables. A seamstress makes clothes.
A good is something that is tangible. It is grown or made for our use. For example, food, vehicles, toys, clothes, books, furniture.
Some producers own the land, tools, machinery and the building. They employ other people to work for them. They are called
employers. The people who work in the business are called employees.
Some producers are self-employed. They may own a business or work for themselves.
Other producers provide a service. For example: A doctor diagnoses our ailments and may prescribe medication.
A calypsonian creates songs to entertain us.
A service is something that is intangible. It is something someone does for you. For example: a haircut or hairstyle, a bus / plane ride,
dental check-up, garbage collection.
Income: Earnings (money) from work or investment.
Salary: The money paid for employee services.
Expenditure: the amount of money spent for goods and services.
Budget: A plan for making and spending money
Saving: Not spending your money straight away, but putting it away so you can spend it later.
Bankrupt ((Koulé): unable to pay debts
After learning the concepts of consumers, producers, income, savings, budget, and reviewing the concepts of goods and services, needs
and wants, are the students able to categorise scenarios based on the concepts?
97
Grade 3 Social Studies
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Math: Money Sense
Problem Solving
Problem solving stories that involve purchasing items and making change. This will be based on the premise that the strategy and skill to
solve the problem has been taught.
Strategy: Do an Operation
Skill: Dual step
Sample:
Machal went to the store and bought a pound of sugar for $1.75, a loaf of bread for $1.50; two grapefruits for $2.00.
How much did he pay for all the items?
Machal paid the cashier $20. How much change will she give him?
Composition: Use Prompt or titles to write a story. ( Teacher can do a whole class demonstration and or have students work
individually)
Suggested prompts/ titles
Prompt 1: You were walking down the street when you found a $20 bill. Write a story about the event and what you did with the
money..
Prompt 2: Merlise helped her bigger brother clean his bike. He paid $20 after they were done. Write a story about what she did with the
money.
Story Title: My Cash Tin
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the
discretion of the Team Leads and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
98
Grade 3 Social Studies
LANGUAGE ARTS MATHEMATICS SCIENCE ART
Read a short story or provide Introduce the concept of data collection Introduce the concept of Discuss the concept of
information about the island. and how it helps us understand and environmental impact and storytelling and how it can
Discuss the concept of natural organize information. how economic activities be used to convey messages
resources and their importance can affect the environment. and lessons.
Discuss the major economic activities
Discuss the importance of on the island, specifically agriculture Discuss the importance of Emphasize the connection
family well-being and how and tourism. sustainability in balancing between agriculture,
economic activities can economic activities and tourism, and the natural
contribute to it. Assign students the task of collecting preserving natural resources of the island.
data on agricultural activities (types of resources.
Introduce the family interview crops, quantities produced) and tourism Have students create short
project, where students (number of visitors, popular stories or narratives that
interview family members attractions). highlight the importance of
about their jobs and the impact natural resources in
on the family. Guide them in creating simple charts or agriculture and tourism.
graphs to represent the collected data
Encourage them to use
creative elements such as
characters and settings to
convey their message.
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
99
Grade 3 Social Studies
Strand (Topic): Economic Decision Making : Culture and Economy
Essential Learning Outcomes: To understand how our natural and human resources shape our island identity
Grade Level Expectations:
K-Explain the relationship between the environment and our culture
S- Explore the ways in which our people can earn a living through culture
V-Appreciate how culture shapes our identity and economy
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
3-EDM- K-2- Conversation: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Explain the Are students able to explain what culture is?
relationship Class Discussion:
between the Are students able to list different aspects of their • Introduce the term Culture and Traditions.
environment and country’s culture? Create a Tree Chart, to show the different aspects of
our culture their culture. (students will choose from the list of
Product: examples and non-examples and write them in the
Can students depict the various aspects of the island's correct area of the Tree Chart). students select the
culture effectively? ones appropriate for their country.
Aspects of culture for the Tree Chart
• Dress
Are students able to list the theme of their • Music
country’s independence celebrations? • Food
• Language
Conversation: • Family life
Are students able to explain how culture contributes to
the development of a country’ economy?
• Discuss some traditional activities that are
done in the community, which are also done
100
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
on an economic level. (farming, fishing,
traditional dancing, foods, festivals, etc)
• Class discusses the activities that take place
during the independence celebrations in their
country.
Listing- Grouping- Labeling-
• Students gather data; photos, videos,
music,foods of different traditional and
contemporary activities in their community.
Culture Corner
• Classes create posters to complete the Cultural
activity corner.
• Bring physical items which show aspects of
culture to add to the corner.
Crossword puzzle
https://www.education.com/worksheet-
generator/reading/crossword-
puzzle/?gad_source=1&gclid=Cj0KCQiA7OqrBhD9
ARIsAK3UXh1RDaCjJBH9aRvb9t-
ESsVpV6TsL8fsO5Bcj2n6Bm-
xEDlB6zZIdHIaAp_5EALw_wcB
• Students will complete a crossword puzzle on
cultural activities held in their country. ( or
Caribbean countries)
3-EDM- S-2- Product Recall from historical and culture thinking unit in
Explore the grade two and then list and discuss the major feasts
101
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
ways in which our Are students able to make the connection between and festivals which take place on their island and the
people can earn a cultural activities and economic development? time they occur.
living through
culture using this information, get the students in groups to
develop a News Reporting Role play. Have students
Conversation: Can students identify various economic present and discuss the feasts and festivals as if they
activities related to culture? are news reporters.
Village Feasts
Independence Celebrations:
Examples
• WCMF ( Dominica)
• Ti Village Creole ( Dominica)
• Military Parade (All)
• Traditional Wear Pageant (All)
• Miss Independence Day Pageant- (St Lucia)
• Expo and Food Fair (Antigua)
• Street Fair & Fashion Extravaganza ( St Kitts)
• IndependenceCalypso Monarch ( Grenada)
Other festivals in the Caribbean:
• Village Feasts
• Carnival( crop-over,vincy mas, ole mas)
• Jazz festival (Dominica, St Kitts, St Lucia)
• Barbados Food and Rum
• Sailing Week Antigua
• Holetown festival Barbados
Journaling or Scrapbooking:
102
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
• Select an event held during Independence
Season.
• Create a photo collage to show what happens
during this event.
• Explain one (1) way the event benefits the
island.
• Write two (2) ways the event creates
economic activity.
Dramatize various Independence activities to display
students’ skills in:
• Dance ( Display a traditional dance of choice)
• Dress (Model the national wear)
• Food:
I) Prep in school; have other classes sample
II) Child prepares at home and shares via
flipgrid
• Language: (creole)
• Music ( Perform a tradition/contemporary
song)
Complete an activity sheet ( Match these or T-chart)
to show the economic activity which is related to each
of cultural activities done above
For Example:
103
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Job Aspect
Seamstress/ tailor Making a Wob Dwiyet
Chef Preparing sancouch
Musician Compose a song
For Cadence-lypso competition
3-EDM-V-2- Product: Design:
Appreciate how Design a programme of activities to share with
culture shapes our Are students able to identify cultural activities to be visitors to your island.
identity and included on a programme?
economy Design a recipe brochure of their favorite local
Are students able to research and create a recipe brochure dishes.
that reflects local cultural dishes?
Are students able to speak the local dialect proudly at a Complete this activity sheet :
given time?
HowCulture Helps Our Economy
PRODUCT
Aspect of Economic example of
Do students show a preference or respect for the local
Culture its use
cuisine which uses crops produced by the island's
farmers?
Food
104
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Product:
Music
Dance
Can students show how cultural activities support the
economy?
Additional Resources and Materials
1. Children's Books:
- Title:"The Magic Garden: Exploring Culture and Nature"
Description: A beautifully illustrated storybook that follows a group of friends as they discover the wonders of their cultural traditions and the natural world
around them.
2. Interactive Games:
- Game: "Cultural Puzzles" - Teacher to create
- Description: An online puzzle game where students can drag and drop puzzle pieces to reveal images representing various cultural practices and their ties to
nature.
Here are some popular online puzzle creators:
• Discovery Education Puzzlemaker
• Puzzlemaker:
• Crossword Labs:
• TheJigsawPuzzles:
• SuperTeacher Worksheets:
3. Nature Walk or Outdoor Exploration:
- Activity:"Nature Scavenger Hunt"
- Description: Take students on a nature walk around the school or nearby park. Provide them with a checklist of items to find, such as different types of
leaves, rocks, or animal tracks. Discuss how these elements might be connected to their culture.
105
Grade 3 Social Studies
4. Art and Craft Activities
- Craft Activity: "Cultural Collage"
-Description:Students can create collages using pictures from magazines or printouts representing aspects of their culture and environment. This hands-on
activity encourages creativity and discussions about the connections between culture and nature.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
• What is culture
• What are the cultural activities which takes place in one's country
• Ways in which the environment helps to shape culture.
• Explain why the national symbols are important to them and the country.
• Stress how they should take pride in their country and symbols.
• Show and describe how to respect our cultural heritage.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts:
Students can write a composition about their cultural experience
Students write an expository essay to explain how to create a cultural dish.
Write a poem in the country's dialect to highlight their understanding of the language. ( Creole - Dominica & St Lucia)
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the
discretion of the Team Leads and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
106
Grade 3 Social Studies
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
SCIENCE LANGUAGE ARTS MATHEMATICS ART TECHNOLOGY
- Topic: Read age-appropriate Introduce basic math Engage in creative Introduce basic technology
Relationship stories or poems that concepts in the context of activities such as tools for research or
between the highlight the connection cultural activities. Counting, drawing, coloring, or presentations. Use simple
environment and between culture and the simple addition, or grouping simple crafts that express applications or online
culture environment. Encourage objects can be applied to cultural identity. Use arts resources to explore
students to express their understand the economic and crafts as a way for cultural traditions and their
- Integration: thoughts through simple aspects of cultural practices. students to visually environmental
Explore basic writing assignments or represent their connections.
concepts of the drawings. USE THE CULTURAL understanding of the
environment, MARKET DAY environment and culture.
ecosystems, and EXERCISE
how cultural
practices relate to
nature.
Conduct simple
experiments or
observations in
the schoolyard or
a local park.
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
107
Grade 3 Social Studies
Strand (Topic): Economic Decision Making: Population
Essential Learning Outcomes: To understand how our natural and human resources shape our island identity
Grade Level Expectations:
K- Define the term population and understand its significance in the context of our region
S- Explain how changes in population can affect our region’s resources and services
V- Evaluate the potential consequences of a growing or declining population on our region’s economy, infrastructure, and community
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
3-EDM-K-3 Define the term Conversation: Previous Knowledge:
population and understand its Can students explain the term Draw on students' knowledge of how a family grows.
significance in the context of population in their own words? Create a concept map using cut out people to represent families
our region and how they grow by adding new members.
Demonstration:
(Use the students or use legos or action figures.)
Create “CITIES’ In the classroom and have the students grow
the population of the ‘City’. explicitly use the term population.
Example: City one stated with a population of 2. soon it grow
by 5. City 2 has a population of 12, however, it lost 2 of its
inhabitants.
Guide students to formulate a working definition of population
through this activity.
Ask children to create a visual representation of the term
"population" and its significance in the context of their region.
This could be a simple drawing, a collage, or a diorama.
108
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
Encourage them to include people, animals, and plants to
represent different aspects of the population.
Technology Inclusion: Exploring Population with "Stack
the Countries"
Students will define the term "population" and understand its
significance in the context of their region using the educational
app "Stack the Countries."
Activity Steps:
1. Introduction (Class Discussion):
- Begin with a brief discussion about what students
understand by the term "population." Encourage them to share
their ideas and thoughts about how the number of people in a
place might affect the community.
2. App Introduction (Stack the Countries):
- Introduce the "Stack the Countries" app to the class.
Explain that the app will help them explore different countries,
their populations, and how these factors can impact the game.
3. Guided Exploration (Teacher-led):
- Use a projector or interactive whiteboard to guide the
students through the app. Play a few rounds together, pointing
out information about countries, their populations, and any
landmarks or features mentioned in the game.
4. Hands-On Play (Individual or Small Groups):
109
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
Allow students to play the game individually or in small groups
on their tablets or computers. Encourage them to explore the
countries, answer questions, and observe how the game
incorporates population information.
5. Discussion and Reflection:
- After the gameplay session, gather the students for a
discussion. Ask questions such as:
- What did you learn about different countries?
- How does population information impact the game?
- Can you think of ways population might affect a country in
real life?
6. Create Population Profiles
- In pairs or individually, have students create simple
"population profiles" for a country of their choice. Include
information like the country's name, capital, population size,
and one interesting fact they discovered while playing the game.
7. Sharing and Presentation:
- Give students the opportunity to share their population
profiles with the class. This can be done through short
presentations or by displaying their work on a bulletin board.
This activity not only introduces the concept of population
using technology but also allows students to apply their
knowledge in a virtual context through gameplay. It combines
interactive learning with creative expression and encourages
110
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
critical thinking about the impact of population on different
regions.
Product: Human Interaction:
Can students explain why it is
important to know about the Organize interactive games or activities that involve counting
population? and categorizing objects to represent population elements (e.g.,
counting toy animals or people in a designated area).
Read “If the World Were a Village: A Book About the World’s
People” by David J. Smith. Ask questions to generate
discussion on the diversity of our global population.
Link with Spatial thinking:
Begin by showing students a map of the Caribbean region and
briefly explain that different places around the region have
different populations. Give each student a small cut out
person and ask them to decorate each person to represent
various characteristics such as hairstyle and clothing. Then
guide students to place their cutouts on the Caribbean map
placed on the board. Ask them to choose different locations for
the population. Discuss why some places may be more
populated than others. Help students to understand that a
population comprises people with various characteristics as
seen by the variations in the pictures on the map.
Observation Activity: "Exploring Our Population"
Observation:
Can students, through observation
and reflection, articulate why
1) Take the students on a short observation walk either around
population information is crucial for
the school premises (if possible) or through virtual means
planning and decision-making?
111
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
(using pictures or videos). Ask them to observe different spaces
and places, such as classrooms, playgrounds, or nearby streets.
2) Distribute the observation worksheets to each student. The
worksheet should contain guided questions such as:
- How many people do you see in this area?
- Are there a lot of buildings?
- What does that tell you about the population?
- How might the number of people impact the need for
schools, parks, or other facilities?
SAMPLE: TELL ME
3) Allow students to either work individually or in small groups.
Encourage them to answer the questions on their observation
worksheets based on what they see during the walk.
4) Discussion and Reflection:**
Bring the students back to the classroom and facilitate a
discussion. Ask them to share their observations and discuss
the importance of population in planning and organizing
communities.
5) - As a class activity, create a visual representation of the
observations. This could be a collage with pictures or drawings
showing different aspects of the community and how
population influences them.
6) Conclude the activity by asking students to reflect on why it
is important to know about the population. Encourage them to
express their thoughts on how this information can help make
their community a better place.
112
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
3-EDM-S-3 - Explain how Product: Watch this video and discuss: Brainpop Population Growth
changes in population can
affect our region's resources Are students able to demonstrate the Organize a collaborative diorama or play activity where children
and services. effect of population growth on work in small groups to depict scenarios of population changes
resources and services? affecting resources and services. This can involve arranging
miniatures, drawing, and discussing the changes within their
created environment. (e.g. showing forests being cleared for
homes, overfishing for consumption, etc.)
Provide students with large sheets of paper and instruct them
to draw to draw their community including houses, schools,
parks
Divide students into equal numbers of small groups. Assign
each group a few items like sweets and instruct them to share
the items among themselves. Ensure that each child will receive
an equal number of items once items are distributed. Then ask
students to explain whether they experienced any problems in
sharing the items. Students must justify their answer. Then the
teacher rearranges the groups so that some groups have more
members than others. Repeat the activity again by distributing
different sets of items in the same quantity to each group. Have
students share the items among themselves. Ask students the
same questions whether they experienced problems in sharing
the items and why. Help students to understand that the
problems they experienced the second time is because the
number of people in the group outnumbered the available
items and that the same situation exist in the real world in that
there are times when the resources of a country cannot sustain
the people who live there because the country is overpopulated.
113
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Outcomes
3-EDM-V-3 - Evaluate the Observation: Ask children to work in small groups to draw their ideal
potential consequences of a Are students able to recognise the community on a large sheet of paper and instruct them to draw
growing or declining challenges of large numbers of the people on the paper that will be in their community. Then
population on our region's people in a small area? provide each group with varying numbers of people to be
economy, infrastructure, and added to their community to represent the consequences of
community. Conversation: population changes.
Do students recognize that there is a
need for communities to have Engage students by asking a few questions:
sufficient diversity of people to offer 1. Have you ever noticed that sometimes there are more
services needed? people in a place than before? How do you think
people feel when it is crowded?
2. Can you think of some things people need everyday like
food, water and energy?
3. Do you think it would be easier to provide these things
if there were more people in a country?
Introduce the concept of population growth and explain to
students that when a country’s population grow it means there
are more people living there which puts more pressure on the
available resources like food, water, energy. Also remind them
that it necessary to have sufficient numbers of people with all
sorts of skills to help make a community thrive
Additional Resources and Materials
(Interactive Maps or Globes:
• Use a large world map or globe for a class activity. Ask students to identify different countries and discuss how populations might vary across continents.
This tactile experience enhances spatial awareness.
• Google Earth: A free online program that allows users to explore the world in 3D.
• National Geographic Kids Maps: A website with interactive maps and games.
• Worldmapper: A website that uses maps to show how different things are distributed around the world.
• 3D Interactive Globe: A website with a 3D globe that users can rotate and zoom in on.
114
Grade 3 Social Studies
Question Cards or Discussion Prompts:
• Create cards with questions like "How does population impact the need for schools?" or "Why is it important to plan for a growing population?" Use
these cards for group discussions or individual reflections.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Key Area Description Example
Population Basics Define "population" in simple terms "Population is the number of people living in a certain place."
"Size means how many people, density means how many
Understand population size, density, and people are in a certain area, and distribution means where
distribution people live."
"Think about our classroom. How many students are there?
Use age-appropriate examples That's our classroom population!"
"Let's look at the map and find different countries and
Geography Concepts Basic knowledge of geography continents."
"Imagine the globe is a giant beach ball. If everyone in the
Use maps, globes, or other visual aids world stood on it, it wouldn't be crowded!"
"Cities use population data to know how many schools,
Community Planning How population information is used hospitals, and parks they need."
Connection between population and "When many people live in one place, they need more roads,
infrastructure buildings, and water."
Age-appropriate books about
Children's Literature communities/neighborhoods "The Berenstain Bears Learn About Needs" or "Corduroy"
"Today we're learning about population. This book shows
Select literature that complements the lesson how animals live together in a community."
Educational Apps or games related to "Let's play 'Stack the Countries' and learn about different
Technology geography/population/community planning populations!"
"This app shows how the world's population has changed
Integrate technology to enhance learning over time."
115
Grade 3 Social Studies
"My hometown is growing quickly, so they're building a new
Real-World Examples Real-world examples or case studies school."
"Think about your neighborhood. How many people live
Share relatable stories there? What would happen if more people moved in?"
"This graph shows how many people live in different parts of
Data Interpretation Interpret simple population data graphs/charts the world."
Explain visual representations in an accessible "See how the bars are different sizes? That means some places
manner have more people than others."
Interactive Teaching
Strategies Interactive teaching strategies "Let's act out how a town grows as its population increases!"
Group discussions, hands-on activities, and visual "We can create a chart to track our classroom population
aids throughout the year."
Local Community "Our city has a growing population, so it's important to take
Insights Local community characteristics care of our environment."
"Let's visit the library and see how many books they have for
Incorporate local examples our large population!"
"Ask questions, share your ideas, and let's learn together about
Communication Skills Effectively communicate with students population!"
"Remember, population just means how many people live in a
Convey complex concepts simply place!"
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other
subjects in the curriculum)
Subject Opportunity Activity
Create and interpret simple graphs, charts, Students create bar graphs representing population of different countries,
Mathematics and tables emphasizing scale and measurement.
Explore population distribution across Students identify countries on a map or globe and discuss population
Geography continents, countries, and regions variation globally.
116
Grade 3 Social Studies
Develop literacy skills by reading about
Language population, communities, and urban Encourage students to write short stories or essays about an imaginary
Arts planning community, considering population size and its impact.
Investigate environmental aspects of Discuss environmental impact of increased population, such as resource
population growth and resource depletion and waste generation. Introduce sustainability and responsible
Science consumption resource use.
Utilize technology for interactive learning Students use educational apps, online maps, or virtual tours to explore
Technology experiences population dynamics in different regions.
Art and Encourage creativity through art projects Have students create visual displays, posters, or 3D models depicting the
Design that represent population-related concepts impact of population on community landscapes.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the
discretion of the Team Leads and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
"Exploring Regional Migration: Understanding Influences, Assessing Impacts, and Fostering Cultural Competence"
117
Grade 3 Social Studies
Strand (Topic): Economic Decision Making: Impact of Migration
Essential Learning Outcomes: To understand how our natural and human resources shape our island identity
Grade Level Expectations:
K-Distinguish between immigration and emigration
S - Analyze the effects of migration on the region, (Positive and Negative)
V- Recognizing the importance of respecting and accepting individuals from diverse backgrounds, understanding their contributions to
the community.
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
3-EDM-K-4 Product: Cartoon and Animation
Can students represent their Create an instructional video or Create a story or use a children's
understanding of the concept of book that illustrates characters moving to a new neighborhood
Distinguish between
immigration and emigration? (immigration) or leaving their current neighborhood (emigration).
immigration and
emigration
Teacher can use:
1. Powtoon
2. Animaker
3. Loom
4. Renderforest
Use an assessment menu: written assignments, oral presentations,
or visual projects for presentation
Assesment Menu
Play a game : Airport
Students take off and land at the airport.
They are given immigration forms to fill out upon entry and exit
of the county. ( country immigration forms can be used)
118
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Complete live worksheet for above game
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/english-second-
language-esl/992829
Storytelling and Mapping
Story Creation: Begin by telling a short and relatable story that
involves characters moving from one place to another. For
Observation example, create a narrative about a family moving to a new town
Are students active participants in sharing (immigration) or a friend leaving for a different city (emigration).
their understanding of the movement of Use age-appropriate language and include elements that resonate
peoples?" with the students.
Caribbean example:
https://diversebookfinder.org/book/coqui-in-the-city/
(See other Story Examples :
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1FPNWC47ZKA0G9cA-
eCVWCxt2rFn1-FAsAm4BDKXjmZc/edit?usp=sharing
Visual Representation: Introduce visuals such as pictures or
drawings to accompany the story. Display images of houses,
neighborhoods, and different locations on a board or screen.
These visuals help reinforce the understanding of the movement
between places.
Mapping Exercise: Provide each student with a simple map or
encourage them to draw one. Have them mark the starting point
(current residence) and the destination (new residence) for the
characters in the story. This mapping exercise helps children
visualize the spatial aspects of immigration and emigration.
119
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Discussion: Facilitate a class discussion after the storytelling and
mapping activity. Encourage students to share their maps, discuss
the reasons for the characters' moves, and express their thoughts
on the concepts of immigration and emigration.
3-EDM-S-4 - Analyze Conversation: Venn Diagram Cluster/BrainStorm
the effects of migration Can students describe how migration can
on the region, (Positive impact the cultural diversity of the region? Teacher plays introductory videos
and Negative)
Explain the concept of migration to kids | Migration lesson for
kids | What is migration ?
Effects of Migration in Migrant Countries of Origin
Effects of Migration in Countries of Destination
Observation: Do students actively
contribute to the class discussion about After viewing video:
the social and environmental Use a Venn diagram to compare and contrast the positive and
consequences of migration in the region? negative effects of migration on a region. Students can work in
groups to brainstorm ideas for each category, and then use a
Venn diagram to visually represent their findings.
Product: Group Work
Can students create a piece of art, such as
a painting, drawing, or sculpture, or a Have students work in groups to represent different perspectives
song, that represents the effects of on migration. about the effects of migration. Leave the visual
migration on the region? representations on display in the classroom and share with
parents at report card time.
3-EDM-V-4 Product: Can students explain the Sing along - Activity
importance of respecting and accepting
Recognizing the
individuals from diverse backgrounds? "The Wheels on the Bus" (Migration Remix)
importance of
120
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
respecting and
accepting individuals (Verse 1)
from diverse The wheels on the bus go round and round,
backgrounds, Round and round, round and round.
understanding their The wheels on the bus go round and round,
contributions to the All across the land.
community.
(Chorus)
Migrating birds fly high, high, high,
High, high, high, high, high.
Migrating birds fly high, high, high,
All across the sky.
(Verse 2)
The wheels on the bus go up and down,
Up and down, up and down.
The wheels on the bus go up and down,
Over the mountains.
(Chorus)
Migrating whales swim deep, deep, deep,
Deep, deep, deep, deep, deep.
Migrating whales swim deep, deep, deep,
All across the sea.
(Verse 3)
The wheels on the bus go open and shut,
Open and shut, open and shut.
The wheels on the bus go open and shut,
All around the town.
(Chorus)
121
Grade 3 Social Studies
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Migrating families pack and pack,
Pack and pack, pack and pack.
Migrating families pack and pack,
All across the land.
Once students learn the song, allow them to create their own
verse 4 and 5.
Verse 4
How can we make sure that migrating families feel welcome in
our communities?
Prompt: Write a verse about ways to make migrating families feel
welcome.
Verse 5
How can we recognize the contributions that new immigrant
families make to our community?
Prompt: Write a verse about ways to that migrating families can
help enrich our communities.
Additional Resources and Materials
1. Powtoon is a cloud-based animation creation platform that can be used to create animated videos. Powtoon has a free
plan that includes a limited number of features, but it is still enough to create a basic instructional video.
2. Animaker is another cloud-based animation creation platform that offers a free plan with limited features. Animaker has
a wider variety of templates and animation styles than Powtoon, so it may be a better choice if you want to create a more
visually engaging video.
122
Grade 3 Social Studies
3. Loom is a free screen recording tool that can be used to record your screen and webcam simultaneously. This can be
useful if you want to create a video that shows you talking about immigration and emigration while also showing
animations or graphics on the screen.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Key Concept Definition Push and Pull Factors Example
Immigration Movement of people into a Reasons for leaving home Attractiveness of destination
country to settle country country
Emigration Movement of people out of a Reasons for leaving home Attractiveness of destination
country to settle in another country country
Difference Immigration is entering, Compare and contrast Compare and contrast attractions of
emigration is leaving reasons for movement different countries
Historical Enslavement, Wind Rush Immigration waves in Impact of historical events on
Examples different regions migration patterns
Contemporary Global refugee crisis, skilled Current global migration Reasons for current migration
Trends worker migration, retirement patterns and trends trends
migration
Intercultural exchange programs,
Food festivals, diverse language learning, cultural sensitivity
Cultural Diversity Increased cultural richness celebrations, international artists training
123
Grade 3 Social Studies
Immigrants contribute to Immigrant entrepreneurs, small Job creation initiatives, access to capital,
Economic Growth workforce and business creation businesses owned by immigrants skills-based training
Successful immigrant-founded
Innovation and Immigrants bring new ideas and companies, technological Incubator programs, mentorship
Entrepreneurship perspectives advancements networks, access to funding
Housing shortages, school Infrastructure development, resource
Increased demand for public overcrowding, healthcare system allocation strategies, community support
Strain on Resources services and resources strain programs
Interfaith dialogues, community
Xenophobia, cultural tensions, Discrimination, prejudice, lack of outreach programs, anti-discrimination
Social Challenges social integration understanding policies
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts Mathematics Science Music and Arts
Read age-appropriate books or Use basic math skills to analyze Discuss basic environmental Create simple art projects
stories about immigration, simple charts or graphs related to concepts related to migration, or drawings that represent
emigration, or diverse cultures. immigration statistics. For such as changes in climate. diversity. Introduce music
Have students write short example, create a bar graph Explore how animals migrate and or dance from various
stories or draw pictures about a showing the number of draw parallels to human cultures to highlight the
fictional journey to a new place. immigrants from different migration in a simplified manner. rich tapestry of global
countries. traditions
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the
discretion of the Team Leads and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
124
Grade 3 Social Studies
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
125
