December 2023
OHCP Grade Two Science Curriculum
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
INTRODUCTION and OVERVIEW
Progression of Knowledge, Skills and Values Grades 1-6
2
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Grade Level Expectations for Skills and Attitudes1
Summary of Skills to be Demonstrated by the end of Grade 2
In the development of inquiry, problem identification, design and solution, learners should demonstrate the following:
In the activities throughout Grade 2, learners are encouraged to develop the attitudes required for positively interacting with scientific and technological ideas and
concepts. At the end of the Grade, these are some of the attitudes that should be evident.
1 The skills and attitudes have been taken verbatim from the OECS Learning Standards
3
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Structure and Properties of Matter
Purpose of the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of
caring not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic study of
the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from leveraging
and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it.
Topic or Strand: Structure and Properties of Matter
Essential Learning Outcome (ELO-1):
Plan and conduct an investigation to describe and classify different kinds of materials by their observable properties. [Clarification Statement: Observations
could include colour, texture, hardness, and flexibility. Patterns could include the similar properties that different materials share.]
Grade Level Guidelines: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: New Vocabulary Lesson 1:
Knowledge Use the word property or characteristic in a Introduction to Matter
● Define the terms: sentence. Students, here is the word for today’s lesson, but oh no, the
o Matter E.g. letters are all mixed up. Can you help me unscramble them
o Characteristics A characteristic of frogs is their slimy skin! to figure out the word? (taterm = matter)
o Properties A property of glass is shininess.
o Solid Students, where are we? (We are in school/in our class/outside)
o Liquid Give three examples of manmade objects. What do you see around us? (furniture, my friends, trees, school
o Gas (glass, pencil, eraser, bread, cars etc.) garden)
o Materials What do I have in my hands? (Teacher may have an object
o Properties Give three examples of living things. such as, chalk/bottle of water/phone in his/her hands)
o Texture (plants, animals, insects) What are we sitting/standing on? (Chairs/pavement/grass)
o Hard/Soft
o Flexible Assessment for States of Matter 1: Now, the word that we unscrambled is used to name all of
o Elastic Create a poster on the states of matter to be those things we just mentioned. What was that word again?
o Rigid assessed by the following rubric: (Matter)
o Natural materials
o Living
4
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
o Manmade Matter is anything that has mass and takes up space. All of the
Identifies the three states of matter (3 marks)
materials things you identified have mass and take up space.
Identifies examples of each state of matter
● State that matter is As you can tell, matter can be found all around us. Let’s
(3 marks)
composed of particles. watch a video about matter.
Highlights properties of the states of matter
● Demonstrate they https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jmm1J2yI9tk (2:21
(3 marks)
understand the properties of mins)
Creativity (3 marks)
the states of matter. Students while looking at the video (0:08 - 0:36 mins), I want
● Demonstrate they
you to tell me:
understand the properties of
1) What matter is made of? (particles)
the different types of Discuss at least ONE of the ways in which gases, 2) What are the states of matter? (solid, liquid, gas)
materials (metal, paper, liquids and solids are different.
wood, plastic, fabric, etc). Discuss at least ONE of the ways in which gases, Let’s continue watching the video (0:37 - 2:09 mins) and
● Compare solids, liquids and liquids and solids are similar. observe how the particles in the different states of matter
gases based on their
behave.
properties. Assessment for States of Matter 2:
● Distinguish between an
https://www.tutoringhour.com/worksheets/matter As you just learnt, the particles in each state of matter
/identifying/ behave differently. Solids, liquids and gases look and behave
object and the material it is
the way they do because of how close or far their particles
made from.
are from each other.
● Determine the properties to
be observed in the
Teacher demonstrates with fists that solids have close
investigations.
particles, liquid particles are further apart and that gas
● Distinguish between objects
particles move around in the air (waving fists). Teacher then
and the materials from
demonstrates with fists that heating up particles of matter
which they are made (ST-2-
makes them move and get farther apart.
PS-MM-1).
Balloon Experiment & Roleplay Activity
● Identify different materials
such as wood, rubber, metal,
Teacher places a balloon over the mouth of an empty glass
plastic and list objects made
soda bottle and heats the bottle with a candle. As the gas
from each (ST-2-PS-MM-2).
particles heat up, they expand and inflate the balloon. Let’s
● Describe giving examples,
roleplay what is happening inside the balloon.
the properties of solids and
liquids (ST-2-PS-MM-5).
5
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Identify examples of at least Before: The gas inside the bottle is represented by the group of students
two solids and two liquids being apart from each other. They should also be moving around freely.
(ST-2-PS-MM-6).
● Realise that some things are After heating: The gas particles move quickly from the bottle into the
natural and some are human balloon. As such, the students should move more rapidly and spread
made (ST-2-TE-NT-1). even farther apart.
● List some physical properties
of matter (ST-3-PS-MM-1).
Observing the Properties of Solids, Liquids and Gases
● Match, with relevant
Activity
examples, properties of
materials which make them
Sing the “Little Scientist” Song (to the tune of “Bingo”)
useful for specific purposes
(ST-3-PS-MM-4).
A little scientist am I
I’ll use my hands, my ears and eyes,
Squeeze, move, feel it
Skills
Push, press, pour it
● Observe the three states of
Lift, drop, hear it.
matter
The object I'll observe.
● Identify the three states of
https://youtu.be/sRIyEhMjJcs lyrics by Juanita Hunte-
matter and give examples of
King, music by Dellonte Boucher
each.
Assessment 3: Particle Arrangement and
● Observe different types of Movement in each State of Matter
materials
Observing Solids Activity
● Identify the properties of Roleplay in groups the arrangement and movement
different materials. of the particles in each state of matter. Let’s observe this group of objects using our eyes to look,
● Compare different types of Rubric fingers to feel and ears to listen.
materials based on their - correct arrangement in each state (3 marks)
observable properties. - correct movement of particles in each state Objects:
● Compare solids, liquids and (3 marks) ● pencil
gases based on their ● chalk
properties. ● crayon
Assessment 4: Particle & States of Matter ● building blocks
6
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Classify matter as solids, ● pebble
liquids and gases. Complete the boxes to show the arrangement of ● plant
● Classify materials based on the given particles. ● nail
observable properties. Students, we use the words characteristics or properties
● Classify objects based on the
when we are trying to identify what makes groups of objects
similar.
materials they are made
For example we might say “ water and oil have the property
from.
or characteristic that they can be poured like a liquid.”
● Communicate the results
from the various
What are the properties or characteristics of the objects in
investigations to the class Assessment for Properties of Materials
the list above that make them similar?
and teacher. 1. Describe how a blind person might use their
● Plan investigations to sense of touch and the properties of solids
How does each object feel? Can each object be moved from
describe and classify (roughness, smoothness, hard, soft) to get to
one place to the next? Does each object need to be inside a
different kinds of materials. school from their home. (e.g. the feel of the
container to be moved?
● Conduct investigations to ground under their feet vs. pavement, stairs from
Does each object change its shape when moved/placed in a
classify materials by their home or into school being smooth, touching
container?
observable properties. trees along the path, touching fences, the feel of
What happens to each object when it is dropped? What do
● Collect and analyse data
doors and door knobs).
you hear when you tap it?
gathered after observing
Is each object squishy?
2. Have children draw a map of how a child could
different materials.
What is the same about them?
get to school and use touch to assist them if they
● Collect and analyse data
were blind. In the map they could include items Closure: Let me summarize what you have said:
gathered after observing
they could touch, hear and smell that might • these objects are hard;
each state of matter.
guide their journey to the destination. (e.g. • they don’t change shape;
● Analyze and interpret data
obtained from their teacher scaffolding questions: What does it feel • they can be measured;
like under their feet -gravel, sand etc. What does
observations to classify • they don’t pour like a liquid- they remain the same as
it feel like on their legs? – grass, branches?) ?
matter and materials. we move them
Where do they turn, can they hear wind in
● Investigate the properties of We call matter with these characteristics or properties,
special trees?, Are there smells associated with
various materials and match Solids.
parts of the community?
the properties to their use
(ST-2-PS-MM-3). Students, based on your observations, answer these TRUE
Classification of Materials according to
or FALSE questions about the solids you observed:
Properties Assessment
7
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Attitudes/Values
1) Some solids are hard. (T)
● Develop curiosity by finding Students conduct investigations on a plastic lid, a 2) Solids take the shape of the container they are placed
out about objects and coin, and a metal key and use the observations made in. (F)
materials around them. to group the objects in different ways according to
● Appreciate that materials their properties. Based on what we would have observed, we now know that
have similar and different solids tend to be hard and they do not take the shape of
properties. their container because solids have closely packed
● Develop inquiry through
particles.
E.g. Complete the following table
investigating materials and
Roleplay the Arrangement & Movement of Particles in
their properties.
Property Coin Key Plastic a Solid
● Show respect for evidence
Lid
by using the results from the
investigations to make
Type of
classifications.
Material
● Safety when conducting
practical and group work, Stiffness
display sensitivity and offer
assistance to peers who may Clangs
have physical or learning Retrieved from:
challenges. Flexible https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:States_of_matter
● Participate actively in _En.svg
Shiny/
classroom discussions.
Dull
● Show persistence in Students, look at the diagram above and arrange yourselves
completing practical like the particles of a solid (students should stand uniformly in
Shape
activities, especially those rows and columns and wiggle in their spaces).
that may be challenging.
● Work collaboratively,
Observing Liquids Activity
Let’s observe this group of objects:
cooperatively and
Which of the three objects have similar
● oil
respectfully with other
characteristics and could be grouped together?
● milk
members of their group in
Explain.
● water
8
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
exploring and investigating Grouped by shape: The coin and lid are both round. ● juice
different materials. The key is an irregular shape. ● alcohol
● Show sensitivity and
demonstrate helpfulness Grouped by stiffness: The coin and key are both How do they feel?
when working with peers stiff. The lid is flexible. How do they look?
that may have learning or Can it be moved from one place to the next?
physical challenges as you Grouped by material: The coin and key are both Try to move each liquid into the empty containers (cup,
undertake experimental work metal. The lid is plastic. beaker, bowl) provided. Does it need a container to be
together. moved?
Assessment on Type of Materials
● Stewardship/Respect for Does it change its shape when moved/placed in a container?
Living Things: What shape do they take when they change containers?
Can they be moved without the containers?
o Take care not to damage What is the same about them?
objects (living and non- Closure: Let me summarize what you have said:
living things) when they • these objects are wet;
are making observations
• these objects can flow;
about materials in the
• they change their shape depending on the container
environment.
they are in;
o Use materials wisely.
• they can be measured;
● Safety: • they can be moved in a container
We call matter with these characteristics or properties,
o Wear safety goggles Liquids.
when conducting certain
experiments. Students, based on your observations, answer these TRUE
o Be careful not to taste or FALSE questions about the liquids:
materials unless told to
do so by the teacher. 1) Liquids can be poured. (T)
o Use safety protocols for 2) Liquids can be easily moved without a container. (F)
collecting objects. 3) Liquids take the shape of the container they are
o Wash hands after placed in. (T)
conducting certain
activities, especially
9
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
when playing with soil or Students based on what we would have observed we learnt
materials collected that liquids can be easily poured and they take the
outside the classroom. shape of their container because liquid particles are not
so closely packed and can move around a little.
● Realise that some things are
natural and some are human Roleplay the Arrangement & Movement of Particles in
made (ST-2-TE-NT-1). a Liquid
Students, look at the diagram above and arrange yourselves
like the particles of a liquid (students should be farther apart but
not in a uniform way, they should move slowly around each other).
Observing Gases Activity
Students are placed in one corner the class and asked to
observe the teacher using these objects:
● Sprays perfume/deodorant in a corner of the class.
Students, were you able to see the perfume? Can you smell it
from your corner of the class? How are you able to smell it?
● Inflates a balloon.
What do you see as the balloon is inflated? (It is getting bigger.)
What is filling up the balloon? (air/gas)
Retrieved and adapted from: ● Deflates a balloon.
https://images.app.goo.gl/96DrLoYxnGbCKkwj8 Where did the air go when the balloon was deflated? (Into the
room)
Extension Question to Challenge Students
10
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Why does heat change the properties of objects? Students, based on your observations, answer these TRUE
(heat causes the particles to move and collide and get or FALSE questions about the gases:
further apart so you can convert solids to liquids-
1. Gases take up all the space in a container. (T)
example melting solid butter)
2. Gases do not change shape. (F)
Gases have particles that spread really far apart and can
move all around a container. That’s why gases like a
perfume/deodorant spray can move all around the
classroom even when it is applied in one corner of the
room. The particles even collide with each other to spread
out even more.
Roleplay the Arrangement & Movement of Particles in
a Gas
Students, look at the diagram above and arrange yourselves
like the particles of a gas (students should be very far apart but not
in a uniform way, they should move quickly around the classroom).
Video/Song:
Matter Chatter (song for kids about solids, liquids, and
gases) - YouTube (3:14 mins)
11
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Lesson 2
Activity introducing observable properties of materials.
Note to teacher: The following is an introductory activity. Have
students use their senses to bring an awareness to the observable
properties of materials.
Students, here’s an object. (Hold up either a rock, plastic toy,
fruit or plush animal to students.) Can you describe the
object? Record their responses on the board. These words
that you have just used to describe your objects, such as,
their colour, how they feel (texture), their size (large/small),
hard, soft, flexible (can bend), rigid (hard to bend), elastic (can
stretch and bounce back), warm and cold, etc are called
properties.
Now let’s practice. Here is a bag of objects. Please take one
object from the bag and describe it.
Note to teacher: Before the students begin to describe their
object, read the poem below entitled “Fingers Tell”.
12
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Give students time to examine their object and sketch it.
Write three properties about the object, using the list created
earlier, as a guide. (E.g. My object is big, green and rough)
Have a few students present their object to the class and
share the properties of their object.
Note to teacher: Collect the completed sheets from
students and add it to their portfolio for assessment.
Lesson 3:
Grouping objects/materials using their observable
properties of materials.
Note to Teacher: Take students on a field trip in and around the
school. Prior to the lesson, ensure that the environment has matter in at
least the solid and liquid states for the students to observe.
Students on your field trip, collect different kinds of objects.
Ensure to follow the safety rules:
13
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Safety Rules for Activity
1) Listen to instructions.
2) Stay on designated paths and areas.
3) Wash hands after conducting activities, especially
when handling soil or materials collected outside the
classroom.
4) Be mindful to not taste materials unless told by the
teacher.
Working in your groups, select three (3) of the objects you
have collected.
Feel them, look at them, tap them, try to stretch them, pull
them apart, bend them, etc. Name and describe the object
using the Observation Card Template below:
14
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Expand template as needed
Did all your items you observed look or feel the same? (No,
some look/feel the same and some are different) Not all materials are
the same. They have properties about them that are the
same and different.
15
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Students return the objects that you described to your
collection. Now, working in your groups, look at your
objects and come up with a way of sorting or classifying
your objects based on any property you choose. Let’s
discuss. What property did you choose? Which items have
that property? Which items were not selected and why?
Now place your objects back in the pile and figure out a
different way to classify or sort them.
Lesson 4: Exploring Different Materials
Materials Mystery Box Activity
Note to teacher:
Include in a box items made of one material only, e.g., wood,
plastic, metal, rubber, paper, fabric, etc.
Blindfold students, have them choose items from a box and
describe each without looking at it or showing it to the class.
The other students will then guess what it is based on the
descriptions given. After guessing, each object is displayed
and passed around the class for all students to make
observations.
“Students, can you tell me what this item is made of?”
Teacher records and displays the information in the table
below:
16
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Object What is it Observations
made of?
Sock Fabric Soft, flexible
Eraser
Building
block
Pass each item around the class to ensure that all make
observations. Repeat the activity with the other items.
From the table, you would notice that these objects are
made from different “things” (fabric, metal, plastic, etc).
These things are called materials. Materials are the things that
objects are made of.
E.g. Pencil is composed of the following materials:
plastic/wood/metal, rubber and pencil lead.
Students describe how each material feels, looks, sounds
when tapped, can it bend, stretch?, etc. Record the
observations stated in the table above.
Classifying Materials Activity
Do all materials look and feel the same? (No, not all materials
are the same).
17
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Materials have different properties and these properties can
be used to classify or sort the materials.
Students work in your groups to classify the objects
provided based on the materials they are made from. Make
certain to label each container according to properties.
Classification of Natural & Manmade Materials
Students, what does the word living mean to you? Give me
some examples of living things (my dog, bugs, humans, plants).
We sometimes say these things are from nature or natural.
Have you heard the word manmade? If we break up that
word in pieces MAN MADE we can see that something like
a piece of glass is made by man (manmade).
Students, there is another way we can classify objects. Take a
look at these two groups of objects:
Group A: leaves, wood, sticks, pebbles/stone, grass,
river/pond water, bugs and other living creatures.
Group B: plastics (cups, bottles, nylon), glass, paper and
steel.
Why is it that steel and bugs are not in the same group? (one
is living/natural, one is manmade) How can we tell that a
material is natural or man made? What is the difference
between natural and manmade materials? Natural materials
come from nature and were not made by humans (e.g. stone,
creatures, plants, water from river/pond, etc) whereas man
made materials were made by humans (e.g. car, steel, plastics,
glass, etc).
18
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Discuss what is different about the groups of objects? (A is a
group of natural materials and B is a group of man-made materials).
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: (Links to professional sources that connect back to the Curriculum and Assessment
Principles of Learning and Principles of Assessment)
Useful book: “Change it: Solids, liquids & Gases” by Adrienne Mason
Inclusive Resources and Materials From Regional Specialists Use of multisensory activities and materials to assist all learners. (texts, family & community
knowledge and resources, contextually relevant professional web resources)
Additional Resources:
Useful book: “It does Matter: Different States of Matter” available at
(https://www.amazon.com/dp/B01A2YJ7DY/ref=rdr_kindle_ext_tmb)
Matter Chatter (song for kids about solids, liquids, and gases)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C33WdI64FiY
Video on particles and properties: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=npv74D2MO6Q (3:49 min)
After heating: Students begin to move faster and farther apart.
19
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
● Another activity for observing properties
Ask children, how could a deaf person use vibration to judge whether objects were hard or soft? (e.g. two hard objects hit together would
give a sharp sound and a fast vibration whereas a soft and hard object hit together would only generate a low vibration)- to demonstrate
this the teacher could have the student close their eyes and hold a soft or hard ball and explain how it feels when something hits it gently.
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other
subjects in the curriculum)
Mathematics:
20
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
● Compare objects in terms of their sizes.
● Total number of items found in an area.
Social Studies:
The use of different colours/objects in different social/historical gatherings, for example certain colours at independence celebrations and objects
in religious gatherings.
Language Arts:
● Communicating ideas through role play and drawing.
● Use a variety of adjectives to describe different objects.
TVET:
● The use of different types of materials to make different objects or structures.
● The use of different types of machines in different fields in TVET.
● Use of different types of materials in making local craft items.
Agriculture:
● Different materials are used.in the construction of certain structures in agriculture, such as greenhouses/ shadehouses.
● Tools used in agriculture are made from a variety of materials depending on their use.
Health:
● Certain colours may be calming/upsetting to a person.
● Certain colours help to keep a person cool/hot.
● Textures of different materials impact persons differently.
● Some people are colour blind.
● Some persons may not have full use of all of their senses and hence may not be able to describe objects adequately.
21
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Elements from Local Culture:
● Volcanic materials: solids- ash, stones, boulders; liquid - the oozing lava, sulfur lake; gases - hot dense fumes from volcano, Sulphur is used
to treat some skin ailments & hot water baths are constructed from hot springs.
● Local liquids (e.g. local beverages/juices/oils - malt, sorrel, lime, coconut water, ginger beer, coconut oil, castor oil, river water, streams,
crater lakes, sulfur springs).
● Local gases- steam on a hot cup of tea, steam rising from hot asphalt after a rain, barbecue smoke, vehicle exhaust, gases at the sulfur
springs, gases created by decaying sargassum seaweed.
● Local solids- limestone, ash, boulders, sand, charcoal, bells, metals.
● Colours- black funeral colours, national colours in flags.
● Materials- coconut husks, shells and fibers used in craft.
● Specific materials are used in different ceremonies.
● National colours, e.g. colours of the national flag/national wear.
● Different materials used to make local craft items.
● Use of different materials by indigenous group.
Resources for a learner who is struggling: (Links to earlier learning activities for similar knowledge, links to resources for special
education needs)
Read aloud books to support all students:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nfg7D5CeOZQ (2:12 mins)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zamug7Fj7MM (6:24 mins)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MmXKoMfy7Q8 (9:31 mins)
Resources for a learner who needs challenge: (Links to learning activities and resources in later grades)
Simulations of states of matter: https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/states-of-matter-basics/latest/states-of-matter-basics_en.html
https://interactives.ck12.org/simulations/chemistry/states-of-matter/app/index.html?screen=sandbox
Strategies that Support the OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning
outcome and associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies ✓ Understand the importance of giving accurate descriptions of
objects/materials/persons when asked to do so.
22
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
✓ Classifying and observing certain patterns or colours. This is linked to
cultural relevance and national pride.
✓ Understand the importance of certain colours or materials to certain
groups in the society.
✓ Safety when conducting practical and group work, display sensitivity and
offer assistance to peers who may have physical or learning challenges.
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication Critically analyzing the information gathered on materials from investigations
conducted.
Competencies
Communicates information on materials/ objects and how they can be
classified truthfully.
Developed critical thinking:
Through exploring various objects and the materials from which they are
made.
Investigating that materials have similar and different properties
Through using Inquiry.
Showing respect for evidence by communicating the results from the
investigations honestly and faithfully.
Developed Well-being Competencies
Certain colours/materials/objects could trigger negative/positive emotions.
Safety when conducting practical and group work, display sensitivity and
offer assistance to peers who may have physical or learning challenges.
Adhering to Safety Protocols such as:
✓ Wear safety goggles when conducting certain experiments.
✓ Be careful not to taste materials unless told to do so by the teacher.
✓ Use safety protocols for collecting objects.
✓ Wash hands after conducting certain activities, especially when
playing with soil or materials collected outside the classroom.
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies ➢ Understand the properties of different materials around them and how
these can be used to create new and safe products.
➢ Introduction to different types of materials used in products.
23
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
➢ Identify the properties of different materials.
➢ Compare different types of materials based on their observable
properties.
➢ Plan investigations to describe and classify different kinds of materials.
➢ Analyze and interpret data obtained from their observations to classify
matter and materials.
24
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Purpose of the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes, and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of
caring not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic study of
the structure and behaviour of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from leveraging
and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it.
Topic or Strand: Structure and Properties of Matter
Essential Learning Outcome (ELO-2):
Analyze data obtained from testing different materials to determine which materials have the properties that are best suited for an intended purpose.
[Clarification Statement: Examples of properties could include, strength, flexibility, hardness, texture, and absorbency.] [Assessment Boundary: Assessment of quantitative
measurements is limited to length.]
Grade Level Guidelines: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Learners are expected to: Introductory Questions In School Field Trip
Knowledge
● Give examples of how Discuss the following: Setup stations around the class/school displaying different
different materials (e.g. Why do you think frying pans are not made from occupations and the materials used in each. If possible, have
wood, cloth, plastics, clay, plastic? persons displaying how they use the items.
metal, etc) are commonly (plastic will melt on heating)
used.
Occupation Main material Object Made
● Explain why certain What is another material that you should not make
Used or Used
materials are more pots from?
suitable for specific (wood, fabric, rubber) Carpenter Wood Wooden Objects
purposes than others. Retrieved from:
● Demonstrate they Why are some materials better for certain purposes Carpenters
than others? Career Video -
understand the
(The properties of materials affect the purpose for YouTube(1:27
importance of testing
which they are used) mins)
different materials.
● Compare the properties
Answer the following questions based on your
of different materials to
experience/knowledge from experiments
determine suitability for
intended purpose.
25
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
● Account for the results
Tailor Cloth Shirts
obtained from the
Retrieved from: Dresses
different tests. https://www.you
● State which properties of tube.com/watch?
a material allow that v=8RZ-QD-rIz8
material to be well suited (1:33 mins)
for an intended use.
● Use data to suggest Glass maker Glass Glassware
reasons for the choice of Retrieved from:
material. Glass Blowers,
Molders,
● Investigate the properties
of various materials and
Benders, and
Finishers(1:19
match the properties to Activity Comparing Strengths of Rods Made from
mins)
the uses (ST-2-PS-MM-
3).
Potter Clay Ceramic Pots
● Design and construct a
Retrieved from:
simple object using
https://youtube.
chosen materials (ST-2-
com/shorts/pW
PS-MM-4). Wa1B9qAHk?fea
● Appreciate the ture=share
advantages and (1:00 mins)
disadvantages of using
devices, tools and Welder Metal Gates, Fence
structures made by Different Materials Retrieved from:
humans (ST-2-TE-UT-1). Welders Cutters
Solderers and
● Acknowledge that Image showing experimental setup
Brazers Career
human-made things hold
Video
the potential to pollute Materials:
(1:56 mins)
the atmosphere and 1. 2 blocks to act as bases
disrupt the environment 2. Rods (plastic straw, paper straw, wooden dowel,
(ST-2-TE-UT-2). metal rod)
3. Weights (E.g., 1g, 10 g, 20g, etc.)
26
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
● Impact of Science and
Cobbler Leather Shoes
Technology may be Method:
https://youtu.be
positive or negative (ST- 1. Set up the experiment as shown above. /ViQH9A9SWO
3-STSE-2). 2. Attach one weight at a time to the rod until it A(3:11 min)
either collapses or bends.
Skills 3. Record the maximum mass each rod can hold Mat Weaver Straw Mats for
● Analyse different before bending or collapsing household
materials to determine 4. Record the results in a table.
Broom maker Straw Brooms for
which materials have the
sweeping
properties that are best Results
suited for an intended
Fisher various Fishing pots
purpose. Table Showing Maximum Masses Each Material can
● Investigate and compare
Hold
Students, visit each station in your groups and collect a sample
the hardness, elasticity,
Maximum
absorbency, etc of Material of the materials used in each occupation.
Mass (g)
different materials (wood,
Collect a sample of the main material used from each station,
plastic, metal, clay, paper Plastic straw
observe the properties of each material, record observations
etc.).
and include some uses of each material in the table below:
● Plan and conduct Paper straw
different tests on a variety
of materials. Wooden Properties of Uses of the
Material
● Predict the results of tests skewer/dowel the material material
on different materials.
● Interpret data collected Metal Rod Wood Hard, Build roof,
from experiments. Strong cannot furniture, etc
(1 mark per mass)
● Use data obtained from
bend, cannot
break easily, etc
their experiments to Discussion
select the materials best
Analyse the data as follows:
Metal (e.g. steel) Metal, strong, Gate, Fences
suited for a particular 1. Which rod is the strongest? (1 mk) Explain your
Hard, Not Car bodies,
purpose.
selection. (2 mks)
easily bent or Ships, etc.
● Measure the different 2. Discuss why some materials are better at bearing
broken
materials and products. load than others. (2 mks)
27
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
● Hypothesize which
materials will give the Actively watch this video and then answer the Co-operative Group Work:
best results when tested following questions: Students, let’s discuss some other ways each of these materials
for a particular property. are used in daily life. E.g. Cloth isn’t only used to make
● Construct devices and Everyday Materials clothing it is also used to make curtains and kitchen towels.
models to test the https://youtu.be/XnkQcP-RHCw(3:01) What else is cloth used to do? Why is cloth a good material to
suitability of materials. Give ONE common use of each material: use for those purposes?
● Perform calculations
● Wood
● Glass Investigating Plastic and Paper Straws
using data collected.
● Metal
● Investigate different
● Plastic Students, have you noticed that plastic straws on juice boxes
materials, their uses and
● Paper are being replaced with paper straws? Why do you think this is
properties.
so? Do you think that paper straws are a suitable replacement
● Compile/analyze data
Assessment on Suitability of Materials for plastic straws?
gathered after conducting
Let’s investigate the effect of liquid on paper and plastic
various tests on different
Tim, the builder, needs to complete the roof, windows, straws. Which of the two do you think will stand up better to
materials.
doors and walls of the house below: the liquid?
● Interpret data obtained
from the various tests
Aim: To investigate the effect of a liquid on paper and plastic
done on the materials.
straws.
Attitudes/Values
Materials Needed:
● Appreciate that the use of
1. One paper straw and one plastic straw of same length
an object is related to the
and size
material from which it is
2. Water or beverage
made.
3. Cup or beaker
● Persistence in
4. Measuring cylinder
experimenting.
● Respect for Evidence.
● Develop creative ways of
testing the different Method:
materials.
28
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
● Work collaboratively & He has only the following materials available: 1. Observe the properties (texture, flexibility, appearance,
cooperatively to complete etc) of each straw while in a dry state. Record the
the experiments. observations in a suitable table.
Wood
● Participate actively in 2. Add the paper straw and plastic straw to a vessel
Plastic
classroom discussions on containing 250ml of water or beverage.
Metal
the need for testing. 3. Leave both straws in the water/beverage for five
Cloth
● When conducting Glass
minutes.
4. Remove both the straws and record observations in
practical work, help those Rubber
the table.
students who appear to Paper
be struggling.
● Use materials wisely as
Help Tim select the most appropriate materials to build TABLE SHOWING OBSERVATIONS MADE
different types of matter
the different parts of the house.
can have serious effects
on living and non-living Type of Straw Observations Observations of
things. of dry straw straw after 5
● Safety protocols. minutes
● When conducting
practical and group work, Plastic
display sensitivity and
Paper
offer assistance to peers
who may have physical or
learning challenges. Were there any changes to the properties of the straws after
● Be aware that some being soaked in liquid for five minutes? (Yes, the paper straw
students may have became soft and weaker while the plastic straw remained firm)
difficulty in lifting, pulling Why do you think the paper straw became soft? (Paper is a
For each choice of material, select two words from the
objects, etc. material that absorbs water and plastics do not; plastics are stronger
box above to describe the properties that make it
● When conducting the materials than paper)
suitable for that part of the house.
planned experiments, Based on your results, is paper a good material for
such as testing elastic transporting liquids? Discuss.
bands, students should What are the benefits of using paper straws and reducing the
wear properly fitting use of plastic straws?
goggles.
29
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
● Wash hands after Mark scheme And why are some beverage companies opting to use paper
collecting and interacting straws as opposed to plastic straws?
with different objects, ➢ The material for each is a possible option (4 marks
especially those collected total, 1mk each) Allow students to share what they know and then watch the
from outside. ➢ The selected material is the most suitable for each following video:
● Glass objects should be part (4 marks total, 1mk each)
avoided with young ➢ Appropriate justification of selected materials (8 “Why Plastic Straws Suck” Video
children, but they could marks total, 2 marks each) https://youtu.be/pdTBG929mgs(4:38 mins )
touch windows, drinking
glasses made from glass, There is a global problem of plastics getting into the
etc. Exit Slip Assessment Activity environment and unlike paper, plastics take a really long time
● Special care should be
to decompose (rot). Plastic garbage, like straws, bags, old nets,
Choose one item from your classroom. What is it made drinking cups and bottles can be harmful to the environment
taken when doing the
of? Why do you think these materials were used? Draw and to sea creatures if not properly disposed of.
following:
✓ When using objects
and label the item and justify your answer in the space
provided.
that may have sharp
edges.
✓ When using
‘scratching’ tools.
✓ When lifting heavy
objects such as
books.
Note to teacher: Use student’s responses to create an
anchor chart.
Sample anchor chart:
Photo of a seal entangled in a plastic netting.
Photo /retrieved from:
30
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Seal_entangled_in_plastic_netting.jpg (1366×969)
(wikimedia.org)
Paper straws are less harmful to the environment and sea
creatures because when they are disposed of they decompose
much faster than plastic straws.
Building Kites from Different Materials Activity
Under the supervision of the teacher/parent, students make
kites using the materials of plastic, paper and fabric.
Materials needed:
1. Sheets of paper, fabric and plastic all cut to the same
dimensions (e.g. 8 ½ x 11)
2. Wooden skewer
3. String
4. Scissors
5. Tape
See how to make a simple kite in the video below for ideas:
Video on How to Make a Simple Kite
https://youtu.be/XI_NiH1g0VQ(2:29 mins)
The activity would be done to test the durability of the kites
using the different materials. Which kite would last longer?
Which one can withstand rain? Which kite flies highest?
Which material do you think is best to make kites? Why? Did
you have any difficulty with the construction of your kite?
Students identify the materials from which objects are made
and discuss why they think the maker selected that material to
make it. What is the object? What is it used for? Examples of
objects: clothing, shoes, pencil, bag, jars, glasses, cutlery,
31
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
windows and doors. This is so students can make connections
with the uses of materials and their properties.
Investigating Absorbency of Different Textures of Paper
Test three (3) different types of paper (e.g. bristol board,
printing paper, paper towel) to see which one absorbs the
most water after 30 seconds.
Before we begin the test, hypothesise (make an educated guess)
which of the papers will be more absorbent.
Method:
1. Cut the three papers, if needed, to ensure they are the
same size.
2. Label each paper A, B and C respectively.
3. Label three beakers/cups - A, B and C.
4. Place 50 ml of water into each of the three
beakers/cups.
5. Add paper A to the beaker labelled A. Leave for 30
seconds. After 30 seconds remove the paper and
measure the amount of water remaining using a
measuring cylinder.
6. Calculate the amount of water absorbed by subtracting
the amount of water remaining in the beaker from 50
ml.
7. Record the results in a table.
32
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Type of Initial Final Volume
paper Volume of Volume of of water
water (ml) water (ml) absorbed
(ml)
A 50
B 50
C 50
8. Repeat steps 5-7 using the remaining papers.
Discussion
Which paper was the most absorbent?
Which was the least absorbent?
Which paper is better for cleaning liquid spills? Explain why?
How does the texture of the papers impact on absorbency?
Should paper towels be made from Bristol board? Why/Why
not?
Testing Paper for Intended Purpose
What is the best paper for this demonstration of the
magnitude of atmospheric pressure?
The teacher can do this as a demonstration using only a
drinking glass, water and several samples of paper. Suggested
to start with an index card and be sure to “overfill” the glass
with water.
33
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
(Screen captures from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=65T4ReLkjCg (0:45
mins)
Start with an index card or heavier paper and place the card
on top of an overfilled glass of water (you should see a
meniscus).
34
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Now turn the glass and card upside down being careful to
keep the card snug and flat against the glass.
Tadaaa!
Try your different types of paper and see which one seems to
work the best!
This isn’t really magic! It can easily be explained.
There is atmospheric pressure all around us. It comes from all
the gas particles in the atmosphere that are colliding above us.
When we expand our chest and lungs we can feel the pressure
from the outside. When we blow up a balloon, we can feel the
pressure on our cheeks. That pressure all around us is
large…large enough to hold up a little card on the bottom of a
glass!
35
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Note: Atmospheric pressure is large enough to hold the card
in place on much bigger containers of water. Just make sure
your card is flat and your container is overfilled. Why not do
an experiment with different size containers?
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: (Links to professional sources that connect back to the Curriculum and Assessment Principles of
Learning and Principles of Assessment)
Introductory Video about materials: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2td5mfgf1OI (2:55 mins)
Inclusive Resources and Materials From Regional Specialists Use of multisensory activities and materials to assist all learners. (texts, family & community
knowledge and resources, contextually relevant professional web resources)
This ELO inherently has much experimental work. The teacher may decide to personally assist students with physical challenges or assign pairings of
students. The experiments can also be done as teacher demonstrations with pause points to engage discussions with students.
Additional Resources:
Participating in Literature Walk: reading and discussing the stories about “The Three Little Pigs”
and “The Three Little Wolves and The Big Bad Pig”. Noting the types of materials that were used
in the stories to build houses and other objects and suggesting reasons why the materials were
appropriate or not.
Suggest to each group a task of making an object and ask the group to write a design brief where
they: 1) make a drawing, 2) make a materials list &amp; 3) explain why the material is best for the
construction.
E.g. possible items: kite (consider Mashramani and kite flying), costumes &amp; cultural celebrations,
baskets, small bridge model, small box for toys, picture frame, basket, hot mat, animal cage, etc.
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in
the curriculum)
Mathematics:
● Use appropriate tools for measuring different materials.
● Display results in the form of tables or pictorial graphs.
36
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
● Using graphical displays (e.g., pictures, charts, grade-appropriate graphs) to represent their results from their experiments.
Social Studies:
● What are some careers that involve fabrication using different materials?
Language Arts:
● Share observations and ideas with other members of the class.
● Lead a class discussion about the properties of common objects using their senses.
● Students re tell classic tales involving materials by changing certain details.
TVET:
● Material testing is done to ensure that the right materials are used in the construction industry.
● Some of the same tests that students will be undertaking are also done by scientists such as engineers on materials which are used in the TVET
field.
Agriculture:
● Farmers benefit from the testing of natural materials such as soil.
● Sensory Indicator testing: (e.g. colour, aroma, taste, texture, etc.) of agriculture produce.
Health:
● Equipment in health have undergone many tests.
● Use materials/equipment as directed as many of the warnings are due to results from tests done on these materials/equipment.
● Many materials are combined to produce safety equipment for different uses.
Elements from Local Culture:
✓ Use of a variety of materials to make the same object e.g., wooden houses, thatch houses, wall houses, brooms for sweeping different areas,
jewels, furniture, clothing, etc. for different uses.
✓ Use of bamboo as a support when making concrete houses.
✓ Choosing the right type of wood for making coals.
Resources for a learner who needs challenge: (Links to learning activities and resources in later grades)
Research the past use of steel bolts for the keel of ships and the newer choices for the same application.
Research the use of balsa wood in the first airplanes.
Strategies that Support the OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
37
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning outcome and
they have:: associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies Respect certain rules concerning the use of certain objects or materials, such as the number
of persons in an elevator, the use of seatbelts, exercise machines, rides at amusement parks,
etc.
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical
Communication Competencies ● Determine the best use of these materials in different situations based on test results
obtained from the literature or data collected personally.
● Communicate information on the data collected from tests done on various materials
and advise persons how to best use these materials truthfully.
Developed Well-being Competencies • Understand the importance of wearing clothing appropriate for the weather.
• Objects made of certain materials may not be suitable for certain conditions. For e.g.,
a paper bag is not suitable for carrying wet groceries. A paper bag is used to package
hot bread since a plastic bag will fail.
• Care has to be taken to protect oneself when certain tests are being done.
• Robots can be constructed from the same materials for different purposes.
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial • Understand why objects they use are made from the materials they are made from
Competencies and how best to care for them.
• Use available data from various tests to decide the best materials for making various
objects.
38
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Purpose of the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of caring
not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic study of the
structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from leveraging and
evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it.
Topic or Strand: Structure and Properties of Matter
Essential Learning Outcome (ELO-3):
Make observations to construct an evidence-based account of how an object made of a small set of pieces can be disassembled and made into a new
object. [Clarification Statement: Examples of pieces could include building blocks, bricks or other assorted small objects.]
Grade Level Guidelines: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners are expected to: Group Work Activity on Assembling and Start with the analogy that letters make up
Disassembling a Structure words, words make up sentences, sentences
Knowledge
make up paragraphs that make up books.
● Define the terms: Note to teacher: Below are two possible videos,
○ Assemble select the more suitable video based on available
resources: Activity 1
○ Disassemble
Students, here are 10 letters. I want you to use
1. Video of How to Build a House using blocks
○ Reassemble some or all of the letters to make one word of
of varying shapes and styles retrieved from:
your choice. Write your word on the card
○ Structure https://youtu.be/pX4ed3T4NXs (5.57
provided and large enough that the class can
mins)
○ Components see. Now hold up your word. Did you all write
the same word? (No) As you can see, not all of
or
● Demonstrate an understanding that you made the same word. Why didn’t we all get
large objects/structures are made up of 2. Video of How to Build a House using the same word? (because of the different possibility of
combinations)
smaller parts/components/units. traditional building blocks retrieved from:
https://youtu.be/1OYdGWosVGQ (6:42
● Demonstrate an understanding that mins) Activity 2: Building Block Activity
objects may be taken to pieces/
Part 1: Suggestion to teacher: be prepared to guide
and support students in how to assemble
39
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
disassembled into their component Students, watch this video on how to construct a building blocks or legos before starting the
parts. model house using building blocks. Now use your activity, if needed.
building blocks to build a house. Your house does
● Demonstrate an understanding that small not have to be exactly the same but it must have Now here are ten blocks or legos: You have
pieces can be assembled to form larger walls, a window space, a door space and a roof. five minutes to assemble (put together) your
structures. choice of products.
If possible, take a photo of the house you built and
● Demonstrate an understanding that new share it in the class chat/email/etc. Did we get the same thing built? Can I take
objects can be formed from the pieces of a
apart (insert student’s name and object) (e.g. John’s
disassembled object/structure.
Part 2: robot) and make (insert student’s name and object)
(e.g. Mary’s house) with the same blocks? (yes
● Explain how objects can be built up, torn
Disassemble the house and build one object that you
we can disassemble or take it apart)
down and reassembled using the same
pass one your way to school everyday. It could be a
parts.
bridge; a tower; a vehicle, a church, etc. If possible,
Closure: So you're telling me that these same
record a short video (1min) where you state the
● Account for any differences that they may
blocks can be used over and over to make
name of the model you built, tell us what you love
observe between the disassembled object different things?
about it and show us its features. Share the video
to the new object made from its pieces.
with the teacher and classmates.
Activity 3: If I give you three sheets of
● Account for the differences between the newsprint, five strips of tape and ask you to
Discuss with class how easy or difficult it was to
disassembled object and the new object build the tallest freestanding tower,
assemble and disassemble the models.
made from its pieces. What will group 1 build? What will group 2
build? What will group 3 build?
● Distinguish between the components of Assessment 2
Closure: Are you telling me that you will all
the disassembled object and the
build different towers to solve the same
components of new objects. Build a structure using a colour scheme of your
problem?
choosing. Shade each square below to show the
You all have the same starting materials and
● State that matter is made up of colour scheme you wish to use.
combinations of smaller pieces (atoms) you can make different products, but I could
that can be combined in many different My colour scheme will be: take them apart and make all new towers too!
ways. Is that right? (yes)
Let’s talk about examples in our world:
Skills
● Observe objects to determine the various (Students may work in groups or individually for this activity)
parts they are made up of.
40
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Discussion: comparing and contrasting the two >Builders start with blocks, wood and nails
● Observe how an object made of a structures based on properties such as the colour and windows and doors and assemble all
small set of pieces can be disassembled scheme used, the number and shape of blocks shapes of houses.
and made into a new object. staying the same, however the shape of the structure
and colour placement of the blocks may change.
>Moms and dads start with a refrigerator and
● Manipulate an object made from a set
cupboard of food and assemble so many
of small pieces by disassembling it and Assessment 3- Group assessment of the building
different sandwiches (because our brothers and
assembling a new object. of a free standing tower and then a new object
sisters like different combinations!)
● Compare and contrast the
Materials:
characteristics of the original structure
>Wheels and steel and glass are put together
with the new structure made from the
● 3 sheets of newspaper (assembled) to make so many different types
same materials in terms of its shape,
● 5 lengths of tape of cars but they often start with the very same
properties, uses, etc.
materials.
Instructions:
● Communicate to the class and teacher,
the results from various investigations Main Closure: Matter is very similar. It is made
Assemble a free-standing tower using all of the
done on assembling, disassembling and up of combinations of smaller pieces that can
materials provided. Take a picture of the tower and
reassembling different objects. be combined in many different ways. We have
submit it to the teacher. Then disassemble the tower
very small building blocks of matter called
and use all of the same materials to assemble
● Interpret results obtained from various
atoms. Later you will learn how they can be
something new. Take a picture and submit it to the
investigations done on assembling, put together in so many ways to make very
teacher.
disassembling and reassembling helpful things for you and I to use. Students
different objects. Scaffolding Questions always remember the letters of the alphabet
and how many words can be made from the
● Was the tower completed? same letters. In the same way, atoms can be
Attitudes/Values
● Were all of the items given to students used assembled to make different types of matter.
up to make the tower?
● Appreciate that some large objects are
● A brief description of the tower given.
composed of smaller pieces which can be
● Was the tower dismantled?
disassembled and then reassembled to
● Was a new object built?
make something new.
● Were all the pieces used to build the new
● Appreciate that matter is composed of
object?
smaller particles called atoms, which
41
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
act as building blocks for many other ● Can the students give a brief description of
things. the new object?
● Can the students give:
● Show persistence in the assembling, ○ Two ways in which both the tower and
disassembling and reassembling of new object are similar?
different objects/structures. ○ Two ways in which both the tower and
new object are different?
● Use available evidence in determining
how to assemble objects or assemble Students’ final challenge questions- Think Pair
pieces to make new objects. Share and report from the group
● Respect the environment and use A. How are the blocks and the objects you
resources wisely. built, similar to the letters of the alphabet
and words and sentences we see in books?
● When conducting practical work, help
group members/ classmates who may (we start with the same pieces and we can make
have difficulty in manipulating many different things; with the alphabet we can make
different pieces. many different words and sentences)
● Develop interest and curiosity by B. How is the matter around us similar to the
conducting investigations to gather object you built?
evidence.
(we have so many different types of matter around us
● Use inquiry to investigate and solve and they must all come from the same building
problems related to assembling and blocks- starting materials)
disassembling of objects.
● Respect the evidence gathered through
their investigations.
● Use their inventiveness to
conceptualize and construct objects
from small sets of pieces.
42
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Follow all recommended safety protocols,
including:
○ Wear safety goggles when
conducting certain experiments.
○ Be careful when pulling objects
apart or when putting pieces
together to form new structures.
● Collaborate with classmates in assembling,
disassembling and reassembling of
different objects/structures.
● Participate actively in classroom
discussions.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: (Links to professional sources that connect back to the Curriculum and Assessment Principles of
Learning and Principles of Assessment)
A great variety of objects are made by assembling a small number of pieces. Some objects are made by assembling different units/pieces, such as a pen,
while others are made by assembling many of the same type of units/pieces, such as a fence. Many of these small units were themselves assembled
from several materials. Some very good examples of this are the building of houses from blocks, which are made by combining sand and cement;
matter which is made from atoms.
An object/structure made of parts can be taken apart or disassembled and the parts can be reassembled to form the original structure. In some
instances, the parts can be rearranged to form new objects/structures. These new objects/structures may have different properties from the original
structure/object. The new structure/object may be different in properties such as size and shape.
Each part of an object/structure has a purpose is the reason why something is made the way it is. Structures are built from a variety of materials that are
suited for different purposes according to their properties such as their strength, flexibility, hardness, texture, resistance to heat, etc.
A variety of shapes can be identified in structures. These shapes include circles, arches, triangles, and rectangles. These shapes help to make the
structures strong and functional.
Two objects or structures can have different characteristics even though they are made from the same set of parts.
43
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Inclusive Resources and Materials From Regional Specialists Use of multisensory activities and materials to assist all learners. (texts, family & community
knowledge and resources, contextually relevant professional web resources)
Building blocks
Newsprint
Tape
Additional Resources:
Access to watching video clips as a class
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in
the curriculum)
Mathematics:
● Use tools to measure the height and width of different structures.
● Count the number of pieces that make up a structure.
● Count the number of objects made from a given number of pieces.
Social Studies:
● Structures/objects used in different social gatherings or by different ethnic/religious groups that are made from many different parts.
● Structures/objects of historical/national importance.
● Many groups or institutions are made up of people with different roles (e.g., the family, church, government, etc).
Language Arts:
● Share observations and ideas with the class on the assembly, disassembly and reassembly of certain objects in the society such as tents.
● Lead a class discussion on the different parts that structures in the class/community are made from.
TVET:
● Many different small units, such as bricks, pieces of wood, etc. are used to make structures in many TVET fields.
● Different types of machines used in different areas, consist of smaller units assembled together.
● Use of different types of materials in constructing different structures.
● Many tools used in TVET have to be disassembled to be repaired.
Agriculture:
● Many different structures/equipment used in the agriculture industry, such as greenhouses, fences, hydroponic devices, etc. are made from many
smaller components.
● Equipment used in agriculture have to assembled, disassembled and reassembled for use, repairs or transportation.
Health:
● Many objects that have been made to help in the diagnosis and treatment of health problems are made up of smaller units that can be
disassembled and reassembled.
● Many types of medication come in packages assembled for their protection.
● Simple everyday objects that protect us from the weather are made from smaller components.
44
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Elements from Local Culture:
● The design and components of different structures used by certain religious/ethnic groups.
● Objects such as blocks, fireside/coal pots, etc. that are built from local materials such as leaves and clay, sand, etc.
● The building of statues to commemorate certain important events.
● Artifacts of religious/historical importance, made of many different parts, help us to understand the tools and materials used by our ancestors.
Resources for a learner who is struggling: (Links to earlier learning activities for similar knowledge, links to resources for special education
needs)
Pictures/diagrams of different objects may be given to struggling learners to help students with the building of objects.
Resources for a learner who needs challenge: (Links to learning activities and resources in later grades)
● Kits with more intricate pieces can be given to learners who need to be challenged.
● To challenge some learners, in activities where the class is given a certain number of pieces, they can be given additional pieces and asked to
make more objects.
Strategies that Support the OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning
outcome and associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies Use materials wisely when assembling smaller units to produce larger units.
Repurpose materials that may be usually thrown out to make different objects.
Apply safety protocols to protect oneself when one is involved in assembling,
disassembling or reassembling materials.
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication Able to advise persons on the best methods to safely and efficiently assemble,
disassemble or reassemble materials, based on observations or available data.
Competencies
Developed Well-being Competencies Apply safety protocols to protect oneself when one is involved in assembling,
disassembling or reassembling materials.
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies Able to advise persons on the best methods to safely and efficiently assemble,
disassemble or reassemble materials.
45
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Make predictions on how the new products from reassembled units will look,
perform, etc.
Using one’s knowledge of how smaller units with the appropriate tools to create
large structures/objects. E.g.
Safely assemble, disassemble and reassemble a variety of objects.
Recycle items that are discarded to create new objects.
Utilize materials resulting from disassembling different objects to make new
objects.
46
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Purpose of the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of
caring not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic study of
the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from leveraging
and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it.
Topic or Strand: Structure and Properties of Matter
Essential Learning Outcome (ELO-4):
Construct an argument with evidence that some changes caused by heating or cooling can be reversed and some cannot. [Clarification Statement: Examples
of reversible changes could include material such as water and butter at different temperatures. Examples of irreversible changes could include cooking an egg, freezing a plant leaf,
and heating paper.]
Grade Level Guidelines: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Teacher to Make a Table of All New Words to Review Weather and the Danger to Plants
The students will be asked to complete the following Farmers are always paying close attention to the
Knowledge sentences with the correct word as the teacher reads weather. If their plants don’t get rain or it is too
• Define the terms: the sentence (the teacher may choose to put the sentences on the hot, it may cause the leaves to wilt and dry up. In
o Wilt board but be mindful of the learning styles and the level of reading in some parts of the world, the weather can
o Freeze your class). suddenly turn cold and the leaves may freeze and
o Kernel again the plant may wilt and die.
o Heating 1. After a very hot day, mother’s favorite plant showed
o Steam signs of blackened leaves and began to _____ (wilt). Students, look at this picture of a plant. Do you
o Cooling 2. When we put water in the cold part of the refrigerator, think if we add water and place this plant in the
o Reversible we expect it to _____ (freeze). warm shade it will become green again? (no, it
o Freezing 3. The opposite of heating is ______ (cooling) looks too damaged)
o Melting 4. Cooking an egg is an example of a _______(irreversible
) change.
5. Accidently melting a crayon on the windowsill in the
• Compare substances before
sun, is an example of a ________(reversible) change.
and after adding
and/orremoving heat.
47
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Account for why some Recognizing Processes That Can Lead to Reversible
processes are reversible and and Irreversible Changes
some are not.
• Explain the effect of heating Let us look at the following pictures.
Can you identify _____________?
and cooling on substances.
(a) cooling
• Distinguish between a
(b) melting
reversible and an irreversible
(c) freezing
change.
(d) heating
• Become aware of the dangers
of irreversible change for
farming and the possible Retrieved from:
precautions a grower can https://www.evergreenti.com/how-do-you-
take. tell-if-a-plant-is-dead/
• State that water can change Retrieved from: https://www.vectorstock.com/royalty-
from solid to liquid and from free-vector/empty-iron-frying-pan-on-high-heat-vector-
liquid to solid (ST-2-PS-MM- 28341376 It looks like the plant is dead. We can’t change it
7). back to a living plant. We would say that the
• Describe the conditions for change from a living plant to a dead plant is
irreversible.
state change of water (ST-2-
PS-MM-8).
• Identify with examples,
physical change in everyday
life E.g. water (ST-3-PS-MM-
2).
Retrieved from:
Skills https://jamaicahospital.org/newsletter/tips-to-make-sure-
• Practice the use of new the-ice-in-your-freezer-is-clean/
vocabulary.
• Observe the effect of adding
and/ or removing heat from
different substances.
48
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
All over the world farmers watch their crops very
• Interpret the results of carefully because they know that some damage is
teacher demonstrations. irreversible. Students, this is a picture of a
Make hypothesis about banana plant (north of the Caribbean) that has
findings. suffered freezing damage that is irreversible. We
know in Caribbean climates it is more likely plants
• Classify changes as reversible
like this will suffer from wind damage or lack of
or irreversible. Retrieved from: water. In each case the change is irreversible.
https://www.istockphoto.com/photo/preparing-food-
gm464860664-58786602
• Record their observations
after heat is applied to
different substances.
• Communicate their ideas in
discussions.
• Predict the effects of heat on
solids and liquids.
Attitudes/Values
Retrieved from: https://www.learningliftoff.com/are-
sports-drinks-safe-for-kids/
• Demonstrate an awareness
Irreversible Changes
that irreversible changes in
Before and After: Reversible or Irreversible?
agriculture can be
Students, today we are going to make popcorn.
detrimental to humans.
Before we begin, can anyone describe what we
Have students fill in the table after thinking about the
start with? (yellowish shiny seed, not round)
following questions regarding these scenarios.
• Appreciate that reversible
and irreversible changes
They will engage in discussions with guided questions.
from applying or removing
Example:
heat takes place in our
1. Have the materials/ substances changed?
everyday life.
2. How have the materials/substances changed?
49
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Display Interest/Curiosity on 3. What was added to the materials/substances that Let us look at a piece of popcorn. We call it a
the importance/use of heat changed? kernel and it is a special type of seed. Let us draw
in the home. 4. Can you get the original materials/substances back? a picture. If you know some words to help
(could you change it back to its original state?) describe it, like color or size, lets label our picture
• Engage in Inquiry to
Note: It is important that teachers distinguish between melted wax of a kernel (small, yellow, shiny)
and burned wax. Melted wax when cooled gives you back the wax
determine the effects of heat
(reversible) whereas burned wax in a candle is a chemical change
on substances.
(irreversible) - the wax is the fuel that the wick draws towards the
flame to burn. It is a common misconception that the wick is the only
• Show respect for evidence
fuel except…where the wax go?
collected from engaging in
scientific inquiry.
• Work cooperatively and
Before After Reversible or
collaboratively in groups.
Irreversible? Retrieved from:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Corn_kernel
Red & blue Red & blue
• Practice safety when applying Students what do you think will happen when I
counters counters
heat to substances. put the kernels in a pan of hot oil (butter) and
separated in mixed together
begin heating it?
rows in a cup
• Display sensitivity and offer (kernel explode)
A match & a A burned
assistance to peers who may If you have made popcorn before you know that
piece of paper match and
have physical or learning the kernel changes. What will it look like after it is
ashes from the
challenges when conducting heated? (puffy, fluffy, white).
burnt paper
practical and group work.
Wax & a hot Melted wax &
bowl a bowl
• Participate actively in
Coins & a cup Coins & a cup
classroom discussions.
of sand of sand mixed
separated together
A raw egg & a A fried egg &
hot frypan a hot pan
Flour, baking Baked cake
powder, sugar,
salt
50
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Candle wax & Burned candle Ok students, let us try heating the kernel. (if
a match & a burned possible the teacher can make it in class otherwise
match a picture follows below)
Irreversible Changes in Our Communities
Local gardens and plants are important for feeding families
and as a source of income for farmers.
Because lack or too much water and drastic changes in
temperature can affect plants and cause irreversible
damage the following task can act as an assignment in the
community.
Students should be asked to approach family and local
Retrieved from:
farmers to determine at least two ways that growers protect
https://pixabay.com/photos/popcorn-movie-
their plants against:
theater-meal-white-1198274/
a) Changes in the amount of water available (too much
or too little)
Let us draw another picture of the kernel after it
b) Changes in the amount of heat available (too hot or
is heated. Add some label words to your picture
too cool)
that describe what it now looks like.
(Examples they may determine: irrigation systems, covering
plants , plants in the shade, providing drainage against
Note: Teacher may choose to use a T Diagram
flooding, protecting against erosion etc.)
for the before and after of this process. See: a
graphic organizer here:
https://k12alliance.org/earlyimplementers/Grade
2/mat/2.4.R2.pdf
Can you guess why the kernel changed to a
fluffy piece of popcorn? It happens because there
is small amount of water inside the kernel and
when we heat the kernel to a high temperature,
the water wants to escape so it breaks the shell of
the kernel and makes a puffy piece of popcorn!
51
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
That is why we see hot steam leave the kernel,; it
is a different form of water. Especially in
microwave popcorn we have to be very careful
opening the bag as the steam (escaping water) can
burn us! ``
I have a question for you to think about students.
>>>Can we get the popped corn back to its
original form as a kernel of corn (a seed)? (no)
We say that changing the corn from kernel to
popped corn is an irreversible process.
Other examples of irreversible changes. Ask
students to watch for at least two other examples
in the video.
See:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bHlP1lRc0
Tg (1:10 mins)
Reversible Processes
Teacher Demonstration (as a prop, during the
demonstration, show a container of frozen
water and an identical container of liquid
water)
Students if I put water in plastic container and
place it in the freezer part of the refrigerator, I
will be cooling it. What will it look like if I leave
it in there overnight? (it will be a block of ice)
52
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
If I take out the container of frozen ice and leave
it on the tabletop, what will happen after a few
hors? (It will begin to melt). And what will it look
after a whole day? (it will be a container of water
again).
When the water changes from ice to liquid water
we say that it is melting.
See: Time lapse video of ice melting.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FYgiZ7Kzg
Dk
(0:44 mins)
When a process gives us back what we started
with, we say that it is reversible.
Remember we couldn’t get the popcorn kernel
back again, the popping process was irreversible.
Another demonstration: Salt Solution
The teacher takes a handful of salt and shows it to
children. They might also show an enlarged
picture so that they can observe the crystalline
structure.
Now the teacher adds the salt to 20 mLs of water
and stirs it until it dissolves. Students, how did the
salt change? (it disappeared into the water). We call
this salt and water combination a solution.
Now students, I am going to pour this solution
into a pan and heat up the pan. We can see that
the water is bubbling and seems to be
disappearing. I think it got lots of energy to jump
into the air! Let us look at what is left in the pan.
53
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
If we look closely, we can see those same salt
crystals.
We would say that this process is reversible
because we got back exactly what we started with!
Crystals on A String
Note: a very popular science project involves
making crystals on a string. Teachers may decide
this would be an interesting activity for their
students. See:
Time lapse video of ice melting.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FYgiZ7Kzg
Dk
Can Students Tell the Difference Between
Reversible and Irreversible: Review Activities
• PowerPoint® to distinguish between
reversible and irreversible changes.
Retrieved
from:https://www.slideshare.net/DrSarahAyoub
/4-ppt-reversible-and-irreversible-change
• Students will be given various claims about the
effect of heat on a number of materials
/substances. such as heating ice, melting
butter, and melting chocolate. They will be
asked to orally agree or disagree with each
claim and provide evidence to support their
position. Accompanying worksheet here:
https://k12alliance.org/earlyimplementers/Grade
2/mat/2.4.G1.pdf
54
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
• This video reviews the processes of heating
and cooling as they relate to reversible and
irreversible processes.
https://youtu.be/Djx8RrYhLh0 (6:46 mins)
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: (Links to professional sources that connect back to the Curriculum and Assessment Principles of
Learning and Principles of Assessment)
Definitions of Key Terms
● Heat is a form of energy.
● Heat flows from hot objects to cool objects.
● It flows because of a difference in temperature.
● The cool object absorbs the energy and becomes warmer.
● Cooling is a process of removing heat.
● It results in the objects having a lower temperature.
● A solid is an object or material that has a fixed shape and volume.
● This means that they do not change their shape to fill the container that they are placed in.
● Liquids do not have a fixed shape.
● They take the shape of the container that they are placed in.
● Gases do not have a fixed shape or volume.
● They take the shape of the container that they are placed in.
● Freezing is the process of a liquid turning to a solid- example liquid water to ice.
● Melting is the process where a solid becomes a liquid when heat is added- example butter melting when placed in a hot pan.
● Temperature is how hot or cold a substance or place is.
● Anything that can be changed back is called reversible.
55
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
● A reversible change happens when no new materials have been created.
● With reversible changes, there are no new materials added.
● Some examples of reversible changes include: ice changing to liquid water, a chocolate bar turning to liquid chocolate, a sheet of paper cut into
small pieces.
● In each example, no new material/substance is made.
● Any object that cannot be changed to its original state is called irreversible change.
● Irreversible changes happen when a new substance or material is created.
● The original material or substance cannot be obtained from the new item.
● Some examples include: baking a cake, frying an egg, making jam, burning paper, making charcoal.
● When some materials are cooled they also go through reversible changes: ice to water, freezing melted chocolate.
● When heat is added to materials/objects, they can go through a reversible or irreversible change.
● Some substances expand (get bigger) when they are heated while others contract (get smaller).
● There may also be a change in the colour of the substance and the amount of the substance (volume).
● We must always ensure that we are safe when adding heat to any material.
● This should not be done without the help of an adult.
● Wear protective gear and maintain safe distances.
● Use the correct tools for working with heating appliances and handling hot items.
● DO NOT PLAY with FIRE!
Inclusive Resources and Materials From Regional Specialists Use of multisensory activities and materials to assist all learners. (texts, family & community
knowledge and resources, contextually relevant professional web resources)
Popcorn, pot, oil or butter
Water, plastic glass or ice cube tray, access to refrigerator
Salt, water, pot or frypan
Additional Resources:
Worksheet Resources for Practice and Assessment
in Distinguishing Reversible and Irreversible Processes
1. https://www.liveworksheets.com/al1169137gz
2. https://www.greatschools.org/library/cms/29/25629.pdf
3. https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/science/grade-2-reversible-changes-a.pdf
4. https://www.liveworksheets.com/fi308683dq
5. https://www.liveworksheets.com/zn1466687gh
56
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
6. https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/topics/zjty4wx/articles/zk9mt39
Examples distinguishing changes
https://www.embibe.com/exams/reversible-and-irreversible-changes/
Simulation on reversible and irreversible changes
https://www.sciencekids.co.nz/gamesactivities/reversiblechanges.html
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in
the curriculum)
Mathematics:
• Reading and writing time.
• Recording the time it will take for different substances to melt e.g. ice, popsicle, ice cream (comparing times/calculating difference/total
time).
Social Studies:
• Respecting others' opinions when working in groups.
• Impacts of irreversible changes on agriculture.
Language Arts:
• Sequencing activities with pictures - Steps in preparing fried eggs, baking a cake (Writing steps explaining the process).
• Oral presentations explaining the changes depicted on charts or posters done by students in groups or individually.
• Reading and Comprehension .
• Cause and effect.
Agriculture:
• Dangers of irreversible changes.
• Identify the local materials used in manufacturing (cocoa, fruits, cassava, coconut, peppers).
Health: Safety at home -
• Identifying risks and hazards at home when heating or boiling substances/materials.
• Identifying personal safety measures that can be observed at home when cooking (boiling and heating materials/substances).
• Benefits/Advantages of cooking/ heating/ boiling.
Art and Craft:
• Drawing and designing charts/posters depicting examples of reversible and irreversible changes. Example water to ice.
57
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Elements from Local Culture:
• Farming practices to protect plants form irreversible change
• making coconut oil
• baking local bread
• making charcoal
• farine and avocado pear
• bamboo bursting
• making jam with local fruits
• burning sugar to make colouring
• making chocolate
• curing of meats
• making ice lollies and icicles
• Making madungo bakes
• making baskets/hats from dried grass/plant parts or making ropes for vines
• Making local coconut sugar cakes, local leather from cow skin, roasting breadfruit, boiling arrowroot starch to use as a glue
Resources for a learner who is struggling: (Links to earlier learning activities for similar knowledge, links to resources for special education needs)
https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/science/grade-2-reversible-changes-a.pdf
https://www.liveworksheets.com/dh528302uv
https://www.liveworksheets.com/zn1466687gh
Resources for a learner who needs challenge: (Links to learning activities and resources in later grades)
Story on Heating, Cooling and Changes
The students will read the story and discuss the changes described. The students will pick out the changes caused by cooling and heating and state whether they are
reversible or irreversible. Link to a story: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U-IvdvYrdxM (3:35 mins)
The students can then be asked to write their own story that includes examples of reversible and irreversible changes:
https://www.greatschools.org/library/cms/12/25812.pdf
Complete a table with their own examples of reversible and irreversible changes that take place with materials around them (Five examples of each).
58
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Strategies that Support the OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning
have:: outcome and associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies Making the connection between elements to local culture and the useful
understanding of how those changes are important to our daily lives. Continue
to produce some of our local items for consumption or sale (Preserve the rich
history and culture of the region).
Local precautions against irreversible damage in agriculture.
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication Make inferences from data gathered during the experiments.
Competencies
Developed Well-being Competencies Ensuring safety when experimenting or investigating changes in materials.
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies Heating and cooling are used in transforming local materials in many
production processes of our manufacturing industries. (jams, jellies, breads,
juices, oils, cassava).
59
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems
Purpose of the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of
caring not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic study of
the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from leveraging
and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it.
Topic or Strand: Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems
Essential Learning Outcome (ELO-1):
Plan and conduct an investigation to determine if plants need sunlight and water to grow. [Assessment Boundary: Assessment is limited to testing one variable at a
time.]
Grade Level Guidelines: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: 1. Naming the different parts of the seed How Can We Grow the Healthiest Plant?
Drawing/ labelling parts of a seed
Knowledge The farmer down the road wants to grow the tastiest beans
● Define the terms: Worksheets in the community and needs to prepare them to sell at the
o Plant market as quickly as possible.
o Optimum
o Leaf Our class is going to investigate plants and advise the
o Root farmer on the best approach to grow the beans!
o Flower
o Stem What do you need to grow as human? (food, water, fresh air,
o Seed sunshine)
o Embryo Students you have seen many plants grown in pots and in
o Seed coat fields so you can tell me what they need to grow also (food-
o Cotyledon nutrients, water and/or rain, and sunshine).
o Function
o Growth
o Germination In particular, the farmer is concerned with the “optimum”
o Stages/Phases amount of water and sunlight. Optimum is a new word
60
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
o Controlled https://www.liveworksheets.com/ag1485763mc that means the best. Let me use it in a sentence for you so
Experiment you understand it better. We are told that 6 -8 glasses of
water is the optimum amount of water for a healthy diet.
• Give examples of parts of This means for good health, the best amount of water is 6-
plants that we eat. 8 glasses.
So we are going to help the farmer understand the
• Account for why it is optimum amount of water and sunlight
important to know how
Students. In order to design the best experiments to advise
to nurture the growth of
the farmer, we need to know much more about the parts of
plants.
a plant and how growth actually happens. So let us do
some background research.
• Use humans as a
comparison to plants in
Plants Parts We Eat
terms of fundamental
Fruits and vegetables are an important part of a healthy
needs (water, nutrition,
https://www.liveworksheets.com/qp1902867hd balanced diet. Farmers work very hard to grow plants that
fresh air).
we can eat. What fruits and vegetables do you eat?
(make a list on the chalk board).
● Name the different parts
of the seed (embryo, seed
We sometimes eat different parts of a plant. A cabbage or
coat, cotyledon).
lettuce plant provides us with a leaf to eat. A yam grows in
the ground. It takes water and nutrients from the soil. The
● Explain the functions of
part of the yam in the soil that we eat is a root. A melon or
the different parts of the
mango plant develops a flower that grows into a fruit that
seed.
we can eat. What part of a cane plant do we eat? If we
squeeze the stem of that plant we can get sugar from it.
● Explain how to design a
Have you ever seen a sunflower? The center of the flower
controlled experiment.
has many seeds that eventually dry out and fall to the
ground to grow another plant. The birds and humans can
● Explain why a controlled
eat these nutritious seeds.
experiment is necessary.
61
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Account for differences in 2. Parts of a seed and function of the
the rate of growth of parts
plants under varying
conditions.
● Identify and name
different kinds of plants
(ST-2-LS-DC-7).
● List different uses of
leaves in everyday life
(ST-2-LS-DC-8).
Retrieved from: Microsoft® stock photos.
● Identify and appreciate
caring for plants and Reviewing the Parts of a Plant
animals and their
environment (ST-2-LS- Students, in order to grow plants for food, we need to
ECS-4). understand the parts of a plant and how we can best help
https://www.k5learning.com/workshe
those parts to work together with the proper care to grow.
ets/science/grade-3-plant-parts-c.pdf
● Outline and explain the
process of germination Students look at the diagram of a plant OR Let’s go
(ST-2-LS-ECS-7). outside to observe a plant (Ensure the chosen plant has fruits).
● Identify and name the
main conditions necessary
for seed growth (ST-2-LS-
ECS-8).
● Name, draw and label the
main external parts of a
3. Conditions necessary for
plant (ST-2-LS-SF-1).
germination
62
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Describe the process of Saying and dramatizing the poem
germination in plants, “The Little Plant”. Link to plant diagram:
outlining the factors that https://www.liveworksheets.com/dp280500gh
are necessary for the
process to occur (ST-3- The Little Plant What is the name of the part of the plant that I will point
LS-DC-7). by Kate L. Brown out? The Teacher points to the different plant parts (root,
stem, leaf, flower, seed, fruit).
● Describe the physical In the heart of a seed, As I call your name you will come up and place the labels
features of the parts of a Buried deep, so deep, in the correct position on the chart or the live plant.
plant, relating these A dear little plant Which part of this plant has seeds? (the fruit)
features to their functions Lay fast asleep! Can you name some fruits that have seeds? (Mango, apples,
(ST-3-LS-SF-1). cherry, guava etc.)
"Wake!" said the sunshine,
Function of the Parts of a Plant
"And creep to the light!"
Skills Students we will learn much more about how a plant grows
"Wake!" said the voice
but let us talk about the way the parts of the plant work
Of the raindrop bright.
● Compare the growth of together.
plants under different
conditions. The little plant heard The leaves collect sunlight.
And it rose to see The roots collect water and food from the soil.
● Construct drawings of the What the wonderful The stem helps move the water and food to the rest of the
different seeds during the Outside world might be. plant.
germination process. The seeds can be spread out in different ways to grow new
Answering questions based on poem plants.
● Place the sequence of
Have you ever wondered what inside a seed looks like?
germination stages in the ● Discussing and answering questions based on
Let’s observe some seeds!
correct order. the poem using the jig-saw grouping (6
persons per group).
● Observe the different
● What is the poem about?
Identifying, Naming and Drawing the Parts of a
stages of plant growth.
● Where was the little plant sleeping?
Seed
● What are two things the little plant needed to
grow?
63
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Infer that sunlight and ● How was the little plant able to see the Students will be given a few beans to soak the day before
water are needed for wonderful world outside the seed? in a plastic cup. Students go to the science corner and get
plants to grow. ● How do you think the little plant felt? the plastic cup with the beans that you soaked the day
Give a reason for your answer. before. Take it back to your desk. In your groups remove
● Measure plant growth the beans from the cup and place it on the tray in front of
over a period of time.
you. Each student takes one bean and places it on the
4. Stages of germination tissue in front of you.
● Communicate results of
investigations in a variety
Do you know the parts of a seed?
of ways.
Each bean will have three distinct parts:
● Predict the effect of
● The seed coat
sunlight and water on the
growth rate of plants. ● The embryo
● The cotyledon
● Construct simple
diagrams and charts to
present findings. We will be examining bean seeds with our hand lens
● Calculate growth rate of Observe as I demonstrate to you how to dissect a bean.
plants under varying https://www.liveworksheets.com/hy2369022xx 1. Remove the seed coat
conditions. 2. Use a plastic knife or butter knife to separate the
two halves of the bean.
● Investigate whether
sunlight and water are Use a magnifying glass to explore all the pieces of the
necessary for plant
beans up close.
growth.
Draw and name the parts of the seeds. You may colour the
● Graph data on plant
parts of the seed.
growth.
OR
64
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Interpret data tables and Today we will use playdough to help us identify the parts
graphs with data on plant of a seed. We will use different colour playdough to make
growth. each part
Attitudes/Values
● Be aware that farming is
an important means to
secure our food and this
is a vital industry for our
countries.
● Appreciate that sunlight
and water are conditions
Retrieved from:
necessary for plant
https://k8schoollessons.com/germination/
growth. You will see these parts in other seeds apart from the bean
seed.
● Display Interest/Curiosity
5. Students will create a poster illustrating seed
for what is needed for For review the teacher may use the following video of the
germination. This will be graded using a
plants to grow well. parts of the seed.
Rubric.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qZ49t8S2dWo (0:52
Factual Information 5 marks
● Develop a positive Neatness of Presentation 5 marks mins)
attitude for engaging in
Correct Spelling and Grammar 5 marks
inquiry.
For our next class you will bring in different seeds that we
Sample: can observe to identify their parts such as mango,
● Demonstrate respect for grapefruit, tamarind and avocado.
evidence by conducting
experiments in a
systematic and timely Functions of the different parts of a seed
manner. The seed has different parts. These parts are very
important to the seed. We say that each part of a seed has a
function. Think about your teeth. They are used for
65
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Work collaboratively & chewing. We would say that chewing is a purpose or
cooperatively to carry out function of your teeth. In the same way, each part of the
scientific investigations. seed has a function.
Do you remember the parts of the seed? Let us watch a
● Show respect for living video to observe the different parts of a seed.
things by caring plants
around. Each part of a seed has a function. As you watch this
video, I want you to pay attention to the function of each
● Display sensitivity and part of the seed. Write down a word or two that helps you
offer assistance to peers remember the function of the coat: the embryo: the
who may have physical or cotyledon (put these three words on the chalkboard).
learning challenges when
conducting practical and The Plant’s Need for Sunshine and Water
group work. Video parts of a seed and functions of each part
Students we have done experiments that show that https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2mYdqm1ePz8 (1:27
● Participate actively in sunshine and water are important to plant growth. In mins)
classroom discussions.
fact, we have done controlled experiments to
determine the optimum amount of sunshine and Let’s discuss what you noticed and review the function of
water for plant growth. the seed parts.
I have a few questions I need you to answer for me What is the function of the seed coat?
about your experience doing this science. The seed coat is the protective coat of a seed. It covers
the inside part of a seed.)
In groups (think, pair, share) I want you to think back
to our experiments and What is the function of the embryo?
1) tell me what is meant by a controlled (To ensure that the plant has everything it needs. It
experiment? senses whether the right conditions needed for growth
(one variable changes, all others remain the same; e.g., are available.)
same seed, same water, same pot, same measure-
change sunshine) What is the function of the cotyledons?
(It is the place which stores food for the developing
2) tell me what is meant by the word optimum seedling.)
and use it in a sentence as you explain it
66
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
(optimum means best- the optimum glasses of water Stages of Germination
for a balanced diet is 6-8 per day).
In order to grow from a seed to a plant, a special set of
3) tell me how you might design a controlled conditions are needed that allow the seed to start. This
experiment to see what types of soil are best beginning of the seed growth is called germination.
for growing bean plants (3 types of soil, same seed Students, tell me some different seeds you would have seen
at the same depth, same amount of water, same before (house plants, garden plants etc.).
amount of sunshine, same measure of growth).
Sometimes seeds look like little pebbles and we might think
they are actually not alive but something magical happens
when we put them in soil and provide heat and water. They
begin a series of steps that allow them to become a living
plant.
(Note: opportunity to briefly talk about living and non-
living things here).
Have you seen a plant grow from a seed? (Yes/no)
Was it a complete plant from the start? (No)
What came out first from the seed? How did it grow?
As you watch this video students, consider the different
steps of germination. Sometimes we call steps stages or
phases. An example of those words in a sentence. From
childhood to becoming an adult we go through different
stages or phases. We start as a baby, then become a
toddler, a young child, a teenager, young adult and adult)
These are all stages or phases of our development as
humans.
I will stop the video at different places so you can draw a
picture of the stage or phase in your journal.
See: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w77zPAtVTuI
(3:09 mins)
67
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Day 2
Day 7
Day 10 Day 23
Day 25
68
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Let us now review what you saw. We can grow our own
bean and use our journals to track the phases.
We will observe germination in a bean plant. We will
need:
(a) a cup (transparent or translucent)
(b) some beans
(c) tissue
(d) water
Effect of Water on Plant Growth
Students will be engaged in a controlled experiment:
The same seeds will be added to 5 of the same containers
at the same depth in the same soil. The containers will then
all be placed in a location with the same amount of sunlight
each day. The first container will have 5 mL of water added
each day. The successive containers will have 10, 20, 25 &
30 mLs added each day. The plant growth will be measured
using a cm ruler along the stem. Students will record the
length of the stem in their notebooks along with a drawn
picture and a description of the plant after 1 week, 2 weeks,
3 weeks & 4 weeks. With the teacher’s help, the plant
growth will be plotted in a graph of length (cm) versus time
(weeks) for each volume of water. Students will report after
4 weeks which amount of water seems to be the optimum
amount for plant growth.
69
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Teacher Notes:
• the teacher could also decide to measure the width
of a leaf rather than the height as long as the same
measure is used for all plants.
• for reliability, the student group measures could be
averaged so that through the class you wee getting
multiple trials; a standard approach to science
experiments.
• The teacher could use the averaging of group
results to make a cumulative class graph to
interpret.
• The table below could be used for a class record or
for individual groups.
Table for the Experiment
Water Measure of Stem at each week
volume (cm)
added 1 2 3 4
(mL)
5
10
20
25
30
Teacher Notes:
• It is most important that the teacher discuss
with students a systematic interpretation of the
data table.
70
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• The teacher may decide to do all the graphing
(as a class activity) and explain how the graphs
give us the optimum values.
The Effect of Sunlight on Plant Growth
Students will be engaged in a controlled experiment:
The same seeds will be added to 5 of the same containers
at the same depth in the same soil. The containers will have
20 mL of water added each day for 4 weeks. The
containers will then all be placed in a location with sunlight
for 30 min, 60 min, 90 min, 120 min & 150 min
respectively. The plant growth will be measured using a
cm ruler along the stem. Students will record the length of
the stem in their notebooks along with a drawn picture and
a description of the plant after 1 week, 2 weeks, 3 weeks &
4 weeks. With the teacher’s help, the plant growth will be
plotted in a graph of length (cm) versus time (weeks) for
each amount of sunlight. Students will report after 4 weeks
which amount of sunlight seems to be the optimum
amount for plant growth.
Table for the Experiment
Time in Measure of Stem at each week
the (cm)
Sunlight 1 2 3 4
(mins)
30
60
90
120
150
71
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Teacher Notes:
• It is most important that the teacher discuss with
students a systematic interpretation of the data
table.
• The teacher may decide to do all the graphing (as a
class activity) and explain how the graphs give us
the optimum values.
Closure:
So students, as a class, what have we learned from our
experiments that we can report to the farmer to help them
with growing the best beans the fastest?
• The best (optimum) amount of water to add to our
plants is ________ mL
• The best (optimum) amount of sunlight for our
plants is _____________mins.
Extension Experiment: What About Adding Other
Liquids to Plants?
If time permits, the teacher may decide to explore the
effect of adding other liquids to plants in a controlled
experiment. This could be a simulation of pollutants
that prevent plants from growing properly.
1. Label five containers “water/control”, “milk”,
“juice”, “Cola” and “sports drink”.
2. Fill each container with the same amount of soil.
3. Plant the same seeds in each.
72
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4. Measure out equal volumes of water, milk, juice,
Cola and the Sports drink and pour on each plant
based on the correct label.
5. Place the plants in a warm sunny place outdoors or
on a windowsill.
6. Repeat step 5 every other day.
7. Record the growth of the plant by measuring the
stem.
Height water milk juice Cola Sports
(cm) drink
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Retrieved from : https://www.education.com/science-
fair/article/watering-
plants/#:~:text=Experimental%20Procedure%3A&text=
Fill%20the%20containers%20with%20potting,in%20the%
20%E2%80%9CMilk%E2%80%9D%20container.
73
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Closure
So students, what have learned about the effect of adding
other liquids to plants to promote growth?
Which of the liquids made the plant grow the most?
__________
Which of the liquids made the plant grow the least?
__________
Gardening in the Community: Visit to a School
Garden
Visit to the school or community garden for a presentation
by the caretaker on caring for plants.
A Review Song: A Tiny Seed Was Sleeping
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IAzo7ZgipH0 (2:32
mns)
(can be sang as a class or in groups e’g boys and girls)
74
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: (Links to professional sources that connect back to the Curriculum and Assessment Principles of
Learning and Principles of Assessment)
Definitions of key terms
1. Plant - living things that make their own food.
2. Growth - an increase in size. Living things, like plants, grow in many different ways.
3. Germination - the process by which seeds begin to grow into plants.
4. Photosynthesis - this is the process through which green plants use sunlight to make food.
5. Seed - it is a part of the plant that can make another similar plant.
6. Embryo - a young developing plant inside of the seed.
7. Seed coat - the seed coat is the protective coat of a seed. It covers the inside part of a seed.
8. Cotyledon - this is the leaf within the embryo of a seed. It is the place which stores food for the developing seedling.
Plants grow under many different conditions. Plants are living things that make their own food. Plants have roots, a stem, branches and
leaves. Plants use a process called photosynthesis to turn sunlight or light energy into food. This happens in their leaves. They use this food
to grow.
The seed is very important in the growth of plants. It has three main parts. They are the seed coat, the embryo, and the cotyledon.
Plants grow under different conditions however, most plants need light energy, which they get from the sun, water and minerals. All of
those make it possible for them to make their own food.
Most plants grow from a seed.
Inside the seed is an embryo.
This is the part from which a young plant develops/grows.
The seed absorbs water and eventually the seed coat bursts open.
Roots begin to grow downwards to make the plant more stable.
The shoot grows above the ground and straightens up towards the light.
Some plants can grow without light, but for a short period of time.
Those plants can begin growing without light but will die if they get no light at all after some time.
Inclusive Resources and Materials From Regional Specialists Use of multisensory activities and materials to assist all learners. (texts, family & community
knowledge and resources, contextually relevant professional web resources)
If a sandwich bag and a wet paper towel are taped to the back of this house with a window, students can watch their inserted bean sprout grow on the
classroom wall.
75
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Retrieved from: https://www.teacherspayteachers.com/Product/My-Little-Sprout-House-Printable-1218023
Watch it Grow: Backyard Life Cycles by Barbara Reid (Scholastic Books)
Additional Resources:
Video illustrating parts of a seed, function of various parts of a seed, conditions required for germination and the stages of germination
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TE6xptjgNR0 (5:04 mins)
Seed Germination
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dxtbSGyhxQ4(7:05 mins)
Germination Content and Quiz
https://k8schoollessons.com/germination/
The Lucky Seed Story and Activities
https://www.e-thaksalawa.moe.gov.lk/moodle/pluginfile.php/31285/mod_resource/content/1/The%20lucky%20seed%20-%20Story.pdf
https://learnenglishkids.britishcouncil.org/listen-watch/short-stories/lucky-seed
Listen to a read aloud from the book entitled We Plant a Seed.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zxl6Kiy7NPI (3:23 mins)
Sprouting seeds and transplanting
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zEOfdGaO5r8 (3:07 mins)
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in
the curriculum)
Mathematics:
• Finding the difference in length (shoot) of two plants (measurement).
• Seriation : Placing things in order (the sequence of germination).
• Constructing various graphs such as bar graphs and pictographs depicting plant growth.
• Calculating the number of days seed(s) took to grow.
Social Studies:
• Identifying plants found in their community and country.
76
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
• Why is farming important to our community?
• How does runoff from fertilizers affect our waterways?
• (Industries) Tracing a product to its original source example: sugar is made from sugar cane, tomato paste from tomatoes etc.
Language Arts:
• Sequencing-
Students will arrange pictures and sentences in the correct order to show plant growth from a seed to an adult plant.
https://www.liveworksheets.com/dy2123352fv.
Matching pictures depicting the stages of germination to correct sentences and vice versa.
• Imagining being a seed and describing what is happening to you as you grow into a young plant.
TVET:
Agriculture
• Technology - The use of the greenhouse to help plants grow.
• The uses of plants.
• Identifying and naming different seeds. Identifying and stating various products made from these seeds. Example coconuts (oil, soap)
Health:
• Healthy eating habits. The importance of plants in our diet.
• Identifying various nutritious dishes that can be made using plants/seeds.
Elements from Local Culture:
• The best time of the year to grow certain plants (dry or wet season).
• The moon is monitored to know when to grow certain crops.
• Foods grown locally are better than imported ones because they are more natural.
• Some plants grow well in swampy areas (e.g. watercress/dasheen/eddoes) while some require less water to grow (e.g. cacti).
• (Some plants grow tall/short, short plants can grow long/leggy if they do not get enough light) too much water can make some plants not sweet
(eg. if waxapple/waterapple gets too much it is not as sweet, as when it bears fruit in dry season).
Resources for a learner who is struggling: (Links to earlier learning activities for similar knowledge, links to resources for special education
needs)
https://www.liveworksheets.com/gy453207hl
https://leara-elearning.com/projects/nutrien/survivor_soak/
77
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Resources for a learner who needs challenge: (Links to learning activities and resources in later grades)
https://www.liveworksheets.com/rt990342cx
https://www.liveworksheets.com/vg2700975st
Strategies that Support the OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have:: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning
outcome and associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies Knowledge of what is needed for plants to grow will contribute to a society
where its citizens show more appreciation for growing food, providing
assistance to farmers and preserving and protecting soil to aid in effective food
production.
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication Offer responses for questions that require critical thinking at the Grade Two
level: “what do you think will happen?”, “What if the plant got no sunlight,
Competencies
would it still grow?”
Developed Well-being Competencies Eating foods from a variety of sources understanding that they all provide
different nutrients needed by the body.
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies Understand the value of farmers in a society.
Aspire to participate in food production on any level.
78
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Purpose of the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of
caring not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic study of
the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from leveraging
and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it.
Topic or Strand: Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems
Essential Learning Outcome (ELO 2):
Develop a simple model that mimics the function of an animal in dispersing seeds or pollinating plants. Make observations of plants and animals to
compare the diversity of life in different habitats. [Clarification Statement: Emphasis is on the diversity of living things in each of a variety of different habitats.]
[Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include specific animal and plant names in specific habitats.]
Grade Level Guidelines: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Classifying Seed Dispersal How Did Those Plants Get There?
Students will collect or use a variety of pictures of different The majority of plants can’t move from where
Knowledge seeds. They will complete a table by ticking the way the seed is they are planted once they start growing, yet we
● Define the terms: dispersed. The feature(s) the seeds have in order to disperse see plants almost everywhere.
o Dispersal: (in this way will be discussed by teacher and students. Example So let us think about the situation in the pictures
plants) moving the seed has hooks that can stick to fur. below; If there were no people around, would
seeds around. there be any trees growing in that area? Why?
o Pollination: to give Sample Method of Dispersal How do they get there?
(drawing)
(a plant) pollen Please give me some of your ideas students?
from another plant (wind, animals, humans)
Seed Wind Water Animals
of the same kind so
that seeds will be
produced.
o Structure: (seeds)
the different parts
of a seed. Each part
79
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
has a different
function (job). Students will design a booklet showing the different types of
seed dispersal. Booklet will include pictures showing examples Retrieved from:
(flower) the
of seeds that are dispersed by the wind, water, and animals. https://www.devex.com/news/australian-
different parts of a
aid-s-plans-to-revive-global-coconut-
flower. Each part
Field Trip- Examples in Nature of Seed Dispersal conservation-92935
has a different
function. On a field trip, students record the different animals that they
o Function: the see and present that information on a class chart. Students can
particular job or draw pictures of the animals.
Teacher Note: Students can also draw pictographs to report
purpose of
their observations.
something.
Pictures can also be used in cases where they are unable to go
o Diversity: being
on the field.
different or having This will be placed according to the habitat. (field, garden and
a variety of rainforest) Students will record the animals and plants that
something. they see in the habitat and discuss how the animals help in
o Habitat: The place seed dispersal and pollination.
They will finally create a collage of the habitat (three in total)
where living things
and present to the class as a group. Retrieved from:
naturally live and
https://www.pxfuel.com/en/free-photo-
grow.
Seed Dispersal Gallery xaauw
o Environment: Students will also participate in a seed dispersal gallery
Everything around walk. Students will display their seed dispersal diagrams/ Now we are going to discuss what you know
us; our collages displayed neatly on their desks and walk around about seeds and fruits as a class or in pairs.
surroundings. This the room to see how others represented information on Example: The parts of the seed, what is found
inside the seed.
includes the living their diagrams.
We are going to use the seeds that you collected
and nonliving
Practice Worksheets on Ways Seeds are Dispersed. from the fruits that you ate at break today. Let us
things around us
compare them.
(air, soil, water, https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/science/grade-2-
plants, animals). seed-dispersal-a.pdf
80
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
o Evaporation: Water (Students will be given extra samples e.g. orange,
changing from the mango, watermelon, plums, cucumber).
liquid to the gas
state.
o Silt
o Loam
o Sand
o Clay
o Chalk
o Invasive species
● Discuss how those fruit
trees grow. How can seeds
make new plants other than
Retrieved from https://encrypted-
placing it in the soil?
tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcTEJRf
● Compare the different Design a flower for insect pollination, what would it look
F-
forms of seed dispersal by like? Why?
ag_vuzvJSr6XFt55MbApTR0KtEyLg&usqp=C
animals. (videos, real life).
AU
● Show your finished model
that mimics the functions
of an animal in dispersing
seeds or pollinating plants.
● Explain simply: seed
dispersal.
● Demonstrate they
understand that there are
different forms of seed
dispersal by animals.
● Identify the parts of the
Students can draw or use materials to design a flower.
flower that aid in
pollination (petals, stamen,
Retrieved from https://www.tigandpeach.com/news/ms-
pistil, pollen).
laurens-pollen-collector-project
81
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Give general characteristics Retrieved from: https://encrypted-
of soil types. Scoring Rubric tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcSS9bsS
● Account for how invasive Explanation of Design - 5 Marks 1jtnwCTj1L66LUDhi9JrfXWCZprhVg&usqp=
plant species might impact Creativity - 3 marks CAU
habitat. Neatness - 2 marks
● Identify the role of each
Labelling the parts of a flower
part of a flower and
Using a chart with a flower. Students will label the parts of a
compare the external parts
flower by placing the names written on flash cards next to the
of different flowers (ST-2-
correct part of the flower. Teacher will use a checklist. Also
LS-SF-2).
students will complete a live worksheet.
● Define propagation of a
https://www.liveworksheets.com/cq573239en
seed (ST-3-LS-DC-2).
● Outline two natural
Pollination Worksheets
methods of propagation in
flowering plants, giving
1. https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/science/gra
local examples (ST-3-LS-
de-2-pollination-a.pdf
DC-4). Retrieved from
● Describe and explain https://www.indiamart.com/proddetail/rijkzwaa
methods of vegetative n-mini-cucumber-seeds-9838494788.html
propagation (ST-3-LS-DC-
5).
● Identify and describe use of
seeds as a means of
reproducing different
plants (ST-3-LS-DC-6).
● Identify and describe the
various agents of
pollination-wind water,
animals etc (ST-5-LS-DC-
Retrieved from
5).
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cucumber
Skills
82
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Observe different habitats
and record the types of
animals and plants that live 2. https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/science/gra
there. de-2-pollination-b.pdf
● Infer how animals and
plants within different
habitats are adapted for
Retrieved from https://www.bulgarian-
seed dispersal and
nuts.com/product/watermelon-seeds/
pollination.
● Classify seeds based on the
type of dispersal (wind,
animal, water).
● Collect data from videos
(using a table) on how
seeds are dispersed in the
environment.
● Communicate their findings
about seed dispersal and
pollination using oral
presentations, tables and
charts.
● Construct a design for a What is so Unusual About This Coffee?
model to show dispersal of Students should research the dispersion of seeds that lead to Retrieved from
seeds by animals. these unique coffees. Return to class with an answer to why https://www.thespruce.com/how-to-grow-
● Calculate the number of these coffees are so expensive? watermelons-1403491
seeds. dispersed by animals,
wind and water. Kopi Luwak
● Construct a pictograph Black Ivory
using the information
gathered. Invasive Plants
● Interpret data presented in If the internet is available to students, groups of three, should
pictographs and charts. be tasked with presenting to the class a description and
83
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Conduct an experiment to explanation for at least two invasive plant species in the
determine how much water Caribbean. They must also speculate how the species might
is absorbed by different impact the ecosystem of the Caribbean.
types of soil. For research purposes, they may refer to the following
websites:
Attitudes/Values https://caribbeaninvasives.org/index.php/2022/09/23/be-
on-the-lookout-invasive-plants/
● Appreciate the importance
of seed dispersal for the https://www.cabi.org/Uploads/isc/Caribbeaniscnewsmarch2
survival of plants. 016.pdf
● Create solutions to mitigate
the impacts of invasive
species of plants.
● Recognise the role of
Retrieved from
animals in the survival of
https://minnetonkaorchards.com/how-to-grow-
different plant species
orange-tree-from-seed/
through seed dispersal.
● Inquiry into soil absorption
gives information for
farming
● Inventiveness - Create a
model to show how
animals disperse seeds.
● Collaboration &
Cooperation - Work
collaboratively with their
peers to create a model for
the type of dispersal
selected.
● Stewardship/Respect for
Living Things.
84
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Safety as the soil Retrieved from:
experiment is undertaken. https://tanrosie.wordpress.com/2013/02/22/gr
● Display sensitivity and offer enada-food-report-part-iii/orange-tree-grenada-
assistance to peers who 2/
may have physical or
learning challenges when
conducting practical and
group work.
● Participate actively in
classroom discussions.
Retrieved from
http://grenadaguide.blogspot.com/2011/09/sp
ondias-dulcis-june-plum-jew-plum-dew.html
85
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://i.etsystatic.com/21038542/r/il/7a1cfb/
1993581520/il_340x270.1993581520_efnx.jpg
Matching the Seed to the Plant
I know many of you must have eaten these
plants before. Can you remember what the seeds
looked like when you took the plant apart? If
you were a farmer and you had a bag of seeds
that got mixed up…could you separate them out
correctly? Some seeds are small, some are flat,
some have different shapes and colors.
Seed Dispersal
Just like people travel to visit new places or see
their family, seeds travel too. They travel for
different reasons and unlike us, they do not need
a suitcase. Why do seeds travel? Plants make
seeds and those seeds have one simple job: to
make a new plant. Plants want their seeds to
86
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
spread out and see the world, not just drop to
the ground and grow at their feed.
What do you notice stuck to your clothes when
you are out playing in the field or in a place
where the grass is quite tall? (seeds)
Some seeds which have hooks or spines. These
hooks attach the seed to the animal's fur or
feathers - or, in the case of humans, to clothes.
Retrieved from:
https://www.ajc.com/lifestyles/environment/pl
ants-must-spread-their-ripe-
seeds/tTerWmg101NeGy6mNPeBAL/
These are all seeds.
Do all seeds look the same? (no)
Can you name two seeds that look different?
How are they different? (some are sticky and some
are not, some are light and some are heavy, some are big
and some are small)
Why do you think the seed sticks to your
clothes? (they have hooks or spines)
This is one way plants disperse their seeds.
87
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Disperse is a new word. What do you think it
means?
Disperse – to spread over a wide area Synonyms
for disperse – spread, scatter, distribute.
When the seeds have grown, the plant needs to
disperse them so that they can grow into new
plants. The seeds need to be dispersed away
from the parent plant so that the new plant has
all the different things that it needs to grow.
Can you think of other ways seeds are spread or
dispersed? Do plants get help in dispersing their
seeds? Students will discuss in groups and write
down ways they think plants disperse their seeds.
(human’s clothes, animal fur, wind, streams, packing of
vegetables for transport)
Let us view a video that shows us how seeds are
dispersed and the features that help them do so.
As you watch the video, I want you to pick out
at least three ways seeds are dispersed. Draw a
picture in your journal of each so you can easily
remember this important process.
Dispersal of Seeds Video
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZRHc
KEGNyVY (1:53 mins)
88
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Clips from the video:
89
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Look at this plant students. It seems like it would
be easy for the wind to blow these seeds.
90
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from
https://www.ethnoplants.com/gb/interesti
ng-plant-seeds/152-miscanthus-sinensis-
elephant-grass-maiden-seeds.html
Animals that facilitate dispersal of seeds or
pollination in plants
Can you identify animals that aid in seed
dispersal or pollination in plants?
Have you seen any seeds on these animals?
Let us look at some pictures. Discuss with your
partner the activity taking place in each picture.
How does this activity help in the dispersal of
seeds or pollination in plants?
Retrieved from
http://lifewithdogsandcats.com/life-with-dogs-
and-cats/burrs-in-dogs-
fur/#sthash.GRJTb7Pz.dpbs
91
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from http://blog.nwf.org/wp-
content/blogs.dir/11/files/2015/01/Squirrel_Fl
ickr_TomGill.jpg
Retrieved from
https://www.birdscaribbean.org/2017/12/fores
t-restoration-in-the-dominican-republic-how-i-
got-the-birds-to-work-for-me/
Now let us view this video to review ways
animals help disperse seeds. As you watch the
video, draw a picture in your journal of at least
92
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
two animals and the way they help disperse
seeds.
video on ways animals disperse seeds.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GGZHBB
OU2yE (2:06 mins)
Using the following checklist (pictures) classify
and group the method that each of the animals
uses to disperse seeds.
(Teacher note: you are looking for a
classification such as:
● burying
● pass in their droppings
● carrying in their fur/hair )
Retrieved from:
https://www.birminghamtimes.com/wp-
content/uploads/2022/01/feat_24ff2e39-ea25-
40f6-ab91-f74bb0d7c9d7.jpg
93
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://aroundthekampfire.com/wp-
content/uploads/2022/01/animal-dispersing-
seeds-through-attachment.png
Retrieved from:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Epizoochory
_-
_black_Labrador_with_hooked_Geum_fruits_in
_his_fur.jpg
94
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://www.howitworksdaily.com/wp-
content/uploads/2018/12/WOA64.seeds_.aly_
KNDP55186335209694985008-450x300.jpg
What Happens After Dispersal?
A seed can fall on different types of soil and this
can affect the likelihood that the seed will grow.
Where might seeds fall that wouldn’t promote
growth (hard packed clay, sand, gravel, rocks).
Why would these be poor places to grow plants
from seeds? (difficult to get roots down, difficulty
finding water source)
We know that water is important for plant
growth.
Different soils have different properties. Because
the sun shines on soils it can give the water
molecules enough energy to go from liquid to
gas (water vapor). We call that evaporation. It
should make sense to us that soils that hold
more water are going to support plant growth.
Let us do a little experiment (teacher demo) to
see which soils will hold the most water. We are
going to put six common types of soil in funnels
and measure how much of the initial water (100
mL) passes through the same quantity of soil.
Soil types:
If possible, the teacher should bring in as many
samples as possible or comparison.
Sand: small particles
Clay: heavier soil high in nutrients
Loam: mixture of clay, sand and peat
95
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Chalk: limestone and basic so not good for acid-
loving plants
Silt: fine particles with more nutrients than sand
(Teacher note: Extended definitions and
properties here:
https://www.boughton.co.uk/products/topsoils
/soil-types/
https://www.gardenersworld.com/plants/find-
out-your-soil-type/
Retrieved from:
https://suffahschool.hounslow.sch.uk/testing-
soil-permeability/
Closure: So students, which of the soils retained
the water the best in our experiment?
What Happens When Seeds get Transported
to New Locations?
Transportation technology has made it possible
for us to travel around the world but it has also
96
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
made it possible for cars, boats, airplanes, trains
to transport seeds. When a seed grows into a
plant in another habitat or environment, it can
cause problems. We call these plants, invasive
species because they are invading a place they
have never been before.
Can you guess what the problem might be? (get
student feedback and then elaborate)
Teacher should engage discussion about impacts:
• overgrown in sensitive areas,
• choke out other plants,
• affect food sources of animals,
• affect water supply,
• upset food web.
Pollination of Flowers: An Important Step in
Propagating the Production of Seeds
In order to understand how flowers can work
with animals like bees to promote the production
of more seeds, we need to first look at the parts
of a flower.
We are going on some field trips in the
environment/school garden/plant shop/orchard
where you will observe and collect a variety of
flowers e.g. hibiscus, buttercups etc. (Remember,
you can go on your own field trip in your
neighbourhood.)
When we return you will work in pairs to
examine (dissect) flower specimens and identify
97
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
floral parts with teacher’s guidance (NB. Allow
learners to remove floral parts starting with the outermost
sepals).
Using a hand lens to observe, describe and draw
parts of the flower in a science journal.
Naming Parts of the Flower. Video Resource
You will view a video to help you with naming
the parts of the flower and explaining
pollination. I will play it three times. So pay
attention.
As you watch it you are going to write or draw
the parts that you see and we will talk about what
you have recorded.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=djPVgip_b
dU (3:55 min.)
Retrieved from:
https://petrosains.com.my/discover-
stem/hibiscus-flower/
98
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Pollination of Flowers
You will listen to audio recording of book
“Flowers are calling” by Rita Gray which is
based on pollination
(https://youtu.be/3_5nhQqWihw (11.35 mins)
Afterwards you will talk about the story and
answer questions e.g. Name some animals that
visit flowers. Why do these animals visit the
flowers?
We will then look at two important words that
will come out of the story (pollination and
pollinators).
This next video will help you with listing animal
pollinators. After the story, you will draw your
favourite animal pollinator and we will share
with your classmates.
Book entitled “Animal Pollinators” by Jennifer
Boothroyd
Read aloud here:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bYRDGG
Vte90
(2:34 mins)
Animals and plants are dependent on each
other within their habitat
Let’s think about how plants make seeds. Pollen
(male part) from one flower falls into another
flower (female part) which allows it to create
fruits and seeds.
99
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
There are many ways for plants to be pollinated:
wind, insects, animals and sometimes even
humans play a role.
Animals are the main way of pollination and
have body parts that help plants reproduce.
BEES have hairs all over their bodies that help
collect and deposit pollen as they travel from one
flower to another.
Watch some bees in action as they pollinate.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J7q9Kn1rh
Rc (1:39 mins)
Create your own Bee and flower using the
activity below.
https://assets-global.website-
files.com/5adf752e38b7222e27f146ee/5e7bd781
1c6d605dd64d4450_Oakland%20Zoo%202nd%
20Grade%20Activity_%20Pollination.pdf
Creating animals that pollinate plants
In groups to use materials from the environment
to create an animal that disperse seeds e.g. bird
(humming bird), cat, bee, butterfly.
Pollen on one plant spreads by “taking a ride” to
another plant.
How can the animal that you created help to
spread pollen?
100
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Scoring Rubric
Creativity 5 marks
Neatness 2 marks
Explanation 5 marks
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: (Links to professional sources that connect back to the Curriculum and Assessment Principles of
Learning and Principles of Assessment)
Seed dispersal is the means by which a plant ensures its seeds are spread as far as possible from the parent plant.
This gives the seeds a great chance to germinate.
Plants disperse their seeds to ensure their survival.
This helps to increase the number of plants in forested areas.
It also helps to increase the food supply for animals including birds.
This is also a good way to spread medicinal plants to other areas.
When plants grow too closely together, they have to compete for light, water and nutrients from the soil.
Seed dispersal allows plants to spread out from a wide area and avoid competing with one another for the same resources.
Seeds are dispersed in three main ways: by animals, through wind, by water.
Animals disperse seeds by burying them, excreting them or carrying them in their fur.
Seeds are dispersed in different ways based on their specific features.
Seeds dispersed by wind are light and usually have hooks which cause them to stick to clothing and animals’ hair/fur.
Seeds that are buried and excreted are usually sources of food.
Animals that carry seeds on their bodies include: sheep, goats, dogs. These seeds have hooks that attach to the animals’ hair or fur and are then carried
to another place to grow.
Birds, bats, chimpanzees and bears disperse seeds through their dropping. Seeds do not digest when eaten by those animals so they pass it in their
droppings which allow the seed to germinate elsewhere.
101
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Squirrels eat seeds but they also bury them. This is another way of dispersing seeds. They are transported from their location to be buried. These animals
later uncover those seeds when they need food. Some of those seeds, however, grow and become new plants.
When a mongoose goes through the bushes small seeds stick to its hair and in that way the seeds move from one place to another. The same thing
happens with dogs and birds.
Pollination is the transfer of pollen to the female part of the flower.
Many different animals pollinate flowers such as bees, butterflies, ants, beetles, lizards, bats, hummingbirds and small mammals.
Inclusive Resources and Materials From Regional Specialists Use of multisensory activities and materials to assist all learners. (texts, family & community
knowledge and resources, contextually relevant professional web resources)
Paper, glue, tape etc. for making models.
Use of video and audio resources for understanding dispersal.
Additional Resources:
Link to pictures of plants from the Caribbean:
https://www.saintlucianplants.com/endemics.html
Seed Dispersal
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aC3pQ9RU9YA(1:08)
https://blog.growingwithscience.com/tag/seed-dispersal-activities/
Song How Seeds Move
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3CCOWHa-qfc(4:25)
A Seed’s Journey
https://fliphtml5.com/yykeg/vumd/basic
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in
the curriculum)
Mathematics:
• Collect data from videos (using a table) on how seeds are dispersed in the environment.
• Calculate the number of seeds dispersed by animals, wind and water.
• Construct a pictograph showing the different ways seeds are dispersed and the number of seeds that are dispersed through each way.
Social Studies:
102
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
• Identify areas where it is possible to find evidence of seed dispersal from animals (geography of places - school environment and home
community).
• Concern for impact of invasive species.
• How to protect the environment from pollutants to encourage pollination.
Language Arts:
• Write legibly and speak clearly and fluently to explain how animals disperse seeds.
• Write a short imaginative story on an animal pollinator e.g. My Life as a Bee.
• Write a short imaginative story about a seed's adventure (The journey of the seed going through seed dispersal.)
TVET:
• Create the models to show how different animals disperse seeds.
Agriculture:
• The importance of seed dispersal and pollination to habitats and our survival.
• The importance of animals (animal pollinators) that help with seed dispersal and pollination in the environment.
Art:
• Design a model for animals dispersing seeds in the environment.
Elements from Local Culture:
• Walking around in the bushes around the school near the school and on the way home.
• Mongoose moving around from one area to another foraging.
• Pollination by local honey bees, seed dispersal by local fruit eating bats/birds/lizards(reptiles).
• Grass burrs getting stuck to clothing while walking through grass.
• Coconuts getting transported by water, many coconut trees grow on beaches / compare animals in these habitats: beach, farm lands, forest,
river, pond, grassy areas.
• Plants/plant parts used local cuisine that could be affected if their pollinators are affected.
• Forest management practices/activities can impact seed dispersal or pollinators.
Resources for a learner who is struggling: (Links to earlier learning activities for similar knowledge, links to resources for special education
needs)
Parts of the flower using craft materials
https://www.teach-me-mommy.com/parts-of-a-flower-craft/
103
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Resources for a learner who needs challenge: (Links to learning activities and resources in later grades)
Seed Dispersal Reading and Comprehension
https://worksheetplace.com/mf_pdf/Seed-dispersal-info.pdf
Creating animals that disperse seeds.
https://teaching.betterlesson.com/lesson/634057/creating-animals-that-disperse-see
Strategies that Support the OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have:: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning
outcome and associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies Students will learn to value the role of animals in seed dispersal which links
directly to plants growing to provide for some of our basic needs.
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication In planning and designing the model for seed dispersal, students will need to be
critical thinkers to best utilise the resources available to them.
Competencies
Developed Well-being Competencies Help with growing local fruit bearing trees (burying) that have nutritional
benefits.
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies Collect and sell seeds that make fruit bearing trees. Sell fruits from trees that they
grow. Plant medicinal shrubs from seeds.
104
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Earth Systems: Processes That Shape The Earth
Purpose of the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of
caring not only for themselves but as responsible citizens for the world around them. Their decision-making will be enhanced by a systematic study of
the structure and behaviour of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from leveraging
and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it.
Topic or Strand: Earth Systems: Processes That Shape The Earth
Essential Learning Outcome (ELO-1): Use information from several sources to provide evidence that Earth events can occur quickly or slowly.
[Clarification Statement: Examples of events and timescales could include volcanic explosions and earthquakes, which happen quickly and erosion of rocks, which occurs slowly.]
[Assessment Boundary:Assessment does not include quantitative measurements of timescales.]
Grade Level Guidelines: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Word Wall Builder to Practice New Words Examples of Processes: Volcanoes
Students, I want to show you a picture.
Knowledge Do you know what this is? We call it a volcano. It
looks like a big mountain but there seems to be
● Define the following terms: something bright at the top?
o Volcano
o Lava
o Soil
o Erupt and eruption Retrieved from:
https://teachersworkstation.com/2021/09/28/week-7-
o Earth Events science-lessons-
o Quake Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EmJv_eOfrD
o Earthquake Game -Base Learning and Definitions
c
105
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
o Erosion The teacher gives the students the following words on Students have you heard the word volcano before?
cards: Can you tell me what you know about volcano’s
● Using examples, (explosions, fire, tall hills). Did you know that we have
demonstrate an Volcano/Lava/Soil/Earthquake/Erosion volcanos in the Caribbean? Recently, a volcano
understanding of the erupted in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. But
difference between fast and The teacher reads to students a simple definition based on volcanoes have been happening all around the
slow earth events. the discussion they had in class. The student holds up the world for a very long time. Let me show you a
word that matches that definition. video clip and another picture of some volcanoes.
● Define the term soil
erosion, listing types of soil (e.g. a tall hill that erupts or explodes with fire and smoke - As you look at these, I want you to think of three
erosion, and ways and volcano). words that help you to describe that volcano (fire,
means of preventing it (ST- smoke, danger, escape).
If the teacher has access to technology, they can use an
5-ESS-ER-1). Can you also draw me a picture that shows what
interactive game called Kahoot® to pose a similar matching
you saw?
● Describe an earthquake as a activity. See game information here:
natural occurrence and https://kahoot.it/?pin=8061856&refer_method=link
See 5 Eruptions here:
explain what causes it, (ST- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EmJv_eOfrD
Distinguishing Fast and Slow Earth Events
5-LS-ECS-15)* describe
c (15:18 mins)
formation in simple terms.
Students, I want to ask you some questions about what we
The teacher may choose to use shorter portions of
● Identify volcanic activity as a discussed today and we are going to put our new words in
the video to allow for student observations of the
natural process and explain these special circles.
features.
how volcanoes are formed, as
well as the impact on the 1. When we think about volcanos erupting, is that a
environment. (ST-5-LS-ECS- fast or slow event? (fast) Let us add eruption to our
16) *describe formation in circles.
simple terms. 2. If the volcano erupts over and over for many years,
it adds new rock over top of old rock and makes
Skills
new soil. Is that a fast or slow event? (slow). Let us
add soil to our circles.
● Use new vocabulary to
3. Is an earthquake a slow or fast event? (fast)
describe your observations.
4. When the ocean gets very high due to a storm or
earthquake, it tends to wash away our beach. Is
that a fast or slow event? (fast)
106
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Draw pictures that 5. If the water in a stream runs over rocks for many
demonstrate you years and makes them smooth, we call that erosion.
understand features of a Is that a fast or slow event? (slow)
volcano.
Journaling Student Understanding
● Compare and contrast slow
Create a picture book showing examples of fast and slow
and fast earth events.
earth events. (At least one accurate picture for each fast and
slow event will earn students full marks for this assessment)
● Problem solve around
Partial marks can be attained for pictures that are unclear as
preparation to be safe for
to which event is occurring.
predictable events.
Thinking About Preparing for Fast Events
● Interpret video information
Extension Activities
Retrieved from:
and pictures.
1) Students can each bring in one item to be placed in
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RB27L0FY6
a classroom emergency supply kit. They should be
E4
● Communicate ideas about
able to explain how that item will be useful during
observation of erosion.
or after a fast earth event.
Let me ask you some questions students.
You can see fire but also there looks to be
● With the assistance of the 2) Individuals or groups can draw posters depicting
something running out of the volcano. The volcano
teacher, construct models. key safety practices for the different fast earth
is so hot that it melts the rock inside, and it flows
events. For example, DROP, COVER, HOLD in
over the edge. We call that liquid rock lava and it is
the event of an earthquake.
very hot! After a while these volcanoes sometimes
get quiet again and all that hot lava cools down and
Suggested Rubric:
forms rocks once again. This can happen over and
Attitudes/Values Neatness 5 marks
over so the rock can spread out and harden and
Discernible Drawing 5 marks
make new soil.
• Appreciate the role of Creativity 5 marks
natural processes in shaping Clear Messaging 5 marks
We know from the news about the volcano in SVG
the earth.
that it happened very quickly, people had to leave
their villages right away because of the danger and
• Compassion for those
new rocks were formed across that part of the
experiencing hardship due
island. We also know that the same volcano
107
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
to a dangerous earth event. Students can research a list of current/extinct volcanoes in exploded; lets use a new word- the volcano
If able, assist those that the member states of the Caribbean and create a map erupted, many years ago also. This means that over
have been victims of an showing their location. a long time, the cooling lava can keep making new
earth event. The following website on Eastern Caribbean Volcanoes rocks over and over - that would be a slow process.
may be useful: We refer to the volcano erupting as an earth event.
● Persistence at completing https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k2201xKMFx4&t=78 This is something special that happened. Other
tasks and activities. s (5:41 mins) examples of events are storms and hurricanes. Later
we will add to this list.
● Interest/Curiosity- Find
out more about different Note: As an extension activity, students may have the
naturally occurring events manual dexterity to help the teacher make a model of a
and objects on their volcano.
own. Instructions follow:
● Respect for Evidence- (220) How to make working Model of
Explain and listen to other volcano/Volcano Eruption/DIY Volcano with
students’ results and tissue paper/Kansal Creation - YouTube (4.05
explanation. mins)
● Collaboration & Note: To simulate the lava flow the teacher may choose to
Cooperation- Share ideas make a working model with vinegar and baking soda
with others.
Examples of Processes: Earthquakes
● Stewardship/Respect for
I want to teach you a new word quake.
Living Things- Show
It means to shake!
sensitivity to living things in
the environment.
Let say it “quake means to shake”.
● Apply safety practices
Did you know that the earth sometimes shakes. We
during fast earth events
call those earthquakes. When the earth shakes, it
such as earthquakes,
happens quickly and it makes cracks in the ground!
hurricanes, etc.
Let me show you a picture.
108
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
.
● When conducting practical
and group work, display
sensitivity and offer
assistance to peers who
may have physical or
learning challenges.
● Participate actively in
classroom discussions.
Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NH4zekbIU0
w (12:20 mins)
(the teacher may wish to emphasize the dangers of
earthquakes and make a model of items on a table, as
buildings and then have children shake it to simulate the
instability).
When these earthquakes happen, they cause waves
in the oceans to get very high, very quickly and this
can wash our beach sand and trees away. Just like
bad storms, the high water over a period of time,
can slowly change the beach front. We call that
erosion.
Look at this picture of a big wave caused by
an earthquake (Note: The word tsunami is probably
too difficult for children at this age and they will
learn more about them later).
109
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NH4zekbIU0
w (12:20 mins)
Examples of Processes: Erosion
Students have you ever noticed that some stones in
a stream bed are really smooth? (show children an
example of a smooth stone or take them to a
small stream as a field trip to observe the
effects of slow erosion)
The water runs over sharp stones for a very long
time and wears them down to be smooth.
Sometimes if you watch really closely in stream you
can see other stones tumbling over each other.
That also wears them down and makes them
smooth. We call this erosion also and it usually
takes a long time to get a smooth stone!
When you look at this picture can you imagine how
long it must take for the ocean to wear down that
rock as the water goes in and out every day? It
110
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
takes a very long time to make these funny rocks by
erosion.
Retrieved from: https://www.viator.com/en-
CA/tours/Hopewell-Cape/Hopewell-Rocks-
Admission/d51622-43008P1
Review Materials and Extended Examples
As review of the ideas above the teacher may find it
useful to access the following videos:
(220) Slow and Rapid Changes on Earth- Science
Grade 2 - YouTube (2.18 mins)
(220) Our Ever-changing Earth: Quick or Slow
Events | MightyOwl Science 2nd Grade -
YouTube (6.48 mins)
111
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
(220) What are Weathering and Erosion? | Calming
Science For Kids - YouTube (6.02 mins)
Extension Activity: Preparing for Fast Events
Invite guest speakers such as a meteorologist or
someone from the disaster management agency to
talk to students about fast events, how they can be
monitored and how the public can be prepared for
them.
Discuss the effects that a fast earth event may have
on life and what will be urgent needs of persons
living in communities experiencing fast earth
events. Food and water shortages need for medical
supplies, damage to infrastructure e.g. roads,
electricity damage to pets and plants.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: (Links to professional sources that connect back to the Curriculum and Assessment Principles of
Learning and Principles of Assessment)
Important Note: This is the first exposure to these topics. The physical details of how these events happen is dealt with in higher grades
Fast Earth Events:
Earthquakes: earthquakes are fast events that can happen when the earth's crust suddenly moves or shifts, causing shaking and vibrations. Children can
learn that earthquakes can cause damage to buildings and homes, and that people need to be prepared by having emergency kits and knowing what to
do during an earthquake.
Volcanic eruptions: volcanic eruptions can happen quickly and dramatically, with lava, ash, and gas spewing out of a volcano. Children can learn about
the different types of volcanoes and how they can be both dangerous and beautiful. It's also important to discuss how people can prepare for volcanic
eruptions and stay safe.
Include a list of current volcanoes in Member States.
112
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Slow Earth Events:
Erosion: erosion is a slow process that happens over time as wind, water, and other forces wear away the land. Children can learn that erosion can
change the shape of the land and create new landscapes, like canyons and valleys.
Weathering: weathering is another slow process that happens over time as rocks and other materials are broken down by weather and other forces.
Children can learn about the different types of weathering, like freezing and thawing, and how it can change the appearance of rocks and other
materials.
It's also important to emphasize that while some events may be fast or slow, they can all have an impact on our planet and the people and animals that
live here. Encourage children to think about how they can help protect the earth and its resources, and to be aware of the different events that can
happen around them.
Inclusive Resources and Materials From Regional Specialists Use of multisensory activities and materials to assist all learners. (texts, family &community
knowledge and resources, contextually relevant professional web resources)
items to create models - sand, fan or hair dryer, rocks, soil, leaves, baking soda, vinegar, food dye, baking tray, water, watering can, tables,
pictures showing fast and slow earth events.
Additional Resources:
Educational Videos: Educational videos are a great way to introduce students to the concepts of fast and slow earth movements. Some excellent
resources include BrainPOP Jr. and National Geographic Kids.
Interactive Websites: Interactive websites such as KidsGeo.com and Earthquake.usgs.gov have games and activities that teach children about different
types of earth movements.
Books: Books can be a great way to help children understand complex concepts in a fun and engaging way. Some excellent options for grade two
students include "Earthquakes" by Seymour Simon, "Volcanoes!" by Anne Schreiber, and "The Magic School Bus Inside the Earth" by Joanna Cole.
Hands-On Activities: Hands-on activities can help reinforce the concepts of fast and slow earth movements. Teachers can use activities such as
building a volcano, making a seismometer, or creating a tsunami in a bottle.
Field Trips: Field trips to natural/virtual history museums or geological sites can help students see firsthand the effects of fast and slow earth
movements.
113
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Collaborative Learning: Collaborative learning activities can help students learn about fast and slow earth movements in a fun and engaging way. For
example, group projects or class discussions can help students learn from one another and reinforce their understanding of the concepts.
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in
the curriculum)
• Mathematics: How often do volcanoes erupt, how often do we have earthquakes- a timeline for local events?
● Social Studies: How do people cope with the challenges of earth events (food, shelter, health?) Where in the world are the most
volcanoes/earthquakes?
● Language Arts: Reading materials EROSION read aloud for kids! https://youtu.be/0fQFevB2Iis (9:04 ins), Weathering and Erosion Read
Aloudhttps://youtu.be/XZ31wSN0sC4 (10:04 mins)
● TVET: Discuss how houses are built to help withstand hurricanes for example use of hurricane straps.
● Agriculture: How does soil erosion or landslides affect crop production.
● Health: Items in a first aid kit and their uses.
Elements from Local Culture:
The submerged volcano “Kick em Jenny” in Grenada’s waters can pose a fast earth event threat to Grenada and other neighbouring islands.
Pictures of hurricane destruction to Caribbean islands including Hurricane Ivan’s impact on Grenada.
In Saint Lucia, the warm waters from the volcano are very therapeutic and create mineral baths which are a popular tourist destination. The Caldera is
named as the only drive through volcano in the world.
Dominica has the most volcanoes in the Eastern Caribbean but not all are active.
La Soufrière, a stratovolcano on the Caribbean island of Saint Vincent in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, began an effusive eruption on 27 December
2020.
114
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Pictures retrieved from:
https://news.un.org/en/story/2021/04/1089722
https://eecentre.org/2022/03/24/saint-vincent-and-the-grenadines-rapid-environmental-assessments-after-la-soufriere-volcano-eruption/
https://sps.columbia.edu/news/building-awareness-st-vincent-families-displaced-la-soufriere-volcano
See: Ash dropping from sky here: https://news.sky.com/story/st-vincent-drone-video-shows-idyllic-island-blanketed-with-volcanic-ash-after-la-
soufriere-eruption-12288605
● Increased number of earthquakes in the region.
● Landslides after periods of heavy rainfall.
● When the river “comes down” (i.e. flows rapidly after rainfall in mountains).
● On the windward side of St. Vincent evidence of wind erosion can be observed in the shapes of the rocks and treetops.
● Blown down trees (plantain/banana trees) after a tropical storm/water shortages/outages during or after the passing of the storm.
Resources for a learner who is struggling: (Links to earlier learning activities for similar knowledge, links to resources for special education
needs)
Playing games to determine fast and slow events.
Participating in hands-on activities creating models to show how fast and slow events occur.
Resources for a learner who needs challenge: (Links to learning activities and resources in later grades)
Do research and identify and draw a world map showing location of volcanoes and earthquakes.
Search the internet for interviews of people living near the volcano Soufriere in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and describe for your peers their
experience.
Strategies that Support the OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning
outcome and associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies Care and compassion for those citizens affected by earth events.
115
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication Distinguishing fast and slow events and their impact on our world in terms of the
landforms .
Competencies
Developed Well-being Competencies Preparing for events and attending to precautions related to health.
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies Connections to hospitality industry. E.g., Saint Lucia- muds from mineral
baths/Dominica- hiking trails & champagne beach/St. Vincent * Grenadines-
Soufriere volcano viewing/Montserrat- volcanic aftermath.
116
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Purpose of the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes, and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of
caring not only for themselves but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision-making will be enhanced by a systematic study of
the structure and behaviour of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from leveraging
and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it.
Topic or Strand: Earth Systems: Processes That Shape The Earth
Essential Learning Outcome (ELO-2):
Compare multiple solutions designed to slow or prevent wind or water from changing the shape of the land.*
[Clarification Statement: Examples of solutions could include different designs of dikes and windbreaks to hold back wind and water, and different
designs for using shrubs, grass, and trees to hold back the land.]
Grade Level Guidelines: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: New Vocabulary (Comprehension) What do we Observe in Nature?
The teacher reads these sentences off the chalkboard and Students, what do you see in this picture from the
Knowledge asks students to choose a word from the list that best fits White Desert in Egypt? (a rock with the center worn out)
the context of the sentence.
• Define the terms: eroded/crop/livestock/roots/weathered/windbreak/
o Weathering retaining wall/grazing/diverted/solutions
o Erosion
o Livestock 1) The farmer’s _________included cows and pigs.
o Graze (livestock)
o Diverting 2) The stream slowly ______ away the large rock
o Retaining Wall until you could see a vein that looked like gold!
o Roots (weathered)
o Crops 3) Food grown in a field by a farmer is often called a Retrieved from: https://the-earth-
o Windbreaks _________. (crop) story.com/post/185600839473/amazing-wind-these-
4) We can protect our fields from wind by putting up wind-erosion-features-in
• Demonstrate they a ___________ (windbreak)
understand that water and 5) The mouth of the river had a lot of tiny pebbles What caused the rock to look like this? (wind)
wind can change the shape that had been ________ from upstream. (eroded)
of the land.
117
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Let us look at another picture. What caused these
• Distinguish between rocks to look similar? (water washed in and wore down the
weathering and erosion. rock)
• Compare ways to prevent
wind/water from changing
land shape.
• Explain at least two given
solutions to slow down or
prevent wind or water from
6) We call a pile of rocks assembled to hold back
changing the shape of the
shifting soil a ___________. (retaining wall)
land.
7) When sheep wander a field eating grass we say
they are_____________. (grazing)
• Distinguish between water
8) The traffic in the village was held up by a stalled
and wind erosion.
truck. Everyone had to drive around on another Retrieved from:
• Investigate the effects of
street. We would say they were _________(diverted) https://www.bayoffundy.com/about/geology/
wave action on the
9) The ______ of plants are very helpful for binding
environment (ST-4-LS-
the soil together so it isn’t easy for water to wash it When continuous flow of wind and water break away
ECS-10).
away. (roots) pieces of rock, we call it weathering. When the
• Plan and execute
10) When we seek out problems caused by water and pieces of rock are moved to another location we call
appropriate research using
wind in the community, we have to be clever to it erosion. Do you think these two processes happen
technological methodology
create _______ to those problems. (solutions) quickly or slowly? (slowly)
to solve environmental
challenges (ST-4-TE-TM- Vocabulary word charts to define terms: Water from tides and rainwater run off can have
1).
dramatic affects on coastal regions and agricultural
Retrieved from: hillsides.
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/340584790569110462/
Skills Can Students Identify Incidences if
Weather/Erosion?
118
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Observe that the processes
of weathering and erosion
take a long time but we can Determine if students can identify whether pictures are
readily see their long-term showing wind or water erosion taking place. Let them
effects. justify their answer.
• Classify a process as either
weathering or erosion.
• Devise a solution to a
problem of
weathering/erosion based
on careful observation of
historical pictures.
Photograph by Desmond Brown
• Hypothesize how diversion
Retrieved from:
of water can be an effective
https://theanguillian.com/2022/06/coastal-erosion-
erosion deterrent.
an-urgent-call-for-action/
• Hypothesize how retention
More Examples of Wind and Water Impacts
walls can be an effective
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-43_HBy9huc
erosion deterrent. Design Challenge.
(3:23 mins)
The sand is shifting on the ocean shore because of higher
• Hypothesize how placing tides than normal due to storms. Draw a picture in your
journal of a solution you might propose to keep the sand
plants on hillsides can be an Establishing Community Problems
effective erosion deterrent. from shifting further. Be prepared to defend your choice
Students will be directed to interview teachers and
of design (i.e. how will it work?)
people in the community to find out causes, effects
• Hypothesize how adding and solutions to wind and water weathering and
Creating models
windbreaks to a field can erosion. Suggested questions for the interview:
If you feel that your students have sufficient manual
protect crops.
dexterity, you might ask them to build a model of their
119
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Communicate to peers the solution using cardboard and simple materials such as • Have you ever noticed erosion taking place in
rationale behind models paper, glue, straws, coffee sticks or wood. your area, like in front of your yard, or on the
that explain dam, road or street?
weathering/erosion The teacher could use the following rubric to evaluate the • What do you think caused it?
problem solutions. model. • What was done about it?
• What can be done about it?
• Construct a model to
explain weathering/erosion
Learners will record responses on the interview sheet
control.
and bring them back to class to discuss with the
entire group.
Focus Question:
• Analyse information (field
Students, what have you learned about local
trip, interviews, pictures)
problems with erosion and how the public has
from the community in
responded with a solution.
order to formulate problem
solutions.
A Design Challenge: How to Prevent Erosion
• Interpret video to better A farmer has a hillside field that they use as
understand the slow pastureland for their sheep and goats. The rainy
process of season has caused erosion such that the rainwater has
weathering/erosion. begun to run in streams down the hillside and wash
away the hill. The farmer is concerned that there will
• Investigate the effects of be dangerous holes and steep inclines as a result of
wave action on the rains. Then his livestock (sheep and goats) will not
environment (ST-4-LS- Discussion What could this homeowner do or what have land to graze on (eat grass).
ECS-10). should they have done to avoid the problem in this
• Plan and execute picture? Let us make a quick erosion model of how water
appropriate research using can erode a hillside. Demo: teacher access tray and
technological methodology, place sand in it. Tilt the tray and pour water down
to solve environmental the side. Demonstrate for children how quickly
rainwater can wash away the soil on a slope.
120
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
challenges (ST-4-TE-TM-
1).
Attitudes/Values
• Show concern for
community problems
related to Retrieved from: https://www.nrdc.org/stories/soil-
weathering/erosion. erosion-101
Retrieved from:
https://teacher.scholastic.com/dirt/erosion/lab.htm
• Appreciate the importance Matching Solutions to Type of Erosion/Weathering
of windbreaks and long
walls in preventing erosion. Match the following methods to reduce erosion with the
Students let us talk about ways that might prevent
type of erosion it helps prevent/reduce.
the soil on a farmer’s hillside from eroding.
• Actively participate in class
discussions. Possible solutions:
What do you see in this picture? (a line of rocks)
• Work diligently to interpret What will happen when water runs down and meets
pictures and videos for the the rocks? (the water will fall into the rock line and follow
information they offer. the rocks)
• Contribute solutions to
identified issues of water
and wind erosion.
• Respect for evidence as
students explain their
results and conclusions
Do Erosion Solutions Pose an Environmental Risk?
drawn from their
investigations.
121
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Inventiveness- Suggest new Ask students to consider the following erosion solutions Retrieved from: Minnesota Stormwater Manual
ways of preventing water from the farmer hillside scenario namely:
and wind erosion. a) Diversion of water Students, this is an example of diverting the water.
b) Retaining walls This means to make another path that is less harmful
• Collaboration & c) Vegetation to create erosion-resistant soil to the hillside. Can you think of another way to
Ask them to work in groups (think/pair/share) and then divert the flowing rainwater? You could purposely
Cooperation- Work
offer at least two possible environmental impacts (good or make a trench or dig a stream bed, so all the rain
together with others to
bad) of the solutions. went in a special channel away from the soil.
investigate erosion in their
(divert waterways- wildlife dependence on water; rock wall-
surrounding.
endangering mobility for animals; plants to bind soil - more What solution do you see for the farmers problem
vegetation added to ecosystem). here in this picture?
• Stewardship/Respect for
Living Things- Show
Attitudinal test to have students show their feelings
sensitivity to living things
toward the importance of preventing wind and/or water
while conducting
erosion.
investigation and proposing
solutions on erosion.
Suggested sample attitudinal test:
• Safety- Observe safety
instructions while carrying
out investigations on wind
and water erosion.
Retrieved from:
• Display sensitivity and offer
https://www.ecolibriumvt.com/hardscapes
assistance to peers who may
have physical or learning
The farmer can build a wall to keep the soil from
challenges when conducting
moving down the hill. These piles of rocks are
practical and group work.
sometimes called retaining walls (or long walls)
because they retain the shape of the land by
maintaining the soil that has been eroded.
Using Technology to Assess
122
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Teacher-made Kahoot game to assess students’ Another Solution to the Farmer’s Problem- How
knowledge on causes, effects and solutions of water and Plants Can Help
wind erosion.
Sample question:
Retrieved from: https://graniteseed.com/blog/how-
do-plants-help-prevent-erosion/
Students, you will notice in this diagram that the
Have students create a scrapbook using pictures and
roots of a range of plants help to hold the soil
reports from field trips to compile causes, effects and
together and prevent erosion.
solutions of wind and/or water erosion.
Closure: Now that you see some possible solutions
to the farmer’s problem maybe this helps you think
about solutions to the problems of erosion in your
community?
Based on these discussions, each student should
report to the class a solution they would recommend
123
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
for a community problem they observed in their
earlier interviews.
How to Protect Against Wind That May Cause
Erosion
The farmer to avoid erosion of their fields containing
crops (fruits & vegetables) will sometimes plant a
row of trees to stop the wind.
Retrieved from:
https://www.thegreendirectory.net/blog/windbreak-
planning-design
Suggested causes, effects and solutions to wind and water
Windbreaks are rows of trees or shrubs that reduce
erosion:
the force of the wind. They can reduce soil erosion,
• Links to websites with content on causes, effects
increase crop yields and protect livestock from heat
and solutions to erosion
and cold. Windbreaks can shield buildings and roads
• https://www.ducksters.com/science/earth_scienc from drifting snow. They beautify the landscape and
e/erosion.php#:~:text=Wind%20can%20erode% provide travel routes and habitat for wildlife.
20by%20picking,more%20particles%20(called%20 Retrieved verbatim from:
abrasion). https://www.nvca.on.ca/Shared%20Documents/Th
124
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• https://kidskonnect.com/science/erosion/ e%20Benefits%20of%20Windbreaks%20Extension
%20Notes.pdf
Extended Assessment Items As a review of weathering and erosion the teacher
• Community-based projects to have students may refer to this video:
participate in community services to help in the https://www.generationgenius.com/videolessons/w
clean-up of areas affected by wind/water erosion. eathering-and-erosion-video-for-kids/ (12:25 mins)
• Interview recording with experts who will describe
Teacher Note: Particulars of weathering are
addressed later in the science curriculum.
causes and solutions to water and wind erosions.
• Journal entries to assess students’ ability to state
what they can do in situations of wind and/or
water erosions.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: (Links to professional sources that connect back to the Curriculum and Assessment Principles of
Learning and Principles of Assessment)
Link to Sample Lesson on Introduction to Erosion:
https://www.generationgenius.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Intro-to-Erosion-Lesson-Plan-GG.pdf
Wind & Water Changes - Weathering & Erosion Activities 2nd Grade Science Centers
https://www.teacherspayteachers.com/Product/Wind-Water-Changes-Weathering-Erosion-Activities-2nd-Grade-Science-Centers-
3417904?st=d6f3f25f075f0ec098222292c622ceee
125
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Inclusive Resources and Materials From Regional Specialists Use of multisensory activities and materials to assist all learners. (texts, family & community
knowledge and resources, contextually relevant professional web resources)
Extended Approaches to Discuss Impacts of Wind and Water
• Jigsaw to have students research causes, effects and solutions to wind and water erosion then have these students act as experts to discuss with
peers.
• Inviting a human resource personnel/professional to discuss causes, effects and solutions to wind and water erosion.
• Think-pair-share to have students discuss the importance of preventing wind and/or water erosions.
• ‘Fishbowl’ cooperative learning strategy to have students separate into an inner and outer circle. In the inner circle or fishbowl, students have a
discussion on causes, effects and solutions to wind and/or water erosion while students in the outer circle listen to the discussion and take notes.
• KWL chart to discuss what students “Know”, “Want to Know” and “Learnt” about wind and/or water erosion.
• Having students write a letter to the local Minister for Infrastructure and Physical Development, Public Utilities, Civil Aviation and
Transportation on the importance of constructing a long wall to prevent water erosion in an identified local area.
• Roleplaying the causes, effects and solutions to wind and/or water erosion through a real-life scenario.
• Creating a class video with students as a mini documentary to report causes, effects and solutions to wind and/or water erosion in a local area
then publishing this video on Flip, Grid or through a class YouTube channel.
• Roleplaying television/radio news on the causes, effects and solutions to wind and/or water erosion in a local area.
• Think-pair-share to have students think about solutions to wind and/or water erosion, then discuss with their peers then share with the whole
class.
• QAR strategy to answer questions based on passages read about wind and/or water erosions.
• Writing thank you cards to show appreciation to important people in their community who offer services to prevent water/wind erosion.
Additional Resources:
Interactive Websites: Interactive websites such as KidsGeo.com
Books: Weathering and Erosion (2014) by Torrey Maloof . Published by Teacher Created Materials
Field Trips: Field trips to natural/virtual history museums or geological sites can help students see firsthand the effects of fast and slow earth
movements.
126
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Collaborative Learning: Collaborative learning activities can help students learn about fast and slow earth movements in a fun and engaging way. For
example, group projects or class discussions can help students learn from one another and reinforce their understanding of the concepts.
PowerPoints, worksheets, hands-on experiments, scientific investigation activities, assessments, and homework projects that help teach children to
compare multiple solutions designed to slow or prevent wind or water from changing the shape of the land.
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in
the curriculum)
Mathematics:
• Accessing data on annual rainfall.
• Reading and interpreting graphs and charts on the communities affected by water erosion for given years.
• Using a grid to determine the area in square units of a plot of land affected by wind/water erosion.
Social Studies:
• Create audio recordings of the oral history stories to recount the experiences of villagers about wind and water erosion in their villages.
• Interviewing/ inviting important people in the community who offer their services to prevent water/wind erosion. This in turn, will showcase
careers related to these fields.
• Discussing the conservation of resources in the environment by preventing wind/water erosion.
• Looking at maps with areas affected by wind/water erosion.
• Discussing the effects on families who are affected by wind/water erosion.
• Having students vote for/against the erection of a long wall in their community to prevent erosion.
• Having students sign a petition for the erection of a long wall in their community to prevent erosion.
Language Arts:
• Practicing new vocabulary.
• communication skills through interview experience.
• Journaling of problem solutions (drawing and adding key words).
127
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
• Using oral and written language to communicate thoughts and feelings on issues regarding the causes, effects and solutions to wind/water
erosion.
TVET:
• Develop a model to represent an erosion problem solution.
• Building a rock wall.
• Redirecting a stream or constructing a rock channel.
• Sketching/Creating a design for a long wall to prevent erosion.
Agriculture:
• Understanding the importance of windbreaks in the survival of farmlands.
• Identifying the effects on crop yield and livestock in situations of water/wind erosion.
• Discussing economic challenges of farmers who are affected by wind/water erosion.
Health:
• Discussing safety measures in situations of wind/water erosion.
• Discussing ways of caring for the environment.
• Discussing the effects of wind/water erosion on the physical health of individuals.
Elements from Local Culture:
• The break water project at Sauteurs; See: https://caribbean.loopnews.com/content/protest-grenada-over-sauteurs-breakwater-project
• Use of Vetiver grass for soil stabilization in Saint Lucia. See: https://vimeo.com/540412046
• Erosion of Telescope beach. See: https://www.ctvnews.ca/sci-tech/encroaching-sea-already-a-threat-in-caribbean-1.1272251
• Use of “back walls” (highly reinforced stonewalls) to prevent landslides, use of gutters and pavements to channel water.
• Vermont River (e.g. Xmas Eve floods) and Georgetown flood which occurred due to the rivers overflowing their banks and changing their
course after heavy rains.
128
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
• Sea defense in Georgetown and Owia Fishery has triangle artificial stones.
• Use of local plants as windbreaks.
• Use of local plants to reduce landslides,
Resources for a learner who is struggling: (Links to earlier learning activities for similar knowledge, links to resources for special education
needs)
• Use of text-to-speech for students who have challenges with reading.
• Picture cards with wind/water erosion.
• Sample models depicting the causes, effects and solutions to wind/water erosion to promote hands-on learning.
• Visual charts and graphic organizers with pictures depicting causes, effects and solutions to wind/water erosion.
Resources for a learner who needs challenge: (Links to learning activities and resources in later grades)
• Use of classroom desktop/laptop for advanced students to research causes, effects and solutions to wind/water erosions
• Reading passages on wind and/or water erosions: https://www.teacherspayteachers.com/Product/Erosion-Reading-Passages-Differentiated-
2nd-Grade-Science-7921317
• Educational games on wind and/or water erosion: https://games.legendsoflearning.com/game/memoria-weathering-and-
erosion/1201?partner=legends-public&media=video
• https://games.legendsoflearning.com/game/walters-travels-weathering-and-erosion/1193?partner=legends-public&media=video
• Worksheets on wind and/or water erosion: https://www.kidsacademy.mobi/printables/erosion/
Strategies that Support the OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
129
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
An educated person in the OECS Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning outcome and associated
will demonstrate they have: lessons?
Developed Citizenship Students participating in community services to assist in the cleaning up of areas affected by wind/water erosion.
Competencies
Students writing a letter to the local Minister for Infrastructure and Physical Development, Public Utilities, Civil
Aviation and Transportation on the importance of constructing a long wall to prevent water erosion in an
identified local area.
Students participating in pageant shows with ‘Mr. and Mrs. Erosion Prevention’ to address the effects and
solutions of wind and/or water erosion in their communities.
Students signing petitions for the erection of a long wall in their community to prevent erosion.
Students voting for or against the erection of a long wall in their community to prevent erosion.
Developed Critical Thinking and Demonstrate a knowledge of different careers related to this field of science e.g. geologists, environmental
Ethical Communication conservationists etc.
Competencies
Students conducting projects to derive solutions to wind/water erosions.
Students answering questions about wind and water erosions.
Students role playing television/radio news on the causes, effects and solutions to wind and/or water erosion in
a local area.
Students creating posters and brochures on the causes, effects and solutions to wind and/or water erosion.
130
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Developed Well-being Students developing communication and collaboration skills in group work.
Competencies
Students building their competency in oral and written language.
Students developing their technological skills in using various technological tools and devices.
Students developing a positive attitude in caring for their environment.
Developed Knowledge and Students discussing ways to conserve the resources in their community by applying measures to prevent
Entrepreneurial Competencies wind/water erosion.
Students discussing economic challenges as a result of wind/water erosion.
Students discussing the finances needed to erect a long wall to prevent erosion.
131
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Purpose of the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes, and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an
attitude of caring not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced
by a systematic study of the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning
science, students benefit from leveraging and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their
relationship to it.
Topic or Strand: Earth Systems: Processes That Shape The Earth
Essential Learning Outcome (ELO-3): Develop a model to represent the shapes and kinds of land and bodies of water in an area.
[Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include quantitative scaling in models.]
Grade Level Guidelines: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Developing Students Descriptive Language- a Students have you ever heard the word landform?
guessing game
Knowledge A landform is any natural feature of the earth’s
The teacher will collect pictures of landforms. They surface.
• Define the following terms: will distribute these between pairs of students so they I want you to look at the following picture and tell
➢ Landform each have several pictures within the pair. They are me the landforms that you see (hills, rivers, mountain,
➢ Continents not allowed to show their partner the pictures they canyons, oceans, islands, volcano, desert, waterfall).
➢ Oceans have. One person in a pair of students will have to
➢ Pie Chart describe the landform they see on their picture They
➢ Fresh or still water can’t use the actual name to describe the picture, just
➢ Soft water words about it. They alternate between pictures to see
➢ Hard water how well the pair can describe landforms and guess
➢ Salt water (saline) the correct answer!
➢ Water Pollution
Teacher notes:
➢ Technology
• Use pictures or photographs of specific
➢ Oil Tankers
landforms such as mountains, hills, valleys,
➢ Fertilizer
and beaches.
➢ Effluents
➢ Reduce • Use diagrams or illustrations showing Retrieved from:
➢ Reuse different bodies of water like oceans, seas, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=07nrh786eP
➢ Recycle rivers, and lakes in the Caribbean. o
132
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
➢ Organic materials Student Story Telling (5:48 mins)
Ask children to go home and talk to their families The largest landforms on earth are the oceans and
• Define and identify locations of about the most interesting landforms or bodies of continents.
different landforms and bodies of water they have seen in the country or in other Continents are the land parts (green) of our earth
water in the Caribbean region, countries they may have visited. Children should and Oceans are the water parts (blue) of the earth.
such as hills, rivers, mountains, come to class prepared to tell their peers in a
canyons, oceans, islands, presentation about the landform and answer any
volcanoes, deserts, waterfalls, and questions.
estuaries.
• Identify the two major landforms
on the earth. Drawing Maps of Local Landforms
Have students create a map of their local area,
• Identify the 7 continents that make identify different landforms and bodies of water in
up the earth’s land masses. their surroundings, and explain how these
geographical features impact their daily lives. There are seven continents on the earth.
• Describe at least three means of
traveling over landforms. Rubric
Accuracy of Map 3 marks
• Compare and define different Explanation of landforms 5 marks
forms of water (fresh, hard, soft Neatness of Map 2 marks
and salt).
Local Area Art Project
• Provide examples of water Students can create an art project depicting one of
pollution. the landforms or bodies of water studied using
different interesting materials such as paper, pasta,
• Give three examples of how vegetables, fruits, recyclable materials etc. They can
technology has resulted in water include a label and short description of their
pollution (oil spill, fertilizer, features for display.
Landforms in my
industrial effluent).
Country
Rubric
• List 5 examples of land pollution. • Accurately depicts landform or water body. 5
marks
133
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Explain how the three R’s mitigate • Shows creativity and thoughtfulness. 3 marks The teacher should align several activities to build up
the effects of pollution. • Is well constructed using very interesting a list of landforms that is common to the students’
materials. 2 marks country. Students would be expected to keep a
• Explain the dangers of litter in the • Description is accurate and contains at least journal with drawn and labelled pictures of the
school and organize a clean-up two facts about the chosen landform or water landforms they have come to know about in their
project (ST-2-ESS-ER-4). body. 3 marks country.
• Description is written using complete
• Describe how pollutants affect sentences 2 marks This includes but is not limited to:
people’s activities and their health • A field trip in the community to see very
(ST-2-ESS-ER-8). Student Self Assessment local landforms. (collecting pictures with
Students can complete a self assessment checklist cellphones to make a PowerPoint® collage)
• Distinguish between activities that concerning their knowledge of landforms or water • Inviting experts and elders from the
harm and those that preserve bodies.
community to speak about the range of
habitat/the environment (ST-2-LS-
landforms in the country.
ECS-6). Sample checklist
• Pictures collected of exceptional landforms
• I can name at least four landforms
unique to the country.
• Define the term environmental • I can name at least four water bodies
• Regular and topographical maps that the
destruction and investigate the • I know which water bodies have fresh or
teacher can use in a demonstration lesson.
factors that cause and prevent tis saltwater
• Google Earth® perspectives of landforms (if
destruction (ST-2-LS-ECS-24). • I know which water bodies have running or
the technology is available) see:
still water
https://earth.google.com/web/
• I can describe the features of at least three
• Identify and discuss some of the landforms
After the teacher and students agree to a
unintended consequences of using • I can describe the features of at least three
comprehensive list, the teacher supplies materials
fuels for transport and production water bodies
and guidance in the group building of a classroom
of materials for commerce (e.g.,
model of their country’s landforms (or even more
pollution) (ST-3-PS-EN-5). As a school project, our class is going to set up
local their community landforms).
three bins outside our classroom. One for paper
• Define the term solid waste, products, one for recyclable plastic products and
Suggested materials:
identifying methods of managing one for organic materials (e.g., left over food, fruit
1) Plasticine or modeling clay and a flat cardboard
this waste in peels, vegetable skins etc.)
or wooden surface.
home/school/community-
134
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
recycling, composting. (ST-2-LS- Each student group of three is going to make a 2) Papier- mâché (flour & water), newsprint and a
ECS-23) poster that advertises the protection of our flat wooden surface. See:
landforms by directing school students to the https://www.instructables.com/Tools-and-
recycling program outside our classroom. Materials-for-Paper-Mache/
Skills Rubric From their journal entries students should make
Statement of the problem. 2 marks landform labels of the correct words to place on
• Interpret a pie chart. Explanation of three Rs. 5 marks their model (e.g. river, mountain etc.)
Creativity in design. 3 marks
• Classify the Caribbean region's
common landforms (e.g.,
Sample of model captured from:
mountains, hills, valleys, plains).
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GnpxyqxYbEA
• Compile information on regional
landforms from several sources.
• Use technology (Google Earth®)
to investigate landforms in the
region.
• Interpret pictures by careful
observation.
• Gather information from video
resources.
• Create posters to communicate the
need for responsible recycling.
• Construct a model or
representation (e.g., using clay, or
paper) that accurately depicts the
135
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
shapes and kinds of land and How do we Navigate Landforms?
bodies of water in their area. Students. Look at these three pictures and tell me
how humans travel over landforms.
• Group litter in their school
according to size, colour, what it is
made of, recyclable and non-
recyclable (ST-2-ESS-ER-3).
• Classify samples of water as hard
Retrieved from:
or soft by their ability to form
https://i0.wp.com/www.skabash.com/wp-
lather with soap, explain the
content/uploads/2022/05/ship-
advantages and disadvantages of
2500x1597.jpg?fit=940%2C600&ssl=1
both types of water (ST-3-ESS-
ER-11).
Attitudes/Values
• Appreciate that water and land are
important resources that must be
protected.
• To be curious about the shapes Retrieved from:
and kinds of land and bodies of https://www.intrepidtravel.com/adventures/wp-
water in their environment. content/uploads/2017/05/FU8A0260-88x450.jpg
• Collaborate with peers to discuss
and compare different landforms
and bodies of water found in the
Caribbean, fostering an
appreciation for the diversity and
uniqueness of the region's
geography.
136
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Demonstrate respect for the
environment by discussing ways to Retrieved from:
protect and preserve landforms https://static.toiimg.com/thumb/msid-
and bodies of water. 79681152,width-748,height-
499,resizemode=4,imgsize-228264/.jpg
• Demonstrate Stewardship/Respect
for living things that may be
Protecting the Landforms
affected by lack of clean water.
Water makes up more than half of the landform
• Demonstrate Stewardship/Respect
space on earth (71%) Let us look at this pie chart as
for living things that are impacted
a way of understanding how much water we have
adversely by pollution.
compared to land.
• Display sensitivity and offer
assistance to peers who may have
physical or learning challenges
when conducting practical and
group work.
• Participate actively in classroom
discussions.
• Unplanned and excessive science
and technological activities may
destroy the earth as we know it,
resulting in untold disasters (Oil
exploration, global warming) (ST-
2-STSE-2).
• Acknowledge that human-made
things hold the potential to pollute
the atmosphere and disrupt the We have different types of water on earth. Fresh
environment (ST-2-TE-UT-2). water or Still water is the purest form of water (we
137
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
sometimes call soft water) and it comes from
mountain runoffs and rivers. It has very little
dissolved in it, just pure water! Water can mix with
minerals easily like rocks (limestone) and we call that
hard water. The water in the ocean has mixed with
salt (like our table salt for cooking). We call that salt
water or saline.
As part of a balanced diet, we need to drink lots of
clean water. Our rivers and oceans support plants and
animals too. This tells us that water is important and
we must take care of it in all forms. Sometimes we are
careless, and we don’t think about hurting the water.
When we add unnatural things to water, we call it
water pollution.
Students tell me some ways that you have seen water
polluted in your community (garbage in the water, spills
of liquids near water supply).
Technology is referred to as a “way of adapting”.
Because humans naturally want to improve their
lifestyle, they adapt with technologies. But sometimes
technology causes problems for water.
Oil tankers are used to transport our fuel across the
world’s oceans but, if they sink or develop a leak it
causes problems for wildlife. This bird got covered in
oil from a ship that sunk in Spain.
138
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://safety4sea.com/cm-learn-
from-the-past-prestige-sinking-one-of-the-worst-oil-
spills-in-europe/
Retrieved from:
https://www.theguardian.com/pictures/image/0,85
43,-10304549059,00.htmlm
Many farmers will add fertilizer (a technology to
adapt farming) to their fields in order to make crops
grow faster and bigger. But sometimes the rain will
wash the fertilizer from the ground into the local
rivers. This can kill fish and plants that grow there
and we can’t use the water for drinking.
Sometimes processing plants that make new
products for us like carpets and clothing, food or
139
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
plastics will put their building beside a river. This
allows them to dump chemicals and waste
(effluents) into the river through pipes. The water is
then polluted by effluents.
We have to be careful because even though we want
to live better lives, our new technologies can cause
us problems if don’t manage them.
Air Pollution
When we burn fuels to heat homes, power
cars/trucks or operate factories, what do we notice
is produced children? (smoke). The smoke rises into
the atmosphere and affects the air we breath so it
can be a health problem. We call that smoke air
pollution.
Land Pollution is a Problem.
Land pollution affects our landforms too!
Students, list at least five examples of pollution on
land that you have seen in your community?
When we add garbage to our landforms we
sometimes call it solid waste. The plant and food
materials we can actually collect and use for fertilizer.
This is called composting.
In order to protect our land, we need to think about
the three R’s
Reduce: means to stop using so many manmade
products (like plastic) because it is convenient to
throw away.
140
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Reuse: means using items in our lifestyle over and
over e.g., instead of a Styrofoam® cup and throwing
it away, we reuse a glass cup.
Recycle: some products we use everyday can be
donated to a processing plant that can break them
down and then make new products from them (e.g.,
you may have seen recycled paper that can be used
again; you may have seen recycled plastics that can be
used to make new products.
Review of Landforms
As student watch the following videos, they should
make their own list of the 20 landforms that are
mentioned.
https://youtu.be/6vrIg8P9ERg (4:46 mins)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b-IBCpenyKg
(7:59 mins)
Landform Song:
To the tune of Frere Jacques (listen to melody here:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QI0abuwq31g
)
Hills and mountains
Hills and mountains
Rivers and streams
Rivers and streams
Waterfalls and oceans
These are all landforms
Sing with me, sing with me!
141
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: (Links to professional sources that connect back to the Curriculum and Assessment Principles of
Learning and Principles of Assessment)
Glossary of terms
Landform is a natural feature on the surface of the Earth, such as mountains, hills, valleys, fields, plateaus, or islands.
A mountain is a big piece of land that rises high above the rest of the land around it. It usually has steep sides and a pointed or rounded top.
A hill is a rounded, raised piece of land higher than the surrounding land but not as steep as a mountain.
A valley is a low area of land between hills or mountains where a river or stream usually flows.
Plain: An area of land that is either flat or slightly rolling, with few or no hills or mountains.
Plateau: A big, flat, elevated area of land that is higher than the land around it. Its edges are usually steep cliffs.
An island is a piece of land surrounded by water on all sides.
Peninsula: A piece of land surrounded on three sides by water but is only linked to the mainland on one side.
Coastline: The coast is where land meets the sea or ocean.
A beach is an area of sand, dirt, or small rocks near the water.
A river is a big stream of water flowing across land and usually empties into another body of water, like a lake, sea, or ocean.
A lake is a big body of freshwater water that is usually surrounded by land and is in the middle of the land.
A pond is a small body of shallow water that is usually filled with fresh water. It is smaller than a lake.
A gulf is a large part of a sea or ocean partly surrounded by land and has a small opening to the open water.
A bay is an area of water partly surrounded by land but has a wider entrance than a gulf.
An estuary (local name: bushiree) is a body of water on the coast partly surrounded by land and where freshwater from a river or stream mixes with
saltwater from the ocean or sea.
Coral reefs are ridges or mounds of coral polyps that grow and stick together in warm, shallow water.
Mangroves are a type of tree or shrub that grows in tropical coastal places and has special adaptations to live in saltwater environments.
A wetland is an area of wet or underwater land, like a marsh, swamp, or bog.
A cave is a natural underground room or group of rooms. They are usually made by the erosion of soft rocks like limestone.
Mountains:
The Caribbean region has several mountain ranges, including the Blue Mountains in Jamaica.
Teach students about the characteristics of mountains, such as their height and steep slopes.
Rivers:
The Caribbean region has several rivers, including the Orinoco River in Venezuela and the Paradise River in Grenada.
Introduce students to rivers as flowing bodies of water that start from a source (such as a mountain) and empty into another body of water (such as a
lake or an ocean).
Lakes:
142
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Explain to students that lakes are bodies of water surrounded by land and can be freshwater or saltwater. Emphasize their importance as habitats for
plants and animals.
Example: Grand Etang Lake in Grenada
Oceans:
The Caribbean Sea is a large body of water in the Caribbean region and is part of the Atlantic Ocean.
Teach students that the Caribbean Sea connects to the Gulf of Mexico and is home to many islands and coral reefs. Help them understand the concept
of an ocean as a vast expanse of saltwater covering most of the Earth's surface.
Other notable landforms in the Caribbean include beaches, coral reefs, and cays (small, low-lying islands).
Familiarise students with these landforms by explaining that beaches are sandy areas along the coast, coral reefs are underwater structures supporting
diverse marine life, and cays are small islands often found in clusters.
Encourage hands-on activities, visual aids (maps, pictures), and discussions to engage students and reinforce their understanding of landforms and
bodies of water in the Caribbean region.
Landforms:
Mountains: Tall, rugged landforms with steep slopes and often pointed peaks.
Hills: Smaller landforms with rounded or sloping tops and gentler slopes than mountains.
Valleys: Low-lying areas between mountains or hills, often with rivers running through them.
Deserts: Dry, barren areas with little vegetation and very little rainfall.
Bodies of Water:
Oceans: Large bodies of saltwater covering most of the Earth's surface.
Seas: Smaller bodies of saltwater partially enclosed by land.
Lakes: Bodies of freshwater surrounded by land.
Rivers: Flowing bodies of water that usually start in mountains or hills and flow into lakes, seas, or oceans.
Streams: Smaller flowing bodies of water that may flow into rivers.
Ponds: Small bodies of freshwater, usually shallower than lakes.
Waterfalls: Places where rivers or streams flow over a steep drop in elevation.
Characteristics and Features:
Landforms:
Elevation: Landforms can be high or low in relation to sea level.
Shape: Landforms have distinct shapes such as pointed (mountains), rounded (hills), or flat (plains).
Soil and Vegetation: Different landforms support different types of soil and vegetation.
Formation: Landforms are shaped by various forces like erosion, tectonic activity, or volcanic activity.
Bodies of Water:
Size: Bodies of water can vary in size from small ponds to vast oceans.
Salinity: Oceans and seas are saltwater bodies, while lakes and rivers are typically freshwater.
143
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Currents: Water bodies can have currents that affect the movement of water and influence their ecosystems.
Depth: Bodies of water can be shallow or deep, with varying depths across different areas.
Aquatic Life: Different bodies of water support diverse ecosystems and aquatic life.
By comparing and contrasting these landforms and bodies of water, teachers can help students develop an understanding of the natural features and
characteristics of the Earth's surface.
Inclusive Resources and Materials From Regional Specialists Use of multisensory activities and materials to assist all learners. (texts, family &community
knowledge and resources, contextually relevant professional web resources)
Primary Science for the Caribbean Mission: Science Book
https://kids.nationalgeographic.com/
https://www.education.com/resources/?q=landforms
https://www.teacherspayteachers.com/Browse/Search:grade%202%20landforms
Sand and Water Play: Students can make islands, mountains, hills out of the sand, and seas, rivers, and lakes out of the water.
Playdough Creations: They can use their hands to shape rocks, hills, volcanoes and islands.
Map making: Give things like rough papers, cardboard, and fabric representing different types of land and water. Students can cut and paste these
pieces onto a base map and add names and symbols to show where certain things are.
Virtual Field Trip: Use technology to take your kids on virtual field trips to different places in the Caribbean. Get students to talk about what they see
and explain what they see.
Sensory Bin Exploration: Create a sensory bin by filling a container with rice, sand, or beans. Add small plastic toys or models of Caribbean landforms
and bodies of water to the bin. Students can explore the bin using their hands, scoop and pour the materials, and identify and discuss the features they
encounter.
Nature Walk and Collecting: Take students on a nature walk around the school or community to look at and collect natural items that reflect different
types of land and bodies of water. Students can collect rocks, seashells, leaves, and other things that can be used to sort, organise, and make visual
displays or collages.
Additional Resources:
Some recommended books include:
"Me on the Map" by Joan Sweeney
"Geography from A to Z: A Picture Glossary" by Jack Knowlton
"Geography: Know Your World" by Richard Bowood
YouTube Channels: National Geographic Kids, SciShow Kids, and Crash Course Kids
https://kids.nationalgeographic.com.
144
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in
the curriculum)
Mathematics:
• Reading charts and graphs.
• Classify different geometric shapes in the landforms and bodies of water. They can learn about shapes such as circles (e.g., lakes), squares (e.g.,
fields), and triangles (e.g., mountains).
• Measure the length, width, and height of mountains, the circumference of lakes, or the area of fields using non-standard units (e.g., hand spans,
paper clips) or standard units (e.g., centimetres, meters).
• Use mapping skills to draw and interpret simple maps, including symbols to represent various features like mountains, rivers, lakes and islands.
Social Studies:
• How water is used as a resource.
• Demonstrating map reading skills.
• Cultural and historical significance of landforms and bodies of water in a region.
• The impact of human activities on the environment and the importance of conservation.
Language Arts:
• Using new words and expressions in conversations and presentations.
• Demonstrating adequate oral presentation skills.
• Reading nonfiction texts to get information about landforms and bodies of water.
• Songs and books about landforms.
TVET:
• 3D modelling
• Using materials like playdough to construct models that mimic real geographical features.
Agriculture:
• The impact of landforms on agriculture, such as how the slope of the land affects water drainage and crop cultivation.
• Water bodies and their importance to agriculture; basic soil types.
Health:
• Why all water is not safe to drink; Making water safe to drink.
• Landforms and bodies of water can provide opportunities for outdoor activities and exercise, such as hiking and swimming.
Elements from Local Culture:
Each country will have landforms that have cultural, spiritual or heritage significance.
These landforms may be part of regular celebrations that the teacher should recognize and expose their students to.
145
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Depictions of early Carib & Arawak boats for travel between islands
and fishing
Pictures retrieved from:
https://www.britannica.com/topic/Carib
https://members.tripod.com/livi_d/history/history.htm
• Make connections to history, travel and spread of the Tinos and Kalinagos.
• Mountains, limestone, cays, rivers, beaches, waterfalls, salt ponds, mangroves, ocean, waterfalls (e.g., Falls of Baleine and Darkview Falls).
• Fresh water springs and mineral springs (e.g. Belair Mineral Spa).
• Sulphur springs, valleys
Resources for a learner who is struggling: (Links to earlier learning activities for similar knowledge, links to resources for special education
needs)
• Websites like Khan Academy, National Geographic Kids, and BBC Bitesize offer interactive lessons, videos, and games that can help children
understand geography concepts, including landforms and bodies of water.
• Field trips or nature walks to observe and explore real-life examples of landforms and bodies of water in your local area.
• Provide learners with physical materials such as clay, playdough, or building blocks to create different landforms and bodies of water.
• Utilize visual aids like posters, charts, or flashcards displaying different landforms and bodies of water.
• Age-appropriate picture books that illustrate different landforms and bodies of water.
146
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
• Make some simple and easily understandable social stories or visual narratives about the many types of land and water features.
• Memory match game with peers.
• Interactive notebooks using picture cut outs and printed words.
Resources for a learner who needs challenge: (Links to learning activities and resources in later grades)
(https://kids.nationalgeographic.com/) and BBC Bitesize (https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/levels/z3g4d2p) provide interactive activities and quizzes
on landforms that are appropriate for students in the second grade. These activities can provide a stimulating, and challenging learning environment.
Strategies that Support the OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning
outcome and associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies Discuss the importance of preserving and protecting the land and bodies of
water in the local area.
Engage students in discussions about environmental issues and brainstorm ways
to take action as responsible citizens.
Encourage students to share their models and findings with the local community
through presentations or exhibitions.
Explore opportunities for community service related to environmental
conservation.
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication Engage students in activities that require critical thinking, such as identifying
similarities and differences between various landforms and bodies of water or
Competencies
categorizing them based on their characteristics.
Developed Well-being Competencies Promote group discussions where students can share their observations,
findings, and thoughts.
Encourage active listening, respectful communication, and the consideration of
different viewpoints.
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies Recognizing local features of the landforms may prepare students well to be
tourism advocates.
147
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Purpose of the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of
caring not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic study of
the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from leveraging
and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it.
Topic or Strand: Earth Systems: Processes That Shape The Earth
Essential Learning Outcome (ELO-4): Obtain information to identify where water is found on Earth and that it can be solid or liquid
Grade Level Guidelines:. Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Using a Map or Globe to Identify Water Situating the Importance of Water
• Have students look at a globe and colour the Students have you have ever thought about all the water
Knowledge land masses in brown and bodies of water in we use every day? Let’s write down some examples you
• Define the terms: blue. might think of (wash my face, bathing, drinking, washing dishes,
o conserve toilets, washing our fruits and vegetables).
o sphere We sometimes think that water is always going to be
o ocean available for us to use but some places in the world
o sea people have to be very careful to conserve water.
o north pole Conserve means to save it and use it only when we need
o south pole to. We should never waste water because we never know
o solid water when it will run it.
o glacier
o liquid water Students, can you tell the class when have you heard of
o ground water someone running out of water at their home, on a farm,
o hail • Students draw pictures of the different places at their business?
o sleet where water sources can be found.
o snow Where water can be found on Earth?
o fresh water • On a blank map of your country/ island colour
o salt water the places where water can be found in blue. Today we are going to talk about where all of water
o precipitation comes from. If we know this, maybe we can be more
o solids • Pupils visit different areas in their island where careful to conserve our water so we have it for all of
o liquids different sources of water can be found and those things you told me about.
o gas add labelled drawings to their journal.
148
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
o water vapor Have you ever wondered where water is found on earth?
o condensation • Pupils are to make their own model of the Give me some examples that you know of (river, rain,
o collection Earth to show where sources of water can be lakes, ocean, sea).
o evaporation found.
o water cycle The teacher assists students in this activity. Have you ever seen a globe? It is a model of the earth.
o freezing Create Your Own Earth Model | Education.com You can see that it looks like a round ball, we call it a
o melting sphere.
o temperature Recalling the Sources of Water
o thermometer Teacher can read these to students have a show of Note: If the teacher has access to a globe they can bring
o water pollution hands for the answer. it into class, otherwise a picture of a globe as below
o reuse should suffice.
o recycle Where is most of Earth's water?
o reduce A. rivers B. lakes C. oceans Take a look at this picture of a globe. I have some
Water can be found in oceans, lakes and ponds. questions for you!
• Identify where water can be True False
found on Earth. The earth has more water than land.
• Show where water can be True False
found in its different forms
(solid, liquid) on Earth. Other Quiz Tools here:
• Compare and describe Teacher may decide to use an electronic recall quiz
here:
different bodies of water.
Bodies Of Water Free Activities online for kids in 2nd
• Use a globe or map to show
grade by Kathy Gordon (tinytap.com)
that planet Earth is made up
Retrieved from:
of more water than land.
Pupils complete a quiz, identifying where water is https://s3-ap-southeast-2.amazonaws.com/wc-
• What is a water cycle?
found on earth. prodpim/JPEG_1000x1000/SMGL1_studymate_globe.j
• How do the particles in a
Free 2nd Grade Science Flashcards - Identify where pg
solid compare to a liquid and
water is on Earth (varsitytutors.com)
a gas?
• Observe different types of Pupils complete a worksheet identifying water sources. Questions:
weather -rainy, sunny, cloudy Sources of water worksheet (liveworksheets.com) Which part do you think is the water? (blue area)
windy (ST-2-ESS-EW-1). It is really large. The biggest blue areas are called oceans
and seas. Examples would be the Atlantic ocean here
149
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Design, draw and label a Pupils match the source of water to its definition in the (show students) and the Caribbean sea here. (show students).
simple diagram to indicate the table. In other parts of the world we have the Mediterranean
water cycle (ST-2-ESS-EW-5). Sea (show students) and the Black Sea(show students). You can
• State at least 3 properties of glaciers Water as a gas, cools and tell by the blue area that seas are smaller than oceans.
Look here, this the Pacific Ocean (show students), it is
water. (ST-2-ESS-ER-11).
converts to liquid and is stored
much larger than the Caribbean sea (show students).
• Identify and list at least 3 uses here.
of water (ST-ESS-ER-12).
Which part do you think is the land? (colored areas)
• State that water can change lake a continuous body of salt water
Let us see if we can find our country on the globe. Here it
from solid to liquid and from on the earth surface
is!
liquid to solid (St-2-PS-MM-
river land consisting of swamps
7).
Different Forms of Water
• Describe the conditions that
ocean a large area of water Look at this picture. Do you know what it is?
cause the changes (ST-2-PS-
surrounded by land
MM-8).
• Identify and name the ground water that occurs below the
elements of weather (water water surface of the Earth
vapor, precipitation) (ST-3-
ESS-EW-2). clouds a large natural stream of water
• Describe and demonstrate flowing in the sea.
how clouds are formed (ST-3-
ESS-EW-3). Forms of Water
• Identify the heat source that Draw a picture that shows that you know three
powers nature’s water cycle, different forms that water might take.
and explain the process (ST-
3-ESS-EW-7). Which picture shows water in liquid form?
• Describe how temperature
affects weather (ST-3-ESS-
EW-8). Retrieved from:
https://www.worldwildlife.org/pages/six-ways-loss-of-
Skills arctic-ice-impacts-everyone
• Identify bodies of water and
land on a map or globe.
Let me give you a hint.
150
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
In other parts of the world (especially at the top and
• Distinguish salt water and Retrieved from: bottom – show globe) the sun’s rays only indirectly reach
fresh water. https://cdn.pixabay.com/photo/2017/12/14/17/33/ them so it gets very cold there.
matterhorn-3019429__340.jpg
• Observe and describe the What is this picture?
physical changes that occur
when water freezes, melts,
and evaporates.
• Observe and interpret a
condensation experiment.
Retrieved from:
https://cdn.pixabay.com/photo/2014/09/21/14/39/r
• Classify the various sources of
ain-455124__340.jpg Retrieved from:
water on earth as solid, liquid
https://cdn.pixabay.com/photo/2018/06/29/23/01/ice
or gas.
-cubes-3506782__340.jpg
• Show how a thermometer can
You are right- these are ice cubes-How do we make
measure the temperature.
them? (we freeze water in the refrigerator)
• Measure the temperature of
In those parts of the globe where it gets really cold, some
frozen water, water and
Retrieved from: of the water is actually frozen, just like an ice cube! We
boiling water.
https://cdn.pixabay.com/photo/2019/02/04/13/12/i call those places on the globe, the North Pole and the
cicle-3974617__340.jpg South Pole (show students on the globe).
• Label a diagram of the water
cycle. Flashcard Games for Identifying states of water We know from scientific studies that those poles have a
Free 2nd Grade Science Flashcards - Explain how lot of water frozen! We call frozen water solid water
• Use fists to demonstrate water on Earth can be solid or liquid because it takes up space just like a rock. The frozen
particle distance in solids, (varsitytutors.com) water you saw in the picture above is called a glacier.
liquids and gas. When the sun shines on a glacier, it melts and that water
Physical Change in state in matter. trickles into the sea water. Liquid water is what we see
• Use fist model to explain the Using the words below, label the diagram showing the coming out of our tap. It can be pumped from a rain
processes in the water cycle physical states of matter. water tank but also from a well underground. The water
151
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
(evaporation, condensation, down in the earth is called groundwater. It can be
precipitation). poured into many different containers, so it doesn’t have
Solid Liquid Gas Evaporation
the same shape all the time. Liquid water also falls from
• Debate the importance of Melting Freezing the sky as rain. In some parts of the world where it gets
water conservation. very cold the rain falling from the sky freezes and fall as
ice pellets called hail or sleet or fluffy flakes we call
• Apply the reuse, recycle and snow.
reduce model to community
As a review the teacher can show this graphic organizer.
improvement.
• Observe the evaporation and
condensation of water (ST-3-
ESS-EW-6).
• Collect and compare
Retrieved from:
measurements of rainfall,
https://d1uvxqwmcz8fl1.cloudfront.net/tes/resources
Retrieved from: https://image.slidesharecdn.com/water-
temperature, wind direction
/11585539/4844b66a-d096-49bc-a7bf-
160513085810/95/water-survival-of-living-being-9-
and windspeed during a
b4c2316ba771/image?width=1000&height=190&versi
638.jpg?cb=1463130220
specific period (ST-2-ESS-
on=1493059500289
EW-7).
Other sources of Water
Web-Based Resources
Students do you know of other places we find water
• Use a thermometer to Pupils play a game identifying the different forms of
besides the ocean, seas and solid water at the poles?
measure temperature and, water
Where can we catch fish? (rivers, streams, lakes etc)
explain how the device works Forms Of Water Free Games | Activities | Puzzles |
(ST-3-ESS-EW-9). Online for kids | Preschool | Kindergarten | by apart
I have two glasses of water here. One is from a nearby
from sKOOL (tinytap.com)
river (or lake) and one is from the ocean. When I taste
them, they are very different (NOTE: you can also supply
Attitudes/Values Labelling The Water Cycle
individual samples to students).
• Appreciation: Students will
The ocean water tastes like salt, like the salt we put on
develop an appreciation for
our food. The river water doesn’t have a salty taste. We
the importance of water as a
sometimes call the river water fresh water. The glaciers
152
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
precious natural resource and at the poles are frozen fresh water. Oceans and seas are
recognize the need for salt water.
conservation efforts.
Nearly all of earth's available water is in the oceans. Most
• Interest/Curiosity: Students freshwater is in glaciers or underground. Only a tiny
will develop a deep interest fraction is in streams, lakes and rivers.
and curiosity in the topic of
water by exploring and In some countries fresh water runs underground and
investigating its properties, flows into wells that can be pumped for drinking.
distribution, and importance
to living things. Properties and Uses of Water
• Inventiveness: Students will Students, we know that water is a liquid. As a liquid, what
are its properties?
use their creativity and
inventiveness to develop and ➢ Takes the shape of a container
implement solutions to real- ➢ Has a definite volume
world water-related problems, ➢ Can be poured
such as water pollution, Water is all around us. Can you name at least three uses
scarcity, and distribution. Retrieved from: of water?
https://www.craftingjeannie.com/water-cycle- ➢ Drinking
• Active Participation: worksheets/ ➢ Washing ourselves
Students will participate ➢ Washing clothes & dishes
actively in classroom Temperature of water in various conditions. ➢ Watering plants
Look at this picture students.
discussions related to water,
developing critical thinking Water from The Sky: The Water Cycle
What is this instrument called? (thermometer)
and communication skills
through classroom debates, What does it measure? (temperature) We also know that water falls from the sky in the form of
discussions and presentations rain. We call rain a form of precipitation.
about water. Why does that happen?
Foundational Ideas
• When conducting practical
and group work, display
153
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
sensitivity and offer assistance Complete the following fun facts on boiling and Begin with a discussion about the particles that make up
to peers who may have freezing. solids, liquids and gases. Get children to stand up and
physical or learning mimic the teachers’ fist actions as you explain.
challenges. 1. Pure water boils at ____________. (100 degrees
Celsius). Use your fists to show children that particles that make
2. Pure water freezes at ___________. (0 degrees up solids are close together. (keep fists close). Tell them
Celsius) that with heat the particles begin to move and get farther
3. Where on the earth would you expect there to apart (move fists apart) These are called liquids. Lastly
be cooler temperatures and therefore glaciers. explain that with even more heat the particles will get
_____________ (North or south pole) enough energy to move far apart and form what we call a
4. Name three types of precipitation. (rain, sleet, gas.
snow)
5. The Caribbean region doesn’t often get sleet
and snow because ___________. (it isn’t cold Next you will perform a demonstration experiment (or
enough for the rain to freeze) show pictures- see below) and use discussion to help
students understand what is happening.
Physical Activity
Everyone stand up. Teacher Demonstration
A. Use your fists to show me what happens when Retrieve two plastic two liter bottles. Cut them in half and
water evaporates from a lake (fists coming apart throw away the tops. Place ice in one half bottle (bottle
and moving). #1) . Place boiling water in the other half bottle (bottle
B. Use your fists to show me liquid water as it #2).
cools in the clouds and condenses to make Now place bottle #1 (ice) on top of bottle #2 (hot water)
rain (fists coming closer together and slowing down). and you will see condensation forming at the bottom of
True or False bottle #1.
Write T if the statement is true or F if it is false.
• We don’t need water. (F)
• People should use water wisely. (T)
• Keeping the tap opened while brushing our teeth is
good. (F)
154
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Reusing and recycling things can reduce water
pollution. (T)
• Life would not be possible without water. (T)
Students, why did this happen? Let us see if we can
Water conservation explain this using our fists?
Look at the pictures. What message are they trying to
explain? The particles that make up liquid water get heated up to
(Water is important, don’t waste it, we should save water) boiling. This makes them move apart and become a gas
(show me with your fists what liquids look like- that is
right, not as tightly packed as the solid) Now when we
heat the liquid our fists come further apart- that is the
liquid getting energy and becoming a gas and moving in
many directions. Let us look at our bottles again… as the
gas moves up to the cold bottle (#2) it starts to slow
down and the particles get closer together again (show me
with your fists) and becomes a liquid. That is why we see
drops of water, the water as a gas (called water vapor)
gets cold and forms a liquid again. We call that
condensation.
retrieved from:
https://www.pinterest.ca/pin/620863498642885957/
So let us take our experiment with the bottles and apply it
https://www.pinterest.ca/pin/201958364525040837/
to the water in the world.
This diagram can help us. It is called the water cycle.
Maybe we can guess why they call it a cycle!
Differentiated Activities
Provide students with materials to paint, draw or color
their own posters depicting water conservation.
Children must demonstrate at least 3 practices in their
community that would reduce the wasting of water.
Organize a class exhibition to showcase their work and
have others appreciate the importance of water.
155
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Rubric:
3 strategies to reduce consumption 5 marks Adopted from: The State of Water in the Water Cycle. (2016).
Neat and demonstrative artwork 5 marks Whale Coast Conservation.
Clear explanation of poster 5 marks https://whalecoastconservation.org.za/the-state-of-
water-in-the-water-cycle/
Water Pollution worksheet: Identify the different items
that add to water pollution in the worksheet. Let us use our fists to pretend we are liquid water in the
ocean, lake or stream. These places are where water is
part of collection. The sun warms us up and our particles
(fists) get farther apart and become water as a gas (water
vapor). We call this evaporation. The water as a gas rises
into the sky where it gets cold. Because it is cold, the
particles get closer together again (fists get closer) and
becomes liquid water again. We call that condensation
(just like our bottle experiment) It collects up in clouds
and when it gets really heavy, it falls as liquid water. If it is
warm it falls as rain. If it is cold outside, it falls as sleet or
snow. We call all of those forms (rain, sleet, snow)
precipitation.
So why do we call it a water cycle students?
(the water goes up from the lakes into the clouds and then falls back
down again- over and over-that is a cycle)
Retrieved from: As review of the water cycle, the teacher may find it
https://www.liveworksheets.com/bz553023pd useful for students to watch the following video and
think about water as a liquid and water as a gas.
Teacher may work with the children to write a poem or Afterwards have them use their fists to explain that water
song entitled “Water, Water Everywhere” that cycle.
emphasizes the new vocabulary. See Water cycle video here
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s0bS-SBAgJI
(2.43 mins)
156
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Teacher can assist students to dramatize a short skit on
the conservation and proper use of water. As a review the teacher can show this graphic organizer.
Teacher may set up a “pro” and “con” debate on the
use of water in the community.
Retrieved from:
https://image.slidesharecdn.com/unit8wateronearth-
150221201505-conversion-gate01/95/unit-8-water-on-
earth-6-638.jpg?cb=1488739492
Review of Water Sources
Watch the video below and list or draw a picture of 4
places water can be found.
https://youtu.be/zn9sdF4fysg (2:14 mins)
157
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Graphic Organizer to Summarise
Useful book to support the curriculum outcome:
Olien, Rebecca (2005) Sources of Water. Capstone Press.
Electronic version here:
https://books.google.dm/books?id=GPouAlZWuxoC&
printsec=frontcover&source=gbs_ge_summary_r&cad=
0#v=onepage&q&f=false
Physical changes of water in the solid, liquid and gaseous
states in more detail.
We know that water is around us in different forms.
Students, let us review with these pictures.
158
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wclY8F-UoTE
(4:34 mins)
Adopted from: Admin. (2022). Changing States Of
Matter - Solid, Liquid And Gas | Phase Change. BYJUS.
https://byjus.com/physics/changing-states-of-matter/
Students are brought to the Science
laboratory/kitchen where the teacher will
demonstrate to students as they observe the physical
changes in water.
● Teacher brings students to the drinking water
trough and students are asked to open the tap and
talk about the water’s physical state (Students will
describe the water flows and it is a liquid).
● Now students, if you want the water from the tap
to become hard (solid), what can be done to it?
159
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
(We can put it in a container and place it in the freezer.
We can freeze it.)
The physical change in state of water from a liquid to a
solid is called freezing.
● Now students look at the ice in this glass. If we
decide to leave it in the sun for 10 minutes what
do you think will happen to the ice? (It will melt. It
will become water.)
The physical change in state of water from a solid to a
liquid is called melting.
Measuring when the change happens
Who has heard of the word temperature? What does it
mean? (how hot it is outside)
Temperature is how hot or cold something is.
Temperature - 2nd Grade Math - Class Ace. (n.d.). Class Ace.
https://www.classace.io/learn/math/2ndgrade/temperat
ure
The temperature of an object is measured in “Degree
Celsius ( ૦C)or Degree Fahrenheit” (૦F). A
thermometer is an instrument used to measure
temperature. The liquid inside the thermometer expands
(gets larger) when it is heated because the molecules get
energy to move further apart.
160
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The teacher should take a glass of ice cubes filled water
and show children that we can measure the temperature
that freezing and melting is happening (establish as zero
degrees Celsius).
The teacher will put a pot to heat then pour water in
the heated pot.
● Now students, can you describe what you
observed when the water is poured into the hot
pot. What happened to the water in the pot? (It
disappeared, it evaporated, it turned into steam “gas”)
● Have students use their fists to show/explain why
the liquid turned to gas.
The physical change in state of water from a liquid to a
gas is called evaporation.
The teacher should show children that we can measure
the temperature of the water in the boiling pot when
liquid water turns to water gas (establish as 100 degrees
Celsius).
The teacher may use the following video to show how
temperature is measured.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J157oziu3zQ (9:00
mins)
Water is important to us!
161
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Water is a very precious resource. A resource is
something that is useful to us. Plants and animals need
water to live. Students, what do you use water for?
(Bathing, washing, drinking, cooking, cleaning etc.)
Let’s listen to a story about how water is important to us.
Listen for some other ways water is important to us.
(Fishing, playing, working, planting etc.)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jS1xbmvcb00 (0:00
– 2:42 mins)
What would it be like without water at home? (It would
not be good at all; we wouldn’t be able to wash, cook,
drink, clean etc.)
Water Conservation- We should save water!
Water is very important for our daily lives and for us to
survive but did you know that there is a limited amount
of water on our planet? This means that we need to be
careful with how much water we use and make sure that
we don't waste it.
Students, what are some ways that people waste water?
(Leaving the tap open when not in use especially when
brushing your teeth, taking long baths, using too much
water when doing certain chores like washing etc.)
What do you think would happen if we continued to
waste water? (It will soon run out. We won’t be able to
get enough to use in our homes and gardens, it will affect
162
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
the water pressure especially for people living in high
areas).
Let’s see how we can save water by watching this video.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nEJSFSKwEtQ
(4:2 5 mins)
So how can we save water?
•Turn off the tap when you are brushing your teeth or
washing your hands.
•Take shorter showers instead of long baths.
•Fix any leaks in your house, such as dripping taps or
running toilets.
•Use a watering can instead of a hosepipe to water your
plants.
•Only use the washing machine and dishwasher when
they are full.
Water Pollution
Take students to a nearby river.
Students, look at the water and around it. Is there an
abundance of plant and animal life that depends on the
water?
Do you also see that there is trash/garbage polluting
(dirtying) the river? This is called water pollution. Water
pollution happens when harmful things like
trash/garbage, chemicals, or dirty things get into our
water. This can make the water unsafe for animals and
163
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
plants that live in the water, and also for people who
drink it or use it for other things like swimming or
fishing.
Make a list of the things that you observe polluting the
water. (bottles, snack wrappers, plastic bags etc.)
How do you think they got there? (people littering,
dumping trash/rubbish in the rivers)
What can we do to prevent water pollution?
(Reuse, Recycle and Reduce)
● Reuse means finding ways to use something
again instead of throwing it away.
● Recycle means turning something old into
something new.
● Reduce means using less of something. By
practicing these three things, we can all help take
care of our planet and make it a better place to
live!
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: (Links to professional sources that connect back to the Curriculum and Assessment Principles of
Learning and Principles of As
charts with sources of water
Worksheets
https://i.ytimg.com/vi/--t1cRc8fe0/maxresdefault.jpg
https://5.imimg.com/data5/ECOM/Default/2022/7/MK/YD/IN /2074628/10x14-92-500x500.png
https://www.diduknowonline.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/Water-Pollution.jpg
https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:1400/0*bj7Qs35H2Wo_awSo.jpg
164
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
https://www.liveworksheets.com/ko2797394cu
https://www.liveworksheets.com/sf1308667gz
https://www.liveworksheets.com/xu708319cl
Inclusive Resources and Materials From Regional Specialists Use of multisensory activities and materials to assist all learners. (texts, family & community
knowledge and resources, contextually relevant professional web resources)
Sources of water | Uses of water | Source of water for kids | source of water for class 1| (3 :09)
Uses of water | Importance of water | Water and it's uses | Uses of water for kids | Use of water(2:28)
https://youtube.com/watch?v=DHlFxMq9VYo&feature=share (0:50)
https://youtube.com/watch?v=nEJSFSKwEtQ&feature=share (4:25)
WonderGrove Kids | Water Conservation: Why We Need to Conserve Water (3:05)
Additional Resources:
container with water
two -2L soda bottles
Knife to cut bottles
Hot water kettle
Pot
ice
globe
thermometer
https://www.timvandevall.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/blank-world-map.jpg
165
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
https://images.nagwa.com/782168987127.jpg
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the curriculum)
Mathematics: The Earth is a sphere/Study simple bar-graphs on average rainfall for a week./Measurement of temperature
Social Studies: How can we conserve water- where is it wasted? How do we protect water sources from pollution? How do we recycle so we don’t
create more garbage?
Language Arts: Building word bank/reading poems/oral language-(reading, speaking, listening)/Story comprehension related to
water./communication through projects.
TVET: Water filtration models for purification/Water collection systems/Making a ‘Fountain’ model/ models of waterfalls. lakes, ponds, pools,
aquariums/ making ice pops.
Agriculture: Why is water so important to farmers? Water is vital for life. Water is important for our crops, animals and manufacturing goods. Make a
school garden and use watering cans.
Health: Why are liquids and solids important to our health? Clean freshwater is necessary for drinking, cleaning and bathing.
Create a chart with pictures showing how water is polluted and discuss ways we can make the water safe.
Elements from Local Culture:
• Create a song about water, short play on the Uses of Water/Dramatization of a story on how we obtained water in times past/water wheels/use
of wells.
• Colonaire/Yambou Rivers, Villa Beach/Indian Bay, etc.
• River heads at Grand Bonhomme and Petite Bonhomme.
166
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
• Local songs:
o “Coconut water, $1, it good for your daughter, $1”
o “Oh there’s a lovely island in the Caribbean Sea”
• The Old Well in Sandy Bay.
Resources for a learner who is struggling: (Links to earlier learning activities for similar knowledge, links to resources for special education needs)
Live Worksheet- Uses of Water
https://www.liveworksheets.com/lb902017ol
Questions: What are some of the uses of water? Which ones do you use? Is there anyone that you don’t use water for? Why not? Do you think there is
any use of water that is more important than the other? Why? Why not?
Video-
Water on Earth (Solid or Liquid?)
https://youtu.be/XSyWBNqvTrU
Resources for a learner who needs challenge: (Links to learning activities and resources in later grades)
Videos-
The Water Bodies
https://youtu.be/bNWuQD7QHBc
Questions?
Which source of water has freshwater? (rivers)
What is a lake? (large area of water surrounded by land)
Are there any lakes in your country?
How does water get into the lakes? (rain or underground water) So what happens to the lake when there is no rainfall? (it can dry up)
States of Water
https://youtu.be/Cgr9hzB66vA
Questions
- What is freezing? (When water becomes ice) have you seen freezing taking place anywhere? in your kitchen? anywhere else?
167
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
- What is melting? (When ice turns into liquid?) Have you witnessed melting happening anywhere? What things have you seen melting at
home/school? (icepops.
-
Strategies that Support the OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have:: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning
outcome and associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies Protecting our water source and conserving water.
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication Identifying the importance of water. Debating water usage practices.
Competencies
Developed Well-being Competencies Working with fellow students in their community to conserve.
water
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies Understanding the health issues related to polluted water.
168
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Engineering Design
Purpose of the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of
caring not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic study of
the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from leveraging
and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it.
Topic or Strand: Engineering Design
Essential Learning Outcome (ELO-1): Ask questions, make observations, and gather information about a situation people want to change to define
a simple problem that can be solved through the development of a new or improved object or tool
Grade Level Guidelines: Grade Level Guidelines: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Learners are expected Identifying Technology Impacts Technology and Engineering
to:
In a question answer session with students, the Students we sometimes think of technology as only computers but
Knowledge teacher should ask students to explain how each of actually technology is much broader. Technology has been
• Define the terms: the following technologies has improved life as described as the way humans adapt or change their
o Technology humans: surroundings to improve their lives. It is a type of problem
o Engineering solving that often requires engineering to produce a working
o Problem ● Chalk board (allows a better way to write) product.
o Solution ● Flush toilet (more sanitary than outdoor)
o Engineer ● Bicycle (accessible transportation) Can we think of technology around us that fits that definition?
o Inventions ● Wheelbarrow (effective tool for moving large objects) Here are some examples: soap, a toaster, a car, a telephone, a
o Mechanical ● Pulley clothesline (effective for drying many clothes microwave, hearing aid.
Engineer at once) These are examples of how humans solved a problem; tell me how
o Electrical ● Wheelchair (assists movement of the mobility these technologies improved life by solving a problem.
Engineer challenged)
o Industrial Soap: better for washing than just water
Engineer Toaster: toasting bread without a fire
o Civil Engineer What do all engineers have in common? Car: traveling quickly without a horse or walking
o Design Loop Telephone: communicating over a distance
169
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
o Diagonal side Answer: (They invent things and build things to solve Microwave: cooking food quickly rather than stove
o Ramp problems for people). Hearing aid: improving ability to hear
o Recycling Let us read these books: (Note: teacher can read one or both and it is
o Biomedical recommended they purchase one for the classroom. “Galimoto” is suitable for
Engineers Identifying Engineering in a Story: Galimoto earlier primary and “The Real McCoy” can be used again for higher grades as
Pupils watch the video and list the materials Kondi an introduction to inventors and problem solving/engineering of more complex
• Distinguish used to build his galimoto. solutions)
technology as a https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tbchXWw-W68
problem-solving (7:50 mins) Books: “Galimoto” by Karen Williams
human adaptation
and engineering as Students, what materials could you have used to build See online read aloud book
the tangible a galimoto? (scraps of wires, knife, a dancing man) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tbchXWw-W68 (7.50 mins)
products
and The Real McCoy” by Wendy Towle
(solutions) to that Engineering in the Community
See online read aloud book
process.
Take students out to a place of interest to observe https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZaqimNQPSuQ (15:43
how an engineering problem is solved. Prepare a few mins)
• Demonstrate an
guided questions for the students.
understanding that
Let us see if we can discover how they relate to technology and
engineers plan and
engineering.
design objects and
Example of places: As I read, think about these questions:
tools that are
● a bridge
designed to solve
Guiding Questions
problems faced by ● a plumbing problem (house under
● What is this story about?
people. construction)
● Name some problems solved.
● a manufacturing facility
● How did the main character solve a problem.
• Show how people
are affected by Put these engineering steps in the correct order.
natural and
● Identify the problem Students, we are going to watch a video with a problem and a
human-made
● Was the problem solved? solution.
problems or
● How do you solve the problem?
situations which
● What would you use to solve the problem?
Match the problem to the solution
170
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
they want to be A problem is something that is not going right or causing
Problems Solutions
changed or solved. difficulty. It can be a situation or challenge that needs to be fixed
or solved.
• Identify natural or
human-made A solution is a way to make the problem better or fix it. It is like
problems or finding an answer or a way to make things right again.
Ask students to think about how the design loop was
situations to be As we watch, try to identify the problem and the solution.
applied to the engineering they saw in the community.
changed or solved,
in the home, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sd9MZdB1ItU
Reviewing the Steps
school and (3.09 mins
community. )
Play video up to highpoint (0:55mins) where characters are faced
• Identify possible with a problem.
Ask the following questions:
solutions to the
problems based
Note: For teachers without access to technology, it is
on observation
recommended to access a book that highlights the
and research (what
importance of a bridge. Some examples include those in this
others have done
table below.
to solve similar
problems).
Title Author
Pop’s Bridge Eve Bunting
• Describe the
Building Bridges Tammy Enz
features of the
Cross a Bridge Ryan Ann Hunter
tool or object that
would solve a Golden Gate Bridge Jeffrey Zuehlke
problem based on Rosie Revere Andrea Beaty
scientific Retrieved from: Engineer
information, https://www.liveworksheets.com/tg3433356uk Bridges Katie Marsico
materials used, (3.00mins) Twenty- one April Jones Prince
and how it would Elephants & Still
be of benefit to Standing
Design Challenge
171
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
people and the We see towers all around us. They are used for Alternately the teacher can make up their own story about a
environment. monitoring fires and crops, sending cell phone local river that required crossing.
messages and watching for ships.
• Explain in their Referring to the Video:
own words, the Students, let's first understand the problem. What was the problem
Some examples:
interrelationship that the character faced?
between Science (He couldn’t cross the river because of the rain)
and Technology
(ST-2-TE-TM-3). What do you think he will do to solve the problem? (use a boat, build
a raft, build a bridge, put a piece of wood over the creek etc.)
• Realise that some
Teacher records responses on the board and continues playing the
things are natural
video.
and some are
human-made (ST- Retrieved from: What were the solutions they suggested? (Flying, building a raft, using
2-TE-NT-1). https://www.planetware.com/paris/eiffel-tower-f-p- a log)
et.htm Were his solutions the same as yours? (Yes, No)
What was the solution to the problem? (Building a bridge)
• Match simple
Student groups will be given the following materials What is the name of a person who builds bridges? (an engineer in the
gadgets to the use
and asked to build the tallest free-standing structure. story)
to which they
were put (ST-2-
TE-TM-2). ● Give each group five sheets of newspaper,
What is an engineer?
tape, and pieces of string., clay, push pins,
An engineer is someone who uses their creativity and knowledge
• Identify and thumb tacks.
of math and science to create real solutions to problems.
..
appreciate that the
● Afterwards the teacher can help the pupils
Engineers solve problems with their inventions.
gadgets, tools and
analyze which tower worked the best and
structures used in
What are some great inventions that people use?
summarize why.
their homes and
(airplanes, electricity, cellphones, computers, etc.)
community are
Questions for Discussion
made by humans
Types of engineers
(ST-3-TE-UT-1).
● Was your tower able to stand? (Yes/No)
● Was your tower able to stand? (Yes/No)
172
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Skills ● If your answer is No! Why wasn't your tower Students, engineers can create solutions to many different
able to stand straight? problems and therefore there are many different types of
• Demonstrate an ● If your answer is yes! Why was it able to engineers!
understanding of a stand?
design approach ● What would you do differently next time in Let's watch this video and see if we can draw some pictures that
by using the rebuilding the tower? represent at least 4 types of engineer.
design loop or
design steps in a The following rubric can be used to assess students' https://youtu.be/D9I35Rqo04E (4:06 mins)
real design work.
challenge. Mechanical engineering:
invent and make parts for machines
• Make predictions
Electrical engineering:
about how to
solve a real design invent and make electrical devices
challenge.
Industrial engineering:
invent and make equipment for factories, offices and business
• Make drawings of
places.
proposed
solutions to real
Civil engineering:
design challenges.
design and create roads, bridges,
• Hypothesize why
Each group should be given an area to display their Use the Following Video as a Review
problem solutions
design model and talk about it and answer any
worked or didn’t
questions that people may have. https://www.generationgenius.com/videolessons/what-is-
satisfy the design
engineering-video-for-kids/
challenge.
Engineer Visits the Classroom
Play video sections:
• Develop manual The students should have an opportunity to cycle
Introduction 1:20-3:00 mins.
dexterity in through these questions with a visiting engineer.
Discussion 4:00-10:00 mins.
building a solution ● What is your name?
to a real design ● What is your job?
How to Apply the Engineering Process
challenge. ● What problems do you solve?
173
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
● How do you solve the problems? (Engineering is using science and mathematics to solve our
• Making ● If your idea/ solution doesn’t problems.)
measurements and work, what do you do?
preparing a scaled ● Why do you like your job? Scenario: A stream is created each year when the excessive rains
drawing. cause water to run down from the hillside. Unfortunately, the
Match pictures on the left to an engineering water runs across an important road so no one can pass to get to
• Predicting a solution on the right. the village to work or go to school.
materials list for a
What is the problem that has to be solved?
project.
(To pass over the river.)
• Observe and Problem Solution
How could you solve the problem?
record natural or
(I could build a bridge.)
human made
problems or
Students we are going to pretend we are trying to cross over a
situations that are
stream; we are going to build a bridge.
affecting people,
in the home,
These are the materials you have to try to build a bridge that passes
school and
over a gap 30 cm wide. Your bridge needs to be at least 6 cm wide.
community.
• Construct a device
6 cm
or tool, based on
the plan, to solve
the problem.
30 cm
• Predict the
Box contents may include:
possible
• 10 pieces of spaghetti pasta (each 25 cm long)
outcomes/results
• 3 sheets of standard paper
or benefits of the
• White glue
designed tool. hearing aid • 5 lengths of 5 cm Tape
Awareness of the need for Recycling
174
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
• Demonstrate the In order to design a bridge, we need to take a careful approach
ability to explain Complete the cloze passage below using these words: called the design loop.
to people the
why/how and protect, collect, recycling, clean, paper, plastic, bottles,
benefit of their reduce, new, bins, waste, environment, old
model design.
Caring for our __________ is important. We can do
• Given problems, so by__________. Recycling is turning ______
things into something
be able to design
______. We can _______ things like ____, ______,
and construct
_______ and cans. We must place them in the right
simple gadgets
_______. We can make new things out of them. This
(ST-2-TE-TM-1).
will help to ______ our Earth and keep it ______.
When we recycle, we are helping to _____ the
• Evaluate two
amount of _______ around us.
different gadgets
using named
criteria (ST-2-TE-
Appreciating the importance of Recycling as an
TM-4).
engineering solution for reducing pollution.
• Share information
with peers on the
Read the poem as a whole group on recycling
nature of
and view a video.
technology (St-2-
Retrieved from: https://delaware-valley.biz/wp-
TE-NT-2).
content/uploads/2017/06/design-loop.png
• Formulate
1) You can see from this design loop we start with a problem
problems and do
to solve.
research in
2) We can do some research to see if someone elsewhere has
development of
solved a similar problem.
technological
3) We can think and share our ideas about solving the
devices (construct
problem. It is important to draw a picture of how we think we
models and
might solve the problem.
175
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
gadgets) (ST-3- 4) After we build our solution, we should test it and see if it
TE-TM-1) solves the problem.
5) After we try our bridge, we may think about
improvements to design new bridges.
Attitudes/Values Retrieved from:
https://images.app.goo.gl/X9j5YLdUNP1KNMf Let us use our journal notebooks to follow and record this
• Appreciate the g9 engineering loop as we build our bridges.
importance of
finding solutions https://youtu.be/mv9-FovyamY (10:02 mins) When you are finished making your bridges, we are going to place
to everyday them across a 30 cm span between our desks and test them.
problems and of Teacher Note: You can use small stones of uniform size or
objects and tools After reading the poem and viewing the video, ask wooden blocks placed on the bridge to see how much they will
created/ used to the students what recycling happens in their hold before they break. You can make it a competition to see
solve problems. community and what types of engineering solutions which bridge will hold the most.
have been created to help with recycling.
• Understanding the The closure to the lesson:
1) Which bridge held the most weight?
importance of
2) What was special about the design of that bridge that you
problem-solving
think made it hold more?
as a life skill.
3) What would you do to your own bridge to improve its
strength?
• Becoming aware
4) Let us look at these pictures of bridges and consider what
of the viability and
they have in common.
importance of
careers in
engineering and
technology.
• Participate actively
in classroom
discussions,
contributing
design ideas.
176
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
• Collaborating
productively in
team preparation
of design planning
and construction
of solutions.
• Express the desire
to find solutions
to the problem
identified by Retrieved from: https://trianglesinbridges.weebly.com/why-
asking many triangles.html
questions during
the survey to
understand the
problems faced by
people.
• Demonstrate an
awareness of the
need to care for
the environment
by recycling Retrieved from: https://usbridge.com/truss-bridge-designs-
materials to history/
construct a tool or
object to solve the
problem Do you see the triangles all through the bridge, they must be very
identified. strong.
• Show sensitivity
and assist their
177
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
peers who may The teacher can use a straw with the ends placed inside each other
have learning and to make a triangle or a square. If they then place an object on top
physical challenges
as they are
engaged in the
engineering design
process.
• Appreciate the
advantages and
disadvantages of
using devices,
tools and
of straw figure, the students will see the triangle is much stronger.
structures made
by humans (ST-2-
Retrieved from:
TE-UT-1).
https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/buildingbig/educator/act_straw_ho.
html
• Scientific and
technological
Students, please draw a picture in your notebook of how you
activities are
would change your design if you were going to design another
usually influenced bridge (look for triangles in the design).
by the values and
beliefs of humans Practice With the Engineering Process
and their societies.
Students, we have a set of steps into the school at the top of which
is 1 metre high. These steps would not allow a student in a
wheelchair to pass into the school.
Can you draw a picture in your notebook of how you might design
a ramp so that the person in a wheelchair could be rolled up to the
school entrance?
178
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
We don’t want the ramp to be too steep. In your picture of the
ramp, show how long the diagonal side is. Can you draw the
picture to scale so you know how long the other side will be?
Diagonal
side (ramp)
1m
Teacher Note: Use a ruler to show children how to draw to scale.
Example let 1 metre be equivalent to 10 cm on their page. They
can draw any ramp with a gradual slope but get them to use the
ruler to estimate the length of the diagonal.
Students should make a list of materials they feel they will need in
order to build their ramp.
Creative Design & Recycling
In the following design activity, have students use their notebooks
to record their designs and how they are trying to solve a problem.
Recycle Activity
Students drink a lot of sodas or soft drinks during your break.
These plastic bottles are difficult to dispose of and, many times
pollute the environment. Can you think of a way these bottles can
be reused creatively around the school? (Miss/Sir, we can make
bird feeders from these bottles and hang them in the trees. We can
also use the bottles to create a mini garden.)
Some ideas for students here: https://www.nae-
erboristeria.com/magazine/sostenabilita/article/5-ways-to-use-
old-plastic-bottles-creatively.html
179
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
More Recycling Ideas That Involve Problem Solutions
Let pupils view a video on reuse and recycling of materials as a
means of solving the problem of pollution.
https://youtu.be/idEmx40ZtX8 (1:49 mins)
1. What was the problem in the video?
(plastic bottles were thrown on the road/ground.)
2. What can we do with plastic instead of throwing them
away? (We can reuse them.)
3. How does nature feel when we throw things in the
environment? (It makes nature sad.)
4. Name a few things that we can create with plastic instead
of throwing them away?
(make flower pots, shower baskets, glasses etc.)
Engineering Solutions to Physical Challenges
Helping others is very important, especially those with physical
challenges. When we help someone, we show kindness and make
them feel happy. It's like being a superhero! Helping others can
solve their problems or make their day better. It also makes our
classroom and school a friendly place where everyone feels cared
for and included.
What are some physical challenges that people face? (Seeing,
hearing and movement impaired)
How do you think it feels to face these challenges? (Helpless,
uncomfortable, bad, low self-esteem)
180
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Biomedical Engineers also help to invent solutions to help with
these physical challenges.
Can you name some inventions that have been developed to assist
with these challenges?
(walking canes, glasses, hearing aids, wheelchairs, artificial limbs)
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: (Links to professional sources that connect back to the Curriculum and Assessment Principles of
Learning and Principles of Assessment)
Charts to be used by teachers/students
Charts Websites
https://ecdn.teacherspayteachers.com/thumbitem/STEM-throughout-the-year-The-Bundle-preschool-kindergarten-and-first-grade--
2591407-1541346608/original-2591407-3.jpg
https://ecdn.teacherspayteachers.com/thumbitem/STEM-Engineer-Poster-for-Elementary-1166805-1536205820/original-1166805-
4.jpg
https://ecdn.teacherspayteachers.com/thumbitem/Engineering-Process-Posters-3004105-1486485467/original-3004105-1.jpg
Reading resource
Kids book read aloud: Girls Can Be Engineers By Jamila H Lindo - YouTube (5:25)
Inclusive Resources and Materials From Regional Specialists Use of multisensory activities and materials to assist all learners. (texts, family & community
knowledge and resources, contextually relevant professional web resources)
181
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
• videos
• pictures
• story books
• charts
Additional Resources:
Types of engineers:
https:/ /youtu.be/HVPegJuasZk (4:41 mins)
https://youtu.be/mv9-FovyamY (2:29 mins)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XiuU1mlFeEc (11:30 mins)
Engineering Song:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R3a8oD6_YlU (1:06 mins)
What is engineering?
https://youtu.be/R3a8oD6_YlU (1:07 mins)
How to make a car from recycle bottles
How to make Propeller cars from plastic bottles | Recycle Toys - YouTube(2:35 mins)
Being an Engineer
10 lines on The Engineer / I want to be an engineer / when I grow up / essay /speech / for kids - YouTube (1:07 mins)
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in
the curriculum)
Mathematics:
• Pupils can test the strength of different shapes. How the shape affects the strength of a building.
Shapes of Strength - YouTube (1:35 mins)
• Measuring triangles.
• Scaled drawings
• Estimating materials list.
182
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Social Studies:
• Pupils identify some problems in their community and state ways these problems can be solved.
• Environmental concerns and recycling.
Language Arts:
• Use new words to construct sentences.
• Comprehension based on read aloud stories.
• Listen to stories and place events (sentences) in the correct order.
• Write poems on engineers, being an engineer.
TVET:
• Build models of towers.
• Drawings of ramp solutions.
• Design challenges for biomedical engineers.
Agriculture:
• Impacts of pollution on crops.
• Agricultural problems for engineers to solve.
Health:
• Biomedical engineers pose solutions for physical challenges like prosthetic limbs, mechanical hearts and valves, specialized wheelchairs.
Elements from Local Culture:
• Pupils construct flutes using bamboo/ pawpaw stalks.
• Use bamboo to make vases.
• Use calabash to make musical instruments (shack-shacks, bowls).
• Use of plant fibres to make ropes, furniture.
• Artefacts of stone tools and clay pots, etc.
• Cast iron tools and objects, e.g., coal pots, “copper”, etc.
• Examine tools used in local activities such as in the picking of fruits and in the making of musical instruments, furniture, etc.’
• The metal stake that can be placed into the ground and used to dehusk dry coconuts.
183
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
• Building carts to move goods from place to place in tight spots (e.g. carts used by the cart men in Kingstown).
• Fruit pickers have been locally designed.
• Fishing rods from sticks and reels with plastic bottles.
Resources for a learner who is struggling: (Links to earlier learning activities for similar knowledge, links to resources for special education
needs)
Worksheets
Types of engineers worksheet (liveworksheets.com)
Engineers worksheet (liveworksheets.com)
Design Challenge: Creating a Cup Tower | Education.com
What is Engineering? | Worksheet for Grades K-2 [PDF] (generationgenius.com)
Videos
I'm Going to be an Engineer ( Big Dreams For Little People) | A Career Book for Kids - YouTube (3:57 mins)
I Want To Be An Engineer | Books Read Aloud | We STEM!! Career Day Books for Kids - YouTube (4:41 mins)
How to make a flute- https://youtu.be/BaymX3qJRbQ (1:07 mins)
Resources for a learner who needs challenge: (Links to learning activities and resources in later grades)
Make the biggest structure using index cards, paper plates, and toilet paper rolls.
Websites
https://educationtothecore.com/2020/10/20-stem-challenges-for-kids/
184
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
https://www.teachingexpertise.com/classroom-ideas/2nd-grade-engineering-projects/
https://www.sciencebuddies.org/stem-activities/subjects/second-grade
Strategies that Support the OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning
outcome and associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies Help in preserving, protecting and to appreciate the works of engineers.
Working together to solve real problems in communities.
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication Critically analyzing problems.
Competencies
Developed Well-being Competencies Working with and assisting other people in the community to solve problems.
Solutions to building access for the less abled. New developments in assistive
technologies for the impaired.
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies Understanding the process engineers use to solve problems.
Developing materials lists for planning and potentially costing.
185
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Purpose of the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of
caring not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic study of
the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from leveraging
and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it.
Topic or Strand: Engineering Design
Essential Learning Outcome (ELO-2): Develop a simple sketch, drawing, or physical model to illustrate how the shape of an object helps it function
as needed to solve a given problem.
Grade Level Guidelines: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Learners are expected to: Shapes and Design Introduction
To show how different shapes make up an object which Where can we find objects with different shapes?
Knowledge helps it to function. Use the shapes to build your rocket (At home, school and community)
design! Start by filling in the rocket that has interior lines. All Draw me a picture of at least three different shapes
● Define the terms: the shapes must fit entirely inside the rocket’s outline. we see in our community.
○ Shape
○ Technology Did you ever put your left shoe on your right foot? It
○ Engineering really does not work well because it doesn’t fit the
○ Problems shape- our feet are different!
○ Solutions
○ Design Brief When we solve problems (technology) and
○ Prototype design solutions (engineering) we have to pay
○ Disability careful attention to shapes.
○ Biomedical
engineers Look at the model of the house, try to identify the
○ Blunt/sharp problem and the possible solution.
Use these shapes to complete the design of the rocket.
nose
○ Lock/Key
186
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
○ Controlled
Experiment
● Demonstrate an
understanding that the
shape of an object
depends on its function
to solve a given
problem.
Shapes of Keys and Locks
● Recognize that there are
Print out worksheets and cut out keys and locks. Students
different designs for a
will match the key to the lock.
roof and that some
designs are better for Ask the following questions:
Compare and contrast keys to discuss that keys open locks,
resisting the effects of
but each lock is opened with a specific key even though they
wind and rain. ● Students, what problem do you see the
seem exactly the same and in other cases different.
builder having in putting up these windows?
(The shape /design of the windows are different
● Identify objects in the from the space to put them.)
school, house and
community that have ● What shape are the windows of the house?
specific shapes based on (square)
their functions. ● What shape are the windows they want to
put in? (Part of a circle and square.)
● Recognize that certain ● What do you think the builder will do in
shapes are required in order to solve the problem?
order for a designed (He needs to change the design of the windows to fit into the
object to solve the space.) or
problem. (Make the space the same as the windows.)
● Recognize that keys are Students we can see that shapes have to be designed
Retrieved from:
very carefully prepared to fit the need. The windows here are not useful if
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/463448617896803837/
to exactly fit a lock and they don’t fit the hole in the building wall.
187
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
that this allows us to Ask learners the following questions:
have secure homes and ➢ Why were door/car keys developed? What problem did it
storage facilities. solve? (keys/locks prevent the wrong person getting access) The Best Roof Design for Storms
● Give examples of how ➢ What are the advantages of a key?(security and a variety of Let’s take a look at these houses with different roofs.
poor design can lead to keys to open pad locks/ doors) Which of these houses do you think will be able to
unsafe use and danger. withstand hurricane winds?
➢ What are the disadvantages? (loss of keys, they get broken, can (A discussion will follow about exposed edges and surface area
● Be aware that there are be copied) exposed to winds.)
engineers that assist
humans with physical We can see students that keys must exactly fit locks in order
challenges and that this for them to accomplish the task of securing a room or a car
is an exciting and or bicycle.
rewarding career.
A Design Activity: Paper Airplanes
● Match simple gadgets to
the use to which they i. Background Knowledge
are put (ST-2-TE-TM- Students, in your journal draw a
2). picture of a paper airplane you think
will fly the furthest. Retrieved from:
● Identify and appreciate https://www.homestratosphere.com/wp-
that the gadgets, tools content/uploads/2016/06/39_roof-styles-featured-
and structures used in image-hs.jpg
their homes and
community are made by 1. What are the different shapes you can see in
humans(ST-3-TE-UT- the roofs? (Triangular, rectangular)
1). 2. Which roof do you think will drain off water
easily? (A- Frame Roof, Gable and Valler Roof,
Gable Roof with Dormer Windows.)
Skills 3. Which roofs do you think is the
● Understand and practice Strongest to resist wind damage? (Gable Roof)
the engineering loop of Explain your answer?
stating the problem,
188
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
creating a solution ii. Group Building of Airplanes You can see students that it is important to match
drawing and testing the the design of the roof to the climate the house is in.
prototype design. Teacher has discussion with pupils. Think about the measurements and drawings the
a) What do you see in the picture? (Different shapes of engineer would have to make in order to construct
● Investigate how the the best roof. What would they be?
paper airplanes)
shape of an object Measurements: (house length, width, height, size of roof,
b) What shapes do you see in the airplanes? (Triangles,
depends on its function angles of the roof)
rectangles)
to solve a given Drawings (front view, side view top view of the house, roof
Task: Students, I will divide you into groups and assign each
problem. angles)
group a certain design of airplane to construct.
Here are the four designs that the class will create, one per ***An excellent free technology tool for creating
● Sketch or draw to simply group: paper models of structures is FabLab Model Maker.
illustrate how the shape See download here: https://fablab-
The teacher will distribute sheets of paper for the groups and
of an object depends on modelmaker.software.informer.com/
assist them with construction of airplanes with the particular
its function to solve a
characteristics below. Note: The teacher may want to review
given problem.
construction approaches using the following video: Importance of designing things appropriately
● Communicate effectively https://youtu.be/pHRLpUys5v4 (7:03 mins)
to explain their sketches Students, did you know that it is important for
engineers to design things the right way so that they
or drawings as to how
1. Airplane with blunt nose & big wings
work well and keep us safe?
the shape of an object
2. Airplane with sharp nose & small wings
helps to solve a given
3. Airplane with a blunt nose & small wings When people create or make things like toys, tools,
problem.
4. Airplane with sharp nose & big wings or even playgrounds, it's important to think about
● Compare and contrast
how we will use them. Designing them the right way
is very important. When things are made the right
the shapes of objects Using a standard departure point in the classroom, have the
way, they work better and are safer to use. Look at
with the same/ similar same student throw each of the group airplanes towards the
the pictures below. Are they designed properly?
function.
other end of the classroom. Emphasize ‘controlled
What parts of the design do you think were not done
experiment” (i.e. all variables the same except one, in this well, in your opinion?
● Predicting the shape of
case the airplane itself).
an object to solve a
given problem.
Which plane do you think will fly the furthest? (should be #4)
189
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
● Observe and recognize Have the students measure the distances for each airplane for
different shapes such as comparison.
circles, squares,
What features seem to affect the distance? (nose shape & wing
rectangles, triangles and
size)
more to help solve a
problem.
Closure
● Propose a design for a We can see that the design of the shape makes a big
Retrieved from:
practical device (window difference in these paper airplanes’ ability to fly a longer
https://www.reddit.com/r/CrappyDesign/comment
stick) distance.
s/ukuq0y/splitting_slide_because_why_not/
Students, in your journal, draw a picture of the paper airplane
● Construct working
that flew the furthest and make a note of why it flew further
models of paper
than others. Is it different than your initial design? What did
airplanes.
you learn?
● Test models of paper Individual Activity
airplanes using a Think of an idea to fix the problems with the slides. Sketch
controlled experiment. or draw a design of a slide that is safe and fun to use.’
● Compare and contrast Rubric for scoring
intuitive designs of Presentation - 5 marks, Creativity -10 marks, Safety - 5
airplanes with research- marks)
informed design.
● Infer the suitability of
design solutions from
drawings.
Retrieved from:
● Use a systematic https://www.reddit.com/r/CrappyDesign/comment
approach to problem s/ktl9hs/curves_on_this_slide/
solving.
190
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
● Given problems, be able (The shapes of the slides will prevent children from sliding
to design and construct Retrieved from: properly, they can hurt themselves on the slides.)
simple gadgets (ST-2- https://ir.4sqi.net/img/general/original/2669323_FaMFPc5
TE-TM-1). 5dsfxzBuRxBeExNuLf2U7BFGecTu_PAUCsSk.jpg Design Briefs and the Importance of a Drawing
● Evaluate two different https://i.redd.it/a1mf9iqe5ef71.jpg When an engineer designs a new product to solve a
gadgets using named real problem, they often create a design brief. A
criteria (St-2-TE-TM-4). design brief is a plan that a) states the problem, b)
Which Drawing Better Matches a Problem Solution? draws a picture of the possible solution c) lists
● Formulate problems and materials and processes that will be necessary to
do research in
Retrieved from:
build the engineered product and d) an explanation
https://hikingthegta.
development of com/2020/02/29/cl of how their design will work. This happens before
technological devices aireville-ghost- the working model is made and tested as a
(construct models and
towns-of-the-gta/
prototype. A working model that helps us see
gadgets) (ST-3-TE-TM- advantages and disadvantages of our design is called
1). a prototype.
Students, I have a problem I want you to write a
Attitudes/Values
● Recognize that
Read this introduction to students: design brief for.
engineering makes a
The bottom of the front door of a house is 3 feet above the Some summer days are hot and humid. On those
very important
ground. Ishmael, Sandra and Gordon each created a design days, we sometimes want the window up in our
contribution to human’s
brief to build a step that would go from the ground to the homes to let a gentle breeze cool the rooms. As the
daily life.
bottom of the front door. The design brief included a day progresses, maybe it cools down somewhat, so
statement of the problem, a drawing of the possible solution we might still want the window open but, not as
● Creation of assistive
and a list of materials. high.
devices by engineers is a
Students, I want you to consider the three drawings from the
rewarding career.
design briefs. Which do you think is the best design. Explain I want you write a design brief for a single window
why. stick that you could make that would allow the
● Engineering is a creative
window to be held open at two different heights.
job that involves much
problem solving.
191
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
● Show sensitivity in Ishmael’s Drawing
assisting those peers
who may have learning
and physical challenges
as they are engaged in
practical activities.
● Appreciate the
importance of having an
object shaped for its
function to avoid
3 feet
confusion and ensure
Retrieved from:
safety.
https://www.windowscanada.com/media/CACHE/
3 feet images/fbimages/Double-or-single-hung-windows-
● Show concern for their
time-for-big-
safety and that of others
decision/9f4d8ac48103bb8517b342cc8682d4d1.jpeg
when manipulating Sandra’s Drawing
objects during
Teacher Note: Popular design:
investigation.
Wooden Block
● Work with others
willingly to share ideas
and materials to
complete tasks.
● Express the desire to Scoring Rubric for this activity
find and share solutions Description of Problem 2 marks
to given problems. Drawing of solution 5 marks
Materials list 2 marks
● Participate actively in 3 Explanation of the operation 3 marks
feet.
classroom discussions.
Appreciating and assisting peers
6 feet
192
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
● Appreciate advantages
and disadvantages of Gordon’s Drawing Today, we're going to talk about using engineering to
using devices, tools and help someone with a disability.
structures made by
humans (ST-2-TE-UT- A disability is when someone has a condition or a
1). difference that makes some things a little harder for
them to do. Having a disability doesn't mean that
someone can't do anything! They just might do
things a little differently or need some extra help or
support. They use special objects or tools to help
them.
Biomedical engineers have to spend time with
humans and animals in order to understand how
2 their possible design best fits the lifestyle of the user
feet
(wheelchairs, ramps, artificial limbs, assistive technologies for
reading, hearing, seeing).
6 feet
The boy in this film (An Animated Story of a boy
who hates his disabled dog - YouTube (4.18 mins) is
Teacher notes:
missing a limb. As you watch can you spot the
engineered product that has helped him? (a crutch).
Ishmael’s steps will reach the door bottom, but you can show
What other engineered product might help the boy?
students using two rulers that these steps will be much too
(wheelchair, artificial limb)
steep to be useful.
When engineers design products they have to make
Gordon’s steps are not high enough. They are only 2 feet
careful measurements and drawings so the product
high and the door is 3 feet above the ground.
will work for a specific size and shape of a person or
animal.
Sandra’s design should work. The steps reach the 3 foot mark
A very famous scientist, Dr. Stephen Hawking
and they are much more gradual than Ishmael’s design (the
required very specialized assistive tools so he could
teacher can again show the difference using 2 rulers).
communicate.
193
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Retrieved from:
https://www.wired.com/2015/08/stephen-hawking-
software-open-source/
As you look at this picture, tell me what type of
measurements would the engineer have to make and
what would their drawing include?
Measurements (height of Dr. Hawking, placement of
headrest, distance of headrest from the computer screen, height
of computer above the chair, height of the chair, placement of
hand controls etc.)
Drawing (wheelchair, headrest, computer arm &screen, hand
controls)
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: (Links to professional sources that connect back to
the Curriculum and Assessment Principles of Learning and Principles of Assessment)
Read Aloud online books
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SnPdXiOm6JM (6:30 mins. Teachers can begin the read aloud from 1:27 mins)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QB-wqD7gg-k (5:39 mins)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5ctPwDr_e50 (7:42 mins)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9Xm3McQ6upw (10:14 mins)
194
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Anchor Chart
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists Use of multisensory activities and materials to assist all learners. (texts, family &community
knowledge and resources, contextually relevant professional web resources)
Multisensory activities:
Students can construct buildings as part of STEAM projects using magna tiles, or Magnetic Balls and Sticks
.
Magna Tiles Magnetic Balls and Sticks (These can be purchased at Amazon.com)
8.5 x 11 inch paper
Journals
Additional Resources:
Digital projection for analysis of pictures
Laptops
Tablets
Overhead Projector
Speakers
Modeling clay
195
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Tooth picks/ Skewers
Gumdrops or marshmallows
Spaghetti
Paper take
Online Resources
ttps://www.amazon.in/Creative-Educational-Aids-Puzzle-Piece/dp/B009310P6G
https://letstalkscience.ca/educational-resources/lessons/its-all-in-shape
https://www.youcubed.org/wim/building-shapes-9-12/
Charts
Worksheets
https://www.liveworksheets.com/py2376826vb
https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/math/grade-2-geometry-identify-2d-shapes-a.pdf
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in
the curriculum)
Mathematics:
• New terminology for shapes
196
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
• Students will learn the different structure of shapes (their properties/characteristics) 2D shapes.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VAWaV1upv6E (14:44 mins)
• Measurement
• Interpreting Drawings
Social Studies:
• How engineering can help humans adapt.
• How engineering can help those with physical challenges.
Language Arts:
● Journaling of the experiments.
● Students will write expository pieces on how they constructed an object using different shapes.
● Use words to improve vocabulary and construct sentences.
● Write short poems on objects with different shapes.
● Create a word wall in the classroom.
TVET:
• Design briefs.
• Constructing paper airplanes.
• Designing solutions for real problems.
• Create a ramp with cardboard and different shapes to move objects. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B9pKkJSaR-w (10:06 mins)
Agriculture:
• The importance of planning a garden plot/field using the design loop approach. (problem/design/picture/materials/prototype/testing etc.)
• Students can use different materials or shaped objects for the growing of agricultural produce. Hydroponic farming using large PVC pipes to
construct a small school garden.
Health:
• Availability of engineered assistive devices for physically challenged (see: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NBVCU1hGcmg (11:26 mins)
• Teach students the different safety symbols and their meanings.
https://youtu.be/CqH2QYt6oOc (4:45 mins)
Elements from Local Culture:
• How are shapes of devices used to communicate in communities.
• Use local wood to create a small boat shaped like a triangle.
197
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
• What types of resources use lock and key for security in a community?
• The cone-like shape of the handmade toy tops.
• Investigate the shapes in some of the many arches in Kingstown (Local name of Kingstown: City of Arches).
• Cobblestone roads in Kingstown (investigate the shapes of the stones).
• The bamboo used for blowing.
• The copper used to make farine.
• Shape of local steel pans in producing different pitch sounds.
• Shape of different blocks produced locally for different purposes.
• Shape of drums, drumming connects us to our ancestors.
• Shape of canoes/driftwood boats.
• Shape of farming/construction tools: hoe, cutlass, pick, axe, spade.
Resources for a learner who is struggling: (Links to earlier learning activities for similar knowledge, links to resources for special education
needs)
Games: Teachers can clink on the links below and sign-up to these online educational sites to engage their students in some interactive games.
https://www.twinkl.com/resource/tg-ga-66-soup-sorter-2d-shapes-game
https://www.splashlearn.com/s/math-games/sort-shapes
Teachers can play “Shape Scavenger Hunt” with the class to assist weaker students in identifying shapes and their properties.
Create different 2D shapes using toothpicks or skewers, gum drops or marshmallows.
Worksheet links
https://www.liveworksheets.com/lr2285469rc
Resources for a learner who needs challenge: (Links to learning activities and resources in later grades)
An excellent free technology tool for creating paper models of structures is FabLab Model Maker. See download here: https://fablab-
modelmaker.software.informer.com/
Videos
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CvWrkxzCiaY (3:52 mins)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gk_u1xr7jQg (8:13 mins)
Other Resources
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Q7bgX09fuHIHY1aySnaB70iy-JKYBDGn/view (Click on this link to view the PowerPoint presentation,
then click on the link below to access the worksheet)
198
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1xSY9fw3hdwsKw0b3qTc8baeNS7lxg97v/view
In class construction activities:
Students can build different structures using modelling clay and toothpicks. See video for clarification.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TZDXz6V7VFA (18:36 mins)
Students can also create design of buildings, Pyramids or the Eiffel Tower using these materials) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zrnR2y2Bzl4
(2:15 mins)
Worksheets
https://www.liveworksheets.com/sd2566593mc
Strategies that Support the OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning
outcome and associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies Show appreciation and assist their peers who may have learning and physical
challenges as they are engaged in practical activities.
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication How to analyze a problem and pose a solution that is well-documented and
tested.
Competencies
Express the desire to find and share solutions to given problems.
Developed Well-being Competencies Show concern for their safety and that of others when manipulating objects
during investigation. Awareness of engineered assistive devices for those with
physical and learning challenges.
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies Describe the shape and function of objects to solve given problems.
How can problem solving, design and prototyping lead to a commercially
available (useful) product.
199
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Purpose of the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of
caring not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic study of
the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from leveraging
and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it.
Topic or Strand: Engineering
Essential Learning Outcome (ELO-3): Analyze data from tests of at least two objects designed to solve the same problem to compare the strengths
and weaknesses of how each performs.
Grade Level Guidelines: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Practicing the Testing Component of Adhesives, An Important Invention
Engineering: A Summative Assessment Students, I am sure you are familiar with sticky notes. Did
Knowledge you know that invention was discovered by accident?
• Define the terms: Students, I want you to look at the following picture
o Adhesives of a bridge. What do you notice about the columns “Post-It notes came about as a by-product of another
o Cardboard (explain supports) under the bridge; what is their invention. Dr Spencer Silver, a 3M scientist, invented a
o Corrugated shape? Are they square or rectangular columns? No, repositionable adhesive but didn't know what to do with it.
o Collapse they are round on the ends aren’t they? We call this A colleague of his, Art Fry, had the idea of a bookmark
o Columns shape a cylinder. that would stay put in his church hymnal, and the rest as
o Cylinder they say is history!”
o Rebar There must be a reason why these are shaped this Quoted from:
way. I want you to conduct an experiment like https://www.officesupplies.org.uk/Blog/Ten-things-you-
• Demonstrate they before to test the strength of different shapes of probably-didn-t-know-about-the-Post-It-note!!!/
columns.
understand that we can
Well, we are all constantly trying to stick things together,
make comparisons and
repair items and fasten things on walls. We call these sticky
determinations by
inventions adhesives and they are very useful as humans
collecting data in
solve real problems with them.
experiments.
Teacher Note: You can read a funny story about a lazy
squirrel who wanted to keep the seasons from changing (to
• Compare the strengths of
avoid collecting nuts) by sticking the leaves back on trees.
different folds of paper.
200
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Have students watch for what adhesives Sidney used?
• Show that there are
inventions all around us. Reference:
Silly Sidney by Morgan Matthews (1986) Troll Associates
• Distinguish different
Press.
Retrieved from: https://www.freepik.com/premium- Online here:
shapes of columns.
photo/bridge-river-with-fortifications-form-
https://openlibrary.org/books/OL2533357M/Silly_Sidney
gabions_22206959.htm
• Match simple gadgets to
Read aloud here: https://youtu.be/YdEe79v0OVw (9:35
the use to which they are Materials:
mins)
put (ST-2-TE-TM-2). • 3 sheets of paper
• Small books or suitable masses
Which Tape is the Strongest?
• Explain in their own • Tape or glue
We are going to do an experiment that compares the
words, the (Retrieved from:
adhesive properties of different types of tape. Which
interrelationships between https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zd2SZE2sXIs
adhesive holds the most weight?
Science and Technology (6:30 mins))
(ST-2-TE-TM-3).
Materials
Students need to make three columns with the paper
• 1 sticky note
• Identify and appreciate that (sides can be glued or taped).
• 20 or more large paperclips (uniform size)
the gadgets, tools, and Teacher can assist them to make columns (see
• Transparent cellophane tape
structures used in their pictures below):
homes and community are • Masking tape
made by humans (ST-3- • Painters Tape
TE-UT-1). • Electrical tape
• Formulate problems and The teacher should place a small piece of transparent tape
do research in development on the centre of the bottom edge of a sticky note and then
of technological devices punch a hole through it. This will hold our paper clips. The
(ST-3-TE-TM-1). teacher can then place the sticky note high on a door or
wall so there is room to hang paperclips from the bottom.
Skills
201
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Observe the results of
experiments and make a
hypothesis. The students then stack similar books carefully on
top of columns and record which column is the
• Infer that the number of
strongest using the table below for their data.
folds has an impact on
paper strength. Column Type Number of Books Before
Collapse
Square
• Measure number of folds
Triangle
and numbers of paper
Cylinder The teacher can add paperclips and children count how
clips.
many paper clips can be added before the note falls. The
Students should report that the cylinder column number of clips can then be entered in this table.
• Communicate community
held the most books before collapsing.
inventions.
Tape Type # of paper
clips
• Construct columns with
Sticky note
paper.
Cellophane tape
Masking tape
• Investigate information
Painters tape
about inventors.
Electrical tape
• Analyse experimental data.
Note: The teacher may choose to add other uniform
weights to the paperclips as well (e.g., washers or beads)
• Given problems, be able to Extended Learning – Concrete and Rebar For the second trial, the teacher will cut the top sticky strip
design and construct simple
from the sticky note and again fasten the note to the wall
gadgets (ST-2-TE-TM-1). While concrete looks strong, depending on the with uniform lengths of different types of available tape (as
components, their relative quantities and the mixing per the table and other examples of adhesives).
• Evaluate two different process, concrete can develop cracks and become a
gadgets using named hazard in construction.
criteria (ST-2-TE-TM-4).
In concrete columns, it is not uncommon for
Attitudes/Values builders to add steel bars called rebar. This metal
202
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
reinforces or strengthens the overall concrete
• Appreciate that humans product.
adapt through problem
solving (technology) and
engineer new inventions to
make life easier.
• Demonstrate respect for
evidence as they make
conclusions based on
Retrieved from: https://www.quora.com/Why-do-
collected data.
we-provide-reinforcement-in-columns-although-
concrete-works-good-in-compression So, students, which adhesive was the strongest?
• Collaborate & cooperate as
Let us look at our numbers to see which one held the most
they conduct experiments.
Retrieved from:
clips before falling?
https://structurepoint.org/publication/htm
l/Interaction-Diagram-Tied-Reinforced-
• Display sensitivity and
Concrete-Column-with-High-Strength-
offer assistance to peers Reinforcing-Bars-ACI-318-
Researching A Common Practice
who may have physical or 19/index.html#t=Tied_Column_HSRB%2
F0._Problem_Statement%2F0._Problem_St Students, we often pack things in boxes to transport them.
learning challenges
atement.htm Can you tell me some things we can do to make sure the
especially when conducting
items in the box are protected from breakage?
practical and group work.
(strong box, spaces between items, soft packing material between
Inventions in the Home items)
• Participate actively in
Students should be asked to look around their home I want you to look at the following pictures of these
classroom discussions.
and community and identify at least 4 useful packing boxes made from cardboard. What do you notice
inventions that engineers have designed and built. about the cardboard they are using in the box?
They can report back to the class these inventions
and asked to speculate how these inventions might
have been tested before being put into Retrieved from:
https://www.ra
production/use.
npak.com/uk/s
olutions/
Integration With Mathematics
203
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Have a class discussion about how the numbers we
collected in class helped us decide the strength of
our products?
(clips and adhesives, marbles and paper bridge, books and
columns) Retrieved from:
https://www.shrisai
printers.com/corru
Integration with Social Studies
gated-boxes
Have students research information on a local
inventor. In a presentation they can display a picture
of the invention and explain how it was important in
their community.
Retrieved from:
https://emballageslm.ca/en/cardboard-
packaging/honeycomb/
What you see is something they call corrugated cardboard.
It is made up of outer layers of paper that have a wavy
layer of paper in between.
Retrieved from:
https://www.we
bstaurantstore.co
m/blog/1138/ty
pes-and-sizes-of-
corrugated-
boxes.html
204
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
We see this in many different boxes for groceries and pizza
and drinks. Let us do some testing to see why this is a
preferred way of packing.
Teacher Note: This is described below as an interactive
demonstration, but children can also do this independently
in groups depending on resources available.
Materials:
• 2 large or 4 small books
• Sheets of plain paper (8.5 x 11 inch
• Small dish
• Small uniform coins or marbles or counters
Set up the following apparatus for testing the strength of 1
flat sheet of paper (Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zd2SZE2sXIs (6:30
mins))
Add your counters to the dish until the paper collapses.
Have students fill in the following table as you increase the
number of folds of the paper from 1 to 6 to 12.
205
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Number Number of Counters to
folds Collapse
0
1
6
12
1 fold of the paper in
half
6 folds of the
paper
206
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
When the testing is complete, ask students to tell you
which form of the paper was the strongest (held the most
counters without collapsing).
So, students, it seems that folding the paper makes it much
stronger. That is why we see our boxes made from
corrugated cardboard, it makes them stronger.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: (Links to professional sources that connect back to the Curriculum and Assessment Principles of
Learning and Principles of Assessment)
How to Cast a Concrete Column -video https://www.quora.com/Why-do-we-provide-reinforcement-in-columns-although-concrete-works-
good-in-compression(8:20 mins)
Engineering Design Process: https://www.teachengineering.org/populartopics/designprocess
Inclusive Resources and Materials From Regional Specialists Use of multisensory activities and materials to assist all learners. (texts, family &community
knowledge and resources, contextually relevant professional web resources)
Paper, paper clips, sticky notes, marble or coins or counters, books for weights, different types of tape
Additional Resources: Silly Sidney book: Morgan Matthews (1986) Troll Associates Press.
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in
the curriculum)
Mathematics: counting, measurement and shapes.
Social Studies: How do humans adapt by making inventions? Local inventors and local problems to solve.
Language Arts: new vocabulary, researching inventions, books about engineering (Rosie Revere Engineer (by Andrea Beaty) Read aloud here:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=31eBdgnPsCo (6:49 mins)
TVET: building structures and measuring strength.
Agriculture: Building retaining walls for eroding fields using concrete and rebar.
Elements from Local Culture:
207
Grade 2 Science Curriculum
Local inventors
Resources for a learner who is struggling: (Links to earlier learning activities for similar knowledge, links to resources for special education
needs)
• Counters and hands-on materials.
• Teacher to manage construction if student manual dexterity is weak.
Resources for a learner who needs challenge: (Links to learning activities and resources in later grades)
• TVET construction of a column or support.
• Opportunities to develop ideas around simple inventions (problem solutions) the students could undertake given a local community problem to
solve.
Strategies that Support the OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning
outcome and associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies Working together in groups collecting data.
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication Interpreting results of experiments and drawing conclusions.
Competencies
Developed Well-being Competencies NA
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies Understanding strengths and properties of materials and the need/process to
test are all fundamental to the construction industry- careers.
208
