November 2024
OHPC GRADE 5 SCIENCE
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Introduction
The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of caring not only for themselves,
but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision-making will be enhanced by a systematic study of the structure and behaviour of
the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, learners benefit from leveraging and evaluating available
technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it.
The following Innovation Configuration Map is designed to assist teachers as they continue to develop the pedagogy that supports the curriculum. It
illustrates the key features of research informed best practices that might serve as a guide to teachers as they seek to engage with the curriculum with the
goal of having “Every Learner Succeed”.
The Teacher’s Developmental Sequence
Growth Area No Implementation Beginning Implementation Moderate Implementation Strong Implementation
Constructivist Teacher-centred Evidence of hands-on activities Evidence of teacher-scaffolder Active lessons that begin with questions
Pedagogy delivery of lessons investigations that necessarily involve about the world (and inherent discussions)
teacher-learner & learner-learner that are socially relevant & invoke cultural
discussions. Minds-on learning. perspectives.
Building Lessons that rely solely Learners are involved in experiments The processes of science & 21st Evidence that the lesson, within active
Process Skills on the recall of century skills are highlighted in learner- authentic learning contexts (real world
knowledge centred activities. (e.g., observing, questions) involves tracking & evaluating
inferring, hypothesizing, measuring, learner growth in the processes of science &
graphing etc. & researching, critical 21st century skills.
thinking, communicating)
Integrating Attention to subject Reading about science topics & Emphasizing literacy (Reading anchor Science Investigations that begin with
Subjects focused topics rather collecting/tabulating data. texts, researching, listening, writing & socially relevant questions that require
than learner outcomes communicating). Emphasizing science numerical analysis &, in communication of
studies that invoke social concern & results, invoke quality discussions that
discussion. Emphasizing the collection, develop literacy skills.
interpretation & communication of
numbers as an account of science
investigation
Empowering No technology tools Use of simple technologies to Use of technologies to access Use of digital pictures, video, simulations &
learning with evident. Teacher-led motivate learners. These may or may enhanced types of learning that place probes to pose authentic real world
instruction accessing not activate new ways of learning. the learner at the centre of
2
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Growth Area No Implementation Beginning Implementation Moderate Implementation Strong Implementation
Instructional traditional resources; constructing knowledge. (e.g. learner- questions as a basis for discussions &
Technology primarily textbook- led simulation activities, use of developing process skills.
based instruction computer probes to collect data, logic
exercises with coding)
Integrating No evidence of Simple activities that challenge Activities that emphasize design Lessons that invoke problem solving to
Technology as problem solving in any learners to think about the problem challenges that rely on careful design solutions in response to community
“a way of context solving that has led to human planning, prototyping & testing. problems.
adapting” adaptation in the world. This
necessarily involves developing an
awareness of technology around us
Progression of Learners’ Knowledge Skills & Values P-6
3
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Grade Level Expectations for Skills and Attitudes1:
SKILLS – A Summary of Skills to be Demonstrated by the end of Grade 5
In the development of inquiry; problem identification, design and solution; learners should demonstrate the following:
1The skills and attitudes have been taken verbatim from the OECS Primary Grades’ Learning Standards
4
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
ATTITUDES – Summary of Attitudes to be Developed by Grade 5 Learners
In the activities throughout Grade 5, learners are encouraged to develop the attitudes required for positively interacting with scientific and technological
ideas and concepts. At the end of the Grade, these are some of the attitudes that should be evident:
5
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Structure and Properties of Matter
Introduction to the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of caring not
only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic study of the structure and
behaviour of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, learners benefit from leveraging and evaluating available
technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it.
Essential Learning Outcome 1: Develop a model to describe that matter is made of particles too small to be seen.
Clarification Statement: Examples of evidence supporting a model could include adding air to expand a basketball, compressing air in a syringe, dissolving sugar
in water, and evaporating salt water.
Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include the atomic-scale mechanism of evaporation and condensation ordered from defining the unseen particles.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: 1. For each of the objects shown below, draw in Learners, in earlier grades, you met the term matter. Do you
the box provided, the arrangement of the remember what matter is? (Matter is anything that has mass and takes
Knowledge particles in this object/substance. up space.) Matter is all around us in different forms, from the air we
breathe, which is a gas, to the water we drink, which is a liquid, and
• Define the terms: the ice in our freezers, which is a solid.
• matter What are the three states of matter you just heard about? (gas, liquid
• compression and solid) Yes, those are the three states of matter that we are going
• surface tension to explore today.
• particles
6
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• melting Matter has different characteristics or properties you know very
• freezing well I am sure from objects around you.
• heating
• boiling In the pictures below we see a block that has a definite shape and
• condensation volume. If you guessed it was a solid, that would be a good guess
and you probably made that guess because of the properties you
• evaporation
recognized. The second picture shows a liquid in a glass. We know
• thermal expansion and
the same liquid can occupy space in another container (like a long
contraction
tube) but it will always have the same volume. Finally, we see a
• hydraulics
balloon filled by someone blowing in a gas (our breath). The gas-
• Demonstrate an understanding
filled balloon can be squeezed and compressed, a special property.
that matter is made up of
Why is that possible. We are going to discover why!
particles too small to be seen.
• Understand that air is a mixture
of different gases, including
water vapour
• Identify the properties of air
and discuss the importance of
air to people. (ST 3 ESS ER 7)
• Define surface tension and
suggest ways that it can be
broken. (ST 5 LS ECS 9) Retrieved from: Retrieved from:
Orange juice in a glass close-up on a white. Isolated https://pixabay.com/illustrations/brick-building-toy-design-
• Describe the effect of
| Waist Away - The Chantel Ray Way plastic-685013/
detergent on surface tension.
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Balloons https://pxhere.com/en/photo/1600418#google_vignette
• Give examples of surface
-aj.svg https://www.rawpixel.com/image/7376000/image-balloon-public-
tension in everyday life and in
https://www.rawpixel.com/image/7371446/psd- domain-celebration
nature.
public-domain-illustrations-construction
• Describe some characteristic
How are the particles in different states of matter arranged?
properties of the different
2. Read each statement carefully, then write
states of matter.
TRUE or FALSE next to each statement in the Matter is made up of particles that are too small to be seen.
• Use the arrangement of
space provided. Particles are the atoms, molecules or ions that make up matter. In
particles in solids, liquids, and
each group of matter, these particles are arranged in a particular
gases to explain observations
manner.
made in different activities.
7
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Distinguish between the a. The particles in a gas are very far apart I will now draw three diagrams on the board, see if you can tell me
different states of matter. compared to the particles in a solid or liquid. which represents a solid, a liquid and a gas.
• Compare different states of _______
matter in terms of the b. Mass is NOT a state of matter? _______
arrangement and movement of c. Heating makes a liquid turn into a solid.
their particles. ______
• Describe each state of matter in d. Mass is the measurement of the amount of
terms of the arrangement of its matter. ______
particles. e. Matter is anything that has mass and takes
• Describe the three phases of up space. ______
matter (solid, liquid, or gas) and f. The amount of matter in an object is its
give examples of each. mass. ______
• Identify solids, liquids and g. Cooling makes a solid turn into a liquid. Retrieved from:
gases based on their ______ https://thumbs.dreamstime.com/z/states-matter-vector-circles-
characteristics. h. In a gas, the particles have very little infographic-illustration-structure-atoms-solid-liquid-gas-
attraction to each other. ______ 221988077.jpg
• Demonstrate the effects of
i. The amount of space an object takes up is
heating and cooling on solids,
called its volume. ______ Explain what each diagram shows about the arrangement of
liquids, and gases.
j. In a liquid, the particles are attracted to particles in each state of matter. The arrangement of these
• Give examples of the effects of
each other but not as much as they are in a solid. particles gives each state of matter special characteristics. Let us
heating and cooling on solids,
______ discuss some of these characteristics.
liquids, and gases.
True: a, b, d, e, f, h, i, j
• Describe phase changes in
False: c, g, Teacher, demonstrate with your fists that solids have close
terms of heat gain or heat loss.
3. Why does the perfume smell at one end of particles, liquid particles are further apart and that gas particles
• Identify change of states of
a classroom move so quickly throughout the move around in the air (waving fists).
matter focusing on liquid
classroom? (gas particles gain energy from their
changing to a solid.
surroundings, collide and spread out quickly) Activity
• Use the terms melting,
evaporating, condensing and
4. State two ways in which a solid is different Learners will now test their knowledge about matter by behaving
freezing to describe phase
from a gas. (solid has shape and is non-compressible) like particles of matter themselves. This activity can be done in
changes
groups of 6-8 learners or as a whole class, depending on the size of
• Identify the processes (heating, 5. A form of matter does not have a fixed the class and the space available.
melting, evaporation, shape nor a fixed volume. An example of this form
condensation and freezing) that of matter is:
8
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
bring about a change of state of a. Air X Learners will act out the three phases of matter as follows:
matter b. Cardboard
• Describe the effects of c. Juice • Solids: Learners form several lines linked closely together
compressing a gas. d. Metal rod in regular rows like lattice work with arms linked tightly.
• Explain why it is easier to The teacher in moving one part of the learner group notes
compress a gas than a liquid in 6. Which of the following states of matter has they all move as single unit-no flexibility as solids are rigid
terms of the arrangement of a definite volume? (liquid and solid) with constant shape.
their particles • Liquids: Learners form a bigger lattice but with only
• Explain how the dissolving hands loosely clasped. As the teacher moves one part of
substances in water supports the lattice, other parts are flexible and the whole group can
the theory that matter is made flex slightly or be pushed closer together slightly.
up of particles too small to be • Gas: Learners-shoulder to shoulder, begin vibrating such
seen. that each collision with a neighbouring learner causes them
to occupy more space until the group has moved outward
Skills to fill the entire room.
• Use the model developed,
describe the differences in Begin by calling out a phase: solid, liquid or gas. Ensure that the
Retrieved from:
attraction among the particles learners perform the correct actions associated with each phase.
https://pixabay.com/photos/orange-juice-juice-
of a solid, liquid, and gas.
vitamins-drink-67556/
• Label drawings of different These are some questions that learners could be asked while they
phases of matter by its are doing the activity:
properties of shape and
volume. 1. What are the characteristics of solids?
• Observe and describe (shape, volume, expand on heating, non-compressible)
phenomena involving gases 2. What are the characteristics of liquids?
and use these to create a model Retrieved from: (volume, no shape, can be poured, can be compressed slightly)
of a gas. https://pixabay.com/photos/mathematics-colorful- 3. What are the characteristics of gases?
game-color-1282319/ (expands easily with heat, no shape, compressible)
• Develop a model to describe
4. What can you say about how close you stand when you are
that matter is made up of tiny
pretending to be a solid, compared to how close you stand
particles, too small to be seen.
while you are pretending to be a liquid or a gas.
• Use a model to describe the
(solid>liquid>gas we get further apart)
salt dissolving salt in water.
9
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Use a model to describe the IMPORTANT TEACHER NOTE: Water is atypical because
evaporation of water from a it does not follow this pattern (hexagonal solid)
solution to produce salt crystals Retrieved from:
• Use models to demonstrate the https://pixabay.com/photos/clouds-weather-wind-
behaviour of particles in cumulus-shapes-7179673/
different states of matter Evidence that Matter is made up of Tiny Particles
• Conduct experiments to 7. As the chef heats the liquid coconut milk,
observe changes in matter (e.g., bubbles can be seen in the pan. As stated before, matter is made up of tiny particles that cannot be
dissolving sugar, compressing a. What is happening to the liquid? seen. However, what evidence do we have that these particles do
air). b. Describe what happens to the exist?
• Label drawings of different movement and arrangement of the
phases of matter by its particles during boiling. (the particles move For the next few lessons, we will explore several different activities
properties of shape and further apart as they gain energy and collide with to see if these activities would provide us with the data we need to
volume. one another.) make this conclusion.
• Observe changes in matter that
8. Chocolate can change its state from a solid Particles in air
provide evidence that matter is
to a liquid.
made up of small particles that
Is an empty bottle empty? (This activity shows that air is
cannot be seen
made up of particles that are far apart.)
• Infer how matter will change
Materials
when it is either heated or
• Flexible plastic soda bottle (18–20 oz.) with cap
cooled
• Balloon
• Investigate the effect of heat
Procedure
energy on the state of matter
• Classify changes in matter
• Learners, I have in my hand a plastic bottle.
Retrieved from: • Look at and touch the uncapped bottle.
• Classify matter as solids,
https://www.pexels.com/photo/chocolate-bars-on-
liquids or gases.
white-surface-6167332/
• Demonstrate the effects of
https://www.rawpixel.com/search/chocolate%20m
heating and cooling on solids,
elt?page=1&path=_topics&sort=curated
liquids, and gases, and
• Give examples from daily life
a. What is the process used to change
of the effects of heating and
the chocolate to a liquid? (melting) • Do you think the bottle is completely empty? (Yes/no)
cooling on solids, liquids and
• If you answered “no”, what do you think is in the
gases.
bottle?
10
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Demonstrate the effects of b. Explain what is happening to the • If you said “yes”, let us see if it is empty.
heating and cooling on solids, particles in the chocolate that causes it to
liquids, and gases, and give change. (they get energy and move further apart) • Carefully put a balloon on the top of the uncapped bottle.
examples from daily life c. How would you describe the
• Explain how the same movement of the particles as they move
substance can exist as a solid, from a solid to a liquid? (particles get further
a liquid or a gas apart)
• Explain how it is possible to d. The melted chocolate can then be
smell a substance turned back into a solid. What is the
• Observe the dissolving of process used to change the chocolate to a
different substances in water liquid? (melting)
• Identify and explain the e. Which particles have more energy,
different phase changes that the particles in the solid chocolate or the
can occur to matter particles in the melted chocolate? (melted) Image adapted from: 26,822 Bottle Balloon Royalty-Free Images,
Stock Photos & Pictures | Shutterstock
• Use a thermometer to
9. Condensation is a process that brings about
measure temperature changes
a phase change in water. • Hold the bottle and squeeze it until you can’t squeeze it
to matter
any further, then answer the questions that follow
• Hypothesize how changes to
a. What is condensation? (Water vapor cools and
different forms of matter will
forms liquid water.)
a. What happens to the balloon when you squeeze
change the arrangement of
b. Explain what is happening to the particles
the bottle? (The balloon expanded as the air left the bottle and
their particles.
in the water that causes it to change. (they move closer
entered the balloon)
• Communicate data collected together than a regular gas,)
b. Is the air in the balloon a solid, a liquid or a gas?
from the different c. What process is the opposite of
(Gas)
experiments to show that
condensation? (evaporation)
c. What do you think happened to the particles
matter is made up of tiny
when you squeezed the bottle and the balloon
particles, too small to be seen.
Accounting for Expansion and Contraction
expanded?
• Develop a model to describe Because the particles that make up a metal bridge
• Now take the balloon off the bottle and put the cap on
that matter is made up of tiny will naturally expand when heated, asphalt built
tightly.
particles, too small to be seen. upon metal bridge links should be danger.
• Squeeze the bottle.
• Use the model developed, Engineers have solved this problem by creating
describe the differences in interlocking fingers on rollers so the bridge can flex
1. Were you still able to squeeze the bottle? Explain your answer
attraction among the particles without expansion/contraction breaking it.
in terms of the particles contained in the air in the bottle. (the
of a solid, liquid, and gas.
11
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Use models of solids, liquids Have learners explain why metals when heated will bottle could only be compressed a small amount because the gas particles
and gases to explain their expand? (particles get enough energy to increase collisions can’t be forced any closer together)
observations in the lesson and move further apart- to sometimes resemble a liquid)
• Observe and describe Formative Assessment: Draw a square in your notebook. In the
phenomena involving gases square, draw circles to represent the particles of a gas. Write below
and use these to create a the square the arrangement of the particles. That is, are the
model of a gas particles very close to each other, somewhat close, or not close to
• Evaluate models developed by each other.
their classmates to show that
matter is made up of tiny Using your hand, you can’t change the shape of a solid substance
particles, too small to be seen like metal or rock by squeezing. So what is it about the molecules
of a gas that invites you to force it to occupy a smaller space by
• Plan and conduct
squeezing it? (The gas particles are further apart and free moving than the
investigations to show that
matter is made up of tiny particles in other forms of matter).
Retrieved from: https://www.mageba-
particles, too small to be seen
group.com/au/en/1026/Infrastructure/Expansion- Experiments to investigate the properties of air
• Compile data from carrying
joints/TENSA-FINGER-RSFD/Detail.htm
out different investigations.
Introduction to Air:
• Analyse data from
Another example: Applying Your Knowledge Teacher: Learners, what is invisible and is all around us (Air). Did
investigations to show that
Often in road construction there are spaces left you know air is made up of several different gases including oxygen
matter is made up of tiny
between concrete sections of the road. Learners, and nitrogen? So air should behave like a gas.
particles, too small to be seen.
based on the bridge example above, please account Tell me what you know about air. (we need it to breath, it can be added
• Interpret data to show that
for the rationale for designing concrete roads this to ballons and air mattresses to fill a space). So it can take up space, but
matter is made up of particles
way. (the space is helpful to avoid concrete damage with the does it have mass? - let us investigate.
too small to be seen.
expansion and contraction of the concrete in different
temperatures) Experiment 1: Air takes up space
Attitudes/Values
Worksheets • Fill a container with water. Explain to learners that this
• Appreciate the role that the
experiment will prove there is air all around us and that it
particulate nature of matter
The following are several worksheets that can be takes up space. Crumble a piece of paper or paper towel into
plays in everyday life.
either printed for learners or downloaded on their a ball and push it into the bottom of a clear drinking glass.
• Appreciate the importance of
devices or projected onto a white board. • Hold the glass vertically with the open end facing down.
phase change in everyday life.
Push it into the water.
• Lift the glass straight out of the water.
12
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Show persistence when States of Matter Worksheet • Remove the paper and have the learners observe and record
conducting experiments to the results. (they should observe the paper is dry)
demonstrate that matter is Worksheet to identify states of matter
made up of tiny particles. https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/scie After the completion of the demonstration, discuss the following
• Demonstrate interest in nce/grade-2-states-of-matter-a.pdf questions and ideas with the class:
finding out more about matter
and the behaviour of the Worksheet to classify objects as solid, liquid, 1. Why didn’t it get wet? (the air pocket between the water and top
particles that make up matter. gas of the inverted glass prevented water from running in wetting the
• Use the inquiry approach in https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/scie paper)
designing and conducting nce/grade-2-states-of-matter-b.pdf 2. What else was in the glass with the water that prevented
various investigations.· the water from getting in? (air filled some space in the glass)
• Show respect for evidence Worksheet to identify changing states of water
obtained from investigation https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/scie Activity 2: Does air have mass? (This activity shows that air has
on the particulate nature of nce/grade-2-states-of-matter-d.pdf mass.)
matter. Materials:
• Work collaboratively with The following are several worksheets exploring • Balloon
their group members to carry different concepts on matter. • Scale
out investigations on the Procedure:
particulate nature of matter. • In pairs/groups of more learners, learners inflate a balloon
• Participate actively in whole- and tie it securely. Weigh the inflated balloon on a scale
class and group discussions on and record its mass.
the particulate nature of • After recording the mass of the balloon, they then deflate
matter. the balloon completely and weigh it again and compare the
• Stewardship/Respect for two masses.
Living Things • Which balloon weighed more? (with air) Why is that?
• When conducting experiments (air takes up space even though it is invisible)
be careful to avoid harming • Write down your observations and conclusions in your
plants, animals or the notebooks.
environment. By the end of this activity, learners should conclude that air has
• Safety: Wash their hands after mass.
completing the activities
• When conducting practical
and group work, display
13
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
sensitivity to those learners Can you force the particles of a liquid to move closer
who may have difficulty together?
observing certain changes in
matter. Materials
• Flexible plastic bottle (18 – 20 oz) with cap
• Water
Retrieved from:
https://pixabay.com/illustrations/water-cup-water-bottle-
transparent-4998513/
Procedure
• Fill a bottle with water to the very top and put the cap on
securely. Squeeze the bottle.
Questions
1. What did you observe? (it invites a little squeezing but not very
much)
2. Were you able to squeeze the bottle filled with water as
much as when there was no water in the bottle? Explain your
answer in terms of particles. (The water-filled bottle could not be
squeezed as much as the air-filled bottle- the air particles as a gas are
further apart and can be compressed some whereas the liquid particles
closer together already can’t be compressed as easily)
3. Use your knowledge about how particles in a gas and those
in a liquid are arranged to explain why you think a closed
bottle of gas is easier to squeeze than a closed bottle of
liquid. The water-filled bottle could not be squeezed as much as the air-
filled bottle- the air particles as a gas are further apart and can be
compressed some whereas the liquid particles closer together already can’t
be compressed as easily)
14
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4. Draw a square in your notebook. Draw circles in the square
to represent the particles of a liquid.
Under the square describe how the particles are arranged. That is,
are the particles very close to each other, somewhat close, or not
close to each other.
Compressing Liquids vs Compressing Gases: a Practical
Example
The brakes in a car operate by passing a liquid through a tube that
extends from your brake pedal inside the car to a movable piston
down near the brake rotor. Imagine a syringe on two ends of a
plastic tube. If you press the syringe on end the syringe on the
other end will move.
Retrieved from:
http://www.mstworkbooks.co.za/technology/gr9/gr9-
technology-05.html
With liquids in the brake line, the movement is transferred because
the liquid does not measurably compress. When you get your
brakes repaired, sometimes air will get in the brake line. The result
is that you press your brake and it compresses the gas in the line
rather than moving the piston at the opposite end. We would say
the brakes feel “spongy” because they collapse without doing the
job of moving the piston at the other end. For this reason, good
15
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
mechanics will always “bleed” the lines inviting the gas to escape so
that only liquid is in the line. This principle is used in many
mechanical devices and is called hydraulics.
Learners, where have you seen hydraulics used? (backhoes, tractors,
dump trucks, garage lifts)
Experiment to Investigate that Solids are made up of particles
In my hand, I have a piece of metal (note to teacher: metal wire or
ball). Is it a solid, a liquid or a gas?
Either ask learners to draw two squares in their notebooks or
provide learners with a worksheet with two boxes as shown below.
Learners, in the square on the right, draw the metal object.
Learners, in the square on the right, draw how the particles in the
object are arranged. Write below the boxes, whether the particles
are very close to each other, somewhat close, or not close to each
other.
Use your model of a solid to explain why solids cannot be
squeezed like gases or liquids. You cannot squeeze solid substances
like metal or rock.
Investigating how Heat affects the movement of particles
Title: Particles on the move
I have in front of me three glasses containing hot, warm, and cold
water. Let us now see if the speed of water particles are different in
hot and cold water?
16
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
I will now put two drops of food colouring in each glass (learners
can help to add food colouring to the glass). Let us see what
happens.
Retrieved from:
https://pixabay.com/photos/ink-water-water-glass-liquid-drops-
2427263/
1. What do you observe in each of the glasses? (the colour moves
around quicker in the hot water)
2. Why do you think this happened? (The particles of water have
more energy because of heat so they move around more and the dye
travels with them)
3. What did you observe about the rate at which the
colouring spread in each glass? (faster in warm water)
Technology supplement
• See also: Skittles experiment where water temperature can
make a difference in rate of diffusion
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SGF13q4C3X0
(4:19 mins)
• See also PHET Simulation here where you can add heat to
a system and watch the particles move!
17
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulations/gas-properties
What is that smell?
Perfume spreading throughout the class
Produce a small, sealed bottle of perfume, vinegar or an essence.
Retrieved from:
https://pixabay.com/photos/perfume-fragrance-luxury-glass-
2721147/
Explain that you are going to open the bottle and pour some out
onto a surface or on a tissue and ask the learners to raise their
hands when they can smell it. You should observe a wave of hands
going up as the fragrance particles spread from the tissue
throughout the class.
Ask learners to answer the following questions:
1. Why couldn’t we smell it when the bottle was sealed? (the
molecules that make up the smell are trapped inside the bottle)
2. Which people in the room could smell the perfume
first? (those people closest to the open bottle)
3. Why do you think they smelled it first (the gas molecules
collided over and over and spread out from the initial site and will get
to the closets person first)
4. Where is the smell coming from? (the gas carries the smell from
the bottle)
18
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5. What do you think is happening? (there is enough heat to give
the gas molecules energy to move more quickly and expand through
collisions.)
Application: Smells in Our World
Our noses access smells that our brains process to give us
recognition or memories of past experiences. The chemicals that
make up those smells are distributed in the gases that make up the
air around us. Because gas molecules are moving around so much
and are susceptible to expanding with small temperature changes,
they are very adept at moving smells around to reach our noses!
Some chemicals that include sulphur (thiols) are particularly able to
travel in gases to our noses; these would include the sulphur smells
that come from surface cracks (volcanoes) or water springs and the
smell of garlic and seaweeds like sargassum. In parts of the world,
skunks emit sulphur sprays to deter attack from predators. See:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=waTAfGeFCto (1:51 mins)
Compressing air
Can you force the particles of a gas to move closer together? (Yes)
The action of forcing particles of matter closer together is called
compressing. Think of the gas in a gas bottle or in a spray can.
These particles have been forced closer together. What happens
when the trapped gases are released? (The gas rushes out forcefully just
like a spray).
When we spray paint out of a can it releases gas with paint particles
being pulled along. Why does the can seem to cool down? What is
happening? (as the gas rushes out side the can, it needs energy to expand
through a small hole in the nozzle. The energy is take from surroundings which
includes the can itself. Removing heat energy means the can gets cooler.)
19
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Let’s investigate compressing air in the experiment below:
• Divide the class into groups of 2
• Provide each group with a small syringe without a needle
Retrieved from:
Best Ce ISO 50ml-200ml Disposable Irrigation Syringe with
Catheter Tip Manufacturer and Factory | Teamstand
(teamstandmedical.com)
Procedure:
1. Examine the syringe carefully, pull the plunger up and down
to familiarize yourself with the syringe and what it is capable
of.
2. Record your observations in your notebook.
3. Pull the plunger all the way to the top.
4. Place your finger just below the tip of the syringe without
touching it.
5. Press the plunger all the way down. Observe what happens.
(it seems to give off cool air like the paint can getting colder)
6. Pull the plunger back to the top again.
7. Place one of your fingers completely over the tip of the
opening tightly.
8. Try to press the plunger all the way down. Observe what
happens. (the plunger will only compress a small amount but much
more than a liquid)
20
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
9. Release the plunger and observe what happens. (the plunger
pressure is released as the plunger moves back upward)
10. What happened to the volume of the syringe while you
pressed the plunger? (it was reduced)
11. What happened to the volume of the syringe while you
released the plunger? (it expanded again)
12. Draw a model to show what happens to the air in the syringe
as you press and when you release the plunger.
13. Use your model to explain what happened when you pressed
and released the plunger?
Summary
Although matter in the form of air cannot be seen in the syringe, it
still exists. It can be detected by pressing the plunger and feeling air
as it leaves the syringe. Also, when blocking the syringe, the
plunger cannot go all the way down due to the air in the syringe.
Inflating a ball
This activity can be done as a demonstration if enough beach balls
and pumps are not available. However, if enough materials are
available, then it can be done in groups.
Procedure:
• Gather the following materials (beach ball and pump) for the
demonstration.
• Ask learners to observe the beach ball before it is inflated.
21
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://www.pixelsquid.com/png/deflated-beach-ball-
1216842636782999012?image=D13
• Also invite learners to feel the beach ball before and during
inflation and have them record its properties in their
notebook. (is flat to begin and inflates as air enters)
• After all of the learners have felt the ball and recorded their
observations, inflate the beach to fullness and close the plug,
invite learners to feel the inflated beach ball, observe its
properties and record their observations. (the ball is taut and
seems to be full of air)
Retrieved from:
Pump: https://openclipart.org/detail/333682/air-
pump
Inflated beach ball:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Beach_ball_detail.jpg
Questions:
1. Restate the observable features that the beach ball had
before and after it was inflated. (ball begins flat with no air inside
and then gets air pushed in from pump)
2. What was the cause of the changes? (invisible air particles entered
the ball)
22
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3. What can you say about the volume of the air in the beach
ball before it was inflated and after it was inflated? (the volume
of air inside the ball increases with the action of the pump)
4. Draw a 2-box model to show the beach ball before it was
inflated and after it was completely inflated.
5. How do these two activities provide evidence that matter
consists of tiny particles too small to be seen.
The air in the beach ball cannot be seen but we know that it exists because the
beach ball changes shape and has different properties when air is pumped into
it. The volume of the beach ball increases when air is pumped into it. Air
released from the beach ball can be felt.
After learners have developed their evidence and reasonings, invite
them to share their information.
Confirm and restate the important content about the task to help
them understand the idea of matter existing in particles too small
to be seen.
Application: Why does our tyre go flat on a bicycle or car? (the air
somehow escapes the inside of the tyre through a hole in the rubber or leak
around the rim). How do we remedy this? (we patch the tyre, clean the rim
and reassemble the tyre) After it is assembled, what do we usually do
next? (the garage often has something called a compressor which will
deliver volumes of air to the inside of our tyre to the correct pressure.)
Teacher note:
Extension – Temperature change: after the bicycle pump has
been used for inflating the ball, learners should feel the side of the
pump. They will detect that it is warm. Ask them why the pump
get swarm as pumping continues? (the air particles get compressed
over and over. When they are brought together in collision
23
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
repeatedly, they actually give off heat energy. This is the opposite
of the energy loss as a gas expands leaving a spray can.
Effects of heating and cooling on matter
Let us recall that particles in all states of matter are in constant
motion as follows:
• The particles in solids cannot move freely; instead particles
in a solid vibrate in a fixed position.
• Particles in a liquid vibrate and move about sliding past
each other.
• Particles in a gas vibrate and move freely at high speeds.
Do you think an increase in temperature would increase the kinetic
energy and speed of particles in matter? (Yes)
Heat is the energy possessed by an object due to the vibration of
the molecules that make up the object. When matter is heated, its
particles get further apart, it expands, its overall temperature
increases and it sometimes changes state.
On the other hand, when matter is cooled, heat is removed,
particles slow, it contracts, its temperature decreases and it may
even change state.
Today, we will conduct some exciting experiments to explore the
effects of heat on different types of matter. By the end of our
activities, you will see all of these phenomena. Let's dive in and
discover the power of heat!
Before conducting the experiments, engage learners in a brief
discussion about what heat is and how it can change matter. Use
examples like melting butter on toast or boiling water for tea. Ask
24
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
learners to share their experiences with heat changing matter at
home.
Expansion and contraction
When heat is added to any substance, it expands as its particles
move further apart. This is called thermal expansion.
With thermal expansion, gases expand more than liquids and
liquids expand more than solids.
Air expansion
Materials needed
• Balloon
• Empty soda bottle
• 2 containers
• Cold water
• Hot water
• Thermometer
Procedure:
• Stretch the balloon over the opening of the bottle.
• Place cold-water in a container and a hot-water in another
container. Ensure that the water level is about 15 cm high.
• Encourage the learners to take the temperature of the
water in each container, to determine the difference in
temperature between the two.
• Put the bottle in the container with the hot water and push
it down so the water rises up around the sides of the
bottle. Hold it for a minute or so.
25
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Ask learners to observe the balloon and record their
observations. (the balloon begins to inflate)
• Ask learners to draw a diagram (model), to show how the
heat caused the gas particles to gain energy and expand to
fill the balloon
• Repeat the above steps this time, placing the bottle in the
container with the cold water. Hold it for a minute or so.
Observe how the balloon begins to deflate as the particles
begin to slow at the lower temperature.
• Ask learners to draw a diagram (model), to show how the
absence of heat (cooling) caused the gas particles to
contract or get closer to each other and in the process the
balloon is reduced in size.
• What is inside of the bottle? (air) Can the air escape? (no)
• What happens to the air in the bottle when you put the
bottle in hot water? (the particles moved quicker colliding and
getting further apart filling the balloon with air.
• What happens to the air in the bottle when you put the
bottle in cold water? (the particles slow down and with fewer
collisions there is less pressure exerted by the gas.)
• What do you predict will happen if we leave the bottle in
the hot water for half an hour? (it may expand the balloon so
large it will burst)
26
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners, see if you can explain what is happening in each example.
When you stretch the balloon over the opening of the bottle, all of the air is
trapped inside. Putting the bottle in hot water provides the air particles with
more energy, causes them to heat up and move further apart, taking up more
space (thermal expansion), causing air to enter the balloon and inflate it.
When the bottle was moved into the cold water, the heat was
reduced and the air molecules cooled down moving closer
together, taking up less space than when in the hot water (thermal
contraction).
Examples of how thermal expansion and contraction are used in
everyday life:
1. If the tin lid of a bottle is struck on too tightly, we often dip it
in warm water to help open the bottle.
2. If two metal bowls are struck, one inside the other, we usually
place them in hot water. This helps to separate the two bowls
easily.
Using a Simulation for Particle Behaviour
Use the PHET site found below, to design an activity that has
them investigating what happens when gas particles are
compressed.
(https://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulations/gas-properties
Expansion of solids: Heating metal wire
Suspend a metre length of resistance wire between two supports
and hang a weight from the centre as shown in the diagram below.
Note the position of the weight and then heat the wire. Record the
new position of the weight, to see if the wire expanded. Observe
the wire as it cools.
27
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Diagram by: Amaala Muhammad, St. Vincent and the Grenadines
When metal wire is heated it expands. That is, its length increases. If a
lightweight object is placed on the wire its position changes as the wire droops. If
we stop heating the wire it cools down, contracts and goes back to its original
length. The object will also return to its original position Thus, we see that
solids expand when heated and contract when cooled
Heating liquids
1. Heat a certain amount of water using a stove/Bunsen
burner/candle
2. What happens to the water as it heats up? (It starts moving.)
3. What effect does this have on the volume of the water in the
beaker/pot? (The volume increases as the liquid expands.
4. Your mother asked you to put a pot of water to boil but told
you not to fill the pot to the brim. What is the reason for
this? (water expands and may overflow the pot)
Retrieved from: https://timelessmoon.getarchive.net/media/pot-
steaming-hot-food-drink-b52222
When water boils, it not only expands, it also evaporates. As the
water evaporates, ask learners the following questions.
28
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1. What happened to the water in the heated beaker/pot? (It
changed into an invisible gas.)
2. What happens to the water when it evaporates? (It disperses
into the surrounding air.)
3. What is different about the water after it evaporates? (It is
gas instead of liquid.)
Change of state:
A phase change is a change of matter from one state to another.
Phase changes are only possible when matter loses or gains heat.
For a substance to undergo a change of state, heat must either be
given to it or taken away from it. Each phase change has its own
special name.
1. Melting - solid to liquid (heat gain)
2. Evaporating/Boiling – liquid to gas (heat gain)
3. Condensation – gas to liquid (heat loss)
4. Freezing – liquid to gas (heat loss)
Let’s observe some of these phase changes:
Condensation:.
Fill a glass or beaker with cold water. Leave it undisturbed for a
few minutes. As water vapour condenses on the beaker, ask
learners the following
29
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Photo credit: Amaala Muhammad, St. Vincent and the Grenadines
1. Where does the water come from on the outside of the
beaker? Explain your thinking. (It must come out of the
surrounding air.)
2. Has the amount of water changed inside the beaker? (no)
3. How could you investigate this phenomenon to explain
your answer? (weigh the beaker several times during the process)
The following is another activity that can be done to demonstrate
condensation.
Heat some water until it begins to boil. As the steam is given off,
hold a metal spoon over the steam and watch droplets form on the
spoon as the steam cools and condenses (change) back into water.
Discuss how cooling causes the gas to change back into a liquid.
Think about where you have seen phase change before.
Melting: A change from a solid to a liquid
1. Have you ever had ice-cream on a hot day? What happened to
the ice cream if you did not eat it very quickly? (it melted)
Retrieved from:
https://pixabay.com/photos/ice-cream-melted-dessert-sweet-
2200436/
30
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. What happens to puddles when the Sun comes out after it
rains? (the puddle evaporates- no more water)
3. Where have you seen the following?
a. A liquid turning to a gas (rubbing alcohol on my hand)
b. A gas turns to a liquid. (condensation on the outside of
a window)
c. Will ice cream melt if it is left in the freezer? (not if
the temperature is below freezing temperature)
Dissolving salt in water and evaporating the water to get back
the salt
Explore the Salt:
• Divide the class into groups of two. Provide each with a
teaspoon of salt on a small piece of black construction
paper/Bristol board.
Photo credit: Amaala Muhammad, St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Ask learners to use the magnifying glass to observe the salt then
record what they observe. Also ask them to draw what they see.
(tiny cubic crystals)
• Ask learners to write a hypothesis in their notebook about
what they think will happen if the salt is added to the
water. (it will fall to the bottom & slowly dissolve)
31
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Ask them to pour the salt into the water and stir the water.
What do you observe class? (the salt is disappearing as it
dissolves in the water-stirring and heating accelerates the dissolving
process)
Questions:
1. Could you see the salt in the water after you stirred it? (no
disappeared)-
2. Is it still there or has it disappeared?
3. What is one way you can tell that the salt is still in the
water? (taste it? Evaporate the water)
4. You have just established that you can’t see salt when it is
dissolved in water but you know that it is there.
5. Can you think of other examples of matter that you know
is there but can't see it? (Hint: think about sugar, food
colouring, or a fire)
6. How does this activity help you to understand that matter
is too small to be seen. (dissolving solids is a very small process)
7. What do you think will happen if you evaporate the water
from the glass? (will get salt crystals back)
Evaporate the water
Evaporate the water using a Bunsen burner Put the salt water
on a metal cover or beaker and heat on a Bunsen burner/stove or
candle until the water evaporates. What is left behind? (salt crystals)
Evaporate the water using the Sun
Place the samples on a windowsill or somewhere there is direct
sunlight.
• Let the water evaporate naturally; this may take days to
weeks, depending on the amount of water used.
• Revisit the cups regularly to observe the progress of
evaporation, until all of the water evaporates.
32
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Teacher Note: Experiment can also be conducted using sugar.
Summary
Considering all the demonstrations, done in this section, do your
observations support the statement that matter is made of smaller
particles and that these are too small to be seen individually.
Surface tension
Have you ever noticed that when you slap the surface of water it
feels as though the water is resisting or fighting back? (Yes/No?)
That’s because of surface tension. Surface tension is a force
which is caused when all of the molecules on top of water are
pulled tightly together and behave like an elastic skin. Learners,
watch as I demonstrate surface tension using the following
experiment:
• Fill a glass with water slowly just to the point where the
glass is full and the top of the water is above the glass.
Retrieved from:
https://www.flickr.com/photos/andredoreto/4429208363/in/ph
otostream/
Even though we can’t see them, water molecules like to stick to
each other by weak negative-positive attractions we call hydrogen
bonding
33
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://ib.bioninja.com.au/hydrogen-bonds/
Because of the relatively high attraction of water molecules to each
other through a web of hydrogen bonds, water has a higher surface
tension than most other liquids. The internal molecules are tightly
surrounded but the surface molecules tend to pull inward and form
a surface skin.
Retrieved from: https://saylordotorg.github.io/text_general-
chemistry-principles-patterns-and-applications-v1.0/s15-03-unique-
properties-of-liquids.html
• Carefully place a razor or pin on the surface of the water,
to show learners that the water will support the razor/pin.
• Carefully add a few drops of detergent to the water and
observe the razor or pin falling to the bottom. Ask
learners why they think the surface tension was broken?
(the detergent gets in the way of the hydrogen bonding to break the
surface tension)
34
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Place a few drops of water on a sheet of wax paper. Ask
learners to observe and record what they see. (it forms a
round droplet)
• Carefully add a few drops of detergent to the water on the
sheet of wax paper. Ask learners to observe and record
what they see. (the droplet flattens out)
• Ask learners why they think this happened? (the surface
tension of the droplet was broken because the detergent interrupted
the hydrogen bonding.)
• Applications:
o Washing Clothes: by adding detergent to our
wash water for cleaning clothes, the surface
tension of droplets of water is broken such that
the water is better able to enter the crevices of
textiles and do a better job cleaning. The detergent
serves a second purpose of bonding weakly to oil-
like dirt and water at the same time.
o Mosquito Control: farmers have been known to
add detergent or natural oils to stagnant bodies of
water. These both interrupt the surface tension
film caused by hydrogen bonding. Developing
mosquito larvae happen to breath through tubes
that rely on string surface tension. The clever
farmer can limit the number of mature mosquitos
by reducing surface tension thereby suffocating
the developing mosquitos. This may sound like a
negative intervention but mosquitos can carry
dangerous diseases, so control of the population is
actually a positive measure! Have learners research
35
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
the diseases that mosquitos typically carry and
have them report back to their classmates.
Additional Resources and Materials
Experiment: Don’t spill the water! (This experiment shows air can exert pressure.)
Materials:
• A plastic bottle/jar
• Water
• Piece of cardboard/cardstock
Procedure:
• Learners fill an empty plastic bottle or jar with a little water.
• They then place a piece of cardboard wide enough to cover the opening and invert the bottle/jar.
Learners should observe that the water does not fall out. Learners share why they think the water does not fall out? (The simple explanation is that the outside air pressure
is approx. 14.7 pounds per square inch (varies with temperature and altitude) in all directions. The pressure from the water is much less (approx. 0.3psi or weight divided by area of jar rim).
So, the air pressure pushing up exceeds water pressure down, holding the card in place.)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Disciplinary Core Ideas to be attained by the end of grade 5. Matter of any type can be subdivided into particles that are too small to see, but even then the
matter still exists and can be detected by other means (e.g., by weighing or by its effects on other objects). For example, a model showing that gases are made from
matter particles that are too small to see and are moving freely around in space can explain many observations, including the inflation and shape of a balloon; the
effects of air on larger particles or objects (e.g., leaves in wind, dust suspended in air); and the appearance of visible scale water droplets in condensation, fog, and,
by extension, also in clouds or the contrails of a jet.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2012. A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, Crosscutting Concepts, and Core Ideas.
W ashington, DC: The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/13165.
36
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Mathematics: Record data from different experiments.
Language Arts:
Ask learners to read and summarize the main points, enhancing their reading comprehension skills.
Learners write a story or a poem about the journey of an air molecule through different phases and environments, integrating creative writing with scientific
concepts.
Social Studies: Learners can investigate the effects of phenomena such as the Saharan Dust.
Art: Learners can create models using clay or other materials to represent different phases of matter.
Physical Education: Breathing Exercises: Teach learners about the role of air in respiration through breathing exercises and activities that highlight how air enters
and leaves the lungs. Breathing also helps in maintaining calm and reducing stress.
Music: Sound and Vibration: Explore how air acts as a medium for sound. Conduct experiments to show how sound travels through air and have learners create
simple musical instruments to observe these effects.
Health and Family Life Education: Respiration and Health: Discuss the importance of clean air for healthy lungs and overall well-being. Include topics on how
to protect the respiratory system and the impact of smoking and pollution.
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated
Elements from Local Culture
• Outside cooking on firewood and coal pot. Oxygen (air) is very important to this combustion process. Notably, air and technology have evolved in the
cooking process through gas and electric stoves.
• Balloon blowing competition is a Nine Mornings activity.
• Jumbie from folklore are wind/air spirits.
• The smell of local foods spread; persons can recognize these foods by their smell.
• The fact that matter can change state, is used in local cuisine.
• Inflated balls are used in many different sports.
• Inflated balloons are used as decorations.
• The entertainment industry also utilises a number of gases in musical shows and sporting activities.
• Swimmers can cut through water to swim.
• Change of state is used to produce many local foods such as ice cream.
Environment
• Air masses and air pressure systems greatly influence the Caribbean weather. We have a known hurricane season because of this.
37
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Technology
• Use digital tools and apps to simulate experiments or visualise air particles. Interactive simulations can help students understand abstract concepts.
• Many technologies are developed for the detection and removal of particles in the air that are too small to be seen, detect matter dissolved in blood stream,
water bodies, foods etc. as these are too small to be seen.
• Some gases are transported under pressure as a liquid instead of as a gas.
TVET
• Many TVET activities release a lot of dust and chemicals into the atmosphere.
• Many of the food products made in TVET centres are results of matter changing from one state to another
Agriculture
• A number of chemicals are applied in an aerosol manner. These chemicals can spread to areas and cause harm to other animals and plants.
• The sources of air pollution be field and orchard operations, unpaved roads, farm equipment exhaust, agricultural burning, processing and handling
facilities, pesticides, livestock, and windblown dust
38
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 2: Measure and graph quantities to provide evidence that regardless of the type of change that occurs when
heating, cooling, or mixing substances, the total weight of matter is conserved.
Clarification Statement: Examples of reactions or changes could include phase changes, dissolving, and mixing that form new substances.
Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include distinguishing mass and weight.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Experimental Design Scenario
Have learners recall an experiment that shows: Mary and John were twins who got two boxes of wax crayons
Knowledge a) Conservation of mass for a change of each for their birthday. John’s crayons were smaller as he
state preferred them for fine drawings. Mary’s crayons were slightly
Define terms:
b) Conservation of mass for dissolving a larger which preferred for making posters. Unfortunately, on a
● Mass
solid in a liquid with no chemical reaction recent car trip they each left them loose in a separate pile under
● Grams
c) Conservation of mass for a chemical the back window of the car. You guessed it…they melted in the
● Kilograms
reaction in a closed system hot sun- what a mess!
● Reliability
d) Indication of a chemical change rather Neither could remember which side of the car they left them on
● Change of state
than a simple physical state change. but their parents wanted them cleaned up right away.
● Chemical change
Now that the crayons were cool again each of two messes was
● Mixture
Mixing Substances just a mass of colours all mixed together. But which mess was
● Solution
1) If we mix sand and water we have a there’s to clean up??
● Homogeneous mixture
mixture. Would you predict the starting
● Heterogeneous mixture
materials would have the same mass as Do you think if they weighed their other packages of intact
● Soluble/insoluble
the combined materials? (yes) crayons and the solidified wax messes, they could determine
● Precipitate
2) If we mix table salt and water, we can see whose was whose to clean up?
● Conservation of mass and
that the salt slowly dissolves. We say this Let see if we could help them decide if that was possible.
Conservation of matter
is a special homogeneous mixture called a
solution. Would you predict the starting
39
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Changing states of matter: materials would have the same mass as
particularly- melting and the combined materials? (yes) Note to teacher: Conservation of mass is a critical concept that is
freezing developed over time; therefore, learners need multiple
● Open and closed systems opportunities to investigate this phenomenon.
● Variable
What is Mass?
● Controls or controlled variables
As you would have learnt before, matter is anything that has mass
● List some physical properties of
and takes up space, but what is mass? Mass is the measure of how
matter. (ST 3 PS MM 1) Comprehension of Vocabulary
much matter is in an object. Mass can be measured in grams or
Place the words Conservation of Mass in the
kilograms. How would you find the mass of an object? (Weigh the
Identify and explain different ways by centre of this Frayer square and ask learners to fill
object on a scale)
which materials can be changed. (ST 5 in the 4 quadrants with the appropriate
PS MM 1) information.
As a review the teacher may find it useful to view the following
video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BJJOZ5QQpmc
Understand that the mass of water
(1:03 mins) In particular watch Timestamp: 0-0:28s
remains constant when water changes
from solid to liquid. (ST 6 PS MM1)
Investigating Conservation of Mass - Nothing is Lost
From experiments we have done and from your own experiences,
you are aware that the state of matter can be changed. For example,
Skills
solid butter can be melted to form liquid butter, liquid water can
be frozen to form solid water (ice) and solid sugar can be mixed
Hypothesize why the total mass of the
with water until it dissolves. Now, let us think about what happens
products may appear to change when
to the mass of matter when the state changes? Let's conduct a few
performing experiments in an open
investigations to determine if changing the state matter also
system.
Manipulation and Measurement Skills
changes the mass. Let us first start by investigating what happens
when matter changes state.
Identify different phase changes of
Note to teacher:
matter e.g. liquid changing to a solid,
Assess each learner’s use of measuring/weighing
Below are a series of investigations on how changing the
solid to liquid
devices (scale and or measuring cylinder/
state affects the mass of matter. Retrieved from:
measuring spoons/ measuring cups)
40
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Identify the conservation of mass with Suggested Mark Scheme: https://teaching.betterlesson.com/lesson/604577/changing-
phase change. Observe each learner using the apparatus and matter-is-weight-the-same-or-different?from=search
award one mark for each skill the learner can Notes to teacher:
Use measurements and calculations to perform. Using at least three types of matter (butter, ice, chocolate, candle,
show that regardless of the reaction or candy) that melt and/ or freeze quickly, have learners measure the
changes mass is conserved. Electronic Scale: mass of them and record them on an observation sheet.
Conduct an experiment to observe 1. He/she uses the TARE (zero) button Now, heat the solids so that they change state and measure the
what happens when salt is dissolved in appropriately. mass again. After measuring, have learners place the liquids in a
water. 2. Handles scale with care freezer (optional) to change back to solids and measure the mass.
3. Minimises spilling materials on the scale
Have learners plot a bar graph for each substance showing the
Describe their observations of water or if needed he/she removes any spilled
three measurements. N.B. The mass should remain the same.
evaporating and the salt crystals re- materials from the scale before weighing
forming. 4. Invites reading to stabilise before
Before using the scale, instruct learners on how to use the
recording it.
electronic scale. See the following video for guidance
Select and use the appropriate tools to
observe and measure matter. Measuring Cylinder/Measuring Cup:
https://youtu.be/cu4byDWQxKk?si=vq2GTkxT5Ly7-nRc (1:34
mins)
Record and organize observations in 1. Pours liquid carefully to avoid spills
chart form. 2. Places cylinder on a flat surface before
reading
Investigate the effect of heat energy on 3. Reads device at eye-level
the state of matter 4. Reads the bottom of the meniscus.
Retrieved from
Have an understanding that heating and https://publicdomainvectors.org/en/free-clipart/Digital-
cooling matter can bring about phase weighing-scale/85434.html
changes from solid to liquid to gas. Discuss with learners the possible errors that could occur to result
in them not having the same measurement in all three cases e.g.
spilling the substances, reading balance inaccurately, etc. Scientists
call consistency of measurement reliability.
41
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Recognize that when substances Diagram Showing How to read the bottom of
combine, they may lose their individual the meniscus Experiment using Water and Ice
properties. Materials:
● Beaker/cup/tin/soda bottle)
Demonstrate that changes of state are ● Water
reversible through the addition or ● Scale
removal of heat. ● Measuring cup/cylinder
Determine if the mass of a substance Retrieved from: Note to teacher: select a container and volume of water that will
changes when it changes state minimise water loss during the freezing and thawing processes.
https://www.collegesidekick.com/study-
Determine if the mass of two or more guides/introductorychemistry/measurement- Procedure:
substances change when they are mixed uncertainty-accuracy-and-precision ● Place the container on a scale, find its mass, add 250 ml (1
measuring cup) of water to the container and record the
Take measurements showing that Measuring Spoons: mass of the water and the container.
whether the process is a change of state, ● Place the container with the water in a freezer. When the
dissolving, or a chemical reaction, the 1. Careful to avoid spills water is completely frozen, remove from the freezer and
total mass of the substances does not 2. Make certain to fill or level the measuring weigh the frozen water (ice) again and record its mass.
change. spoon as needed. ● Predict what will happen to the mass of the ice after it
3. Transfer all of the material from the melts. Will it change or stay the same?
Understand that the same substance can spoon into the vessel. ● Leave the ice to melt completely, then reweigh the
change state and be a liquid, a solid, or a container with the water.
gas I n a d d i t i o n t o a w a r d i n g m arks for use of ● Record the mass of the water from the melted ice.
apparatus, the teacher may also mark: ● Draw a bar graph of your results.
Apply the Law of Conservation of Mass
to the mixing of two separate states of 1. How well learners work with their team
matter. and if he/she shows regard for others.
2. How they maintain their work station (i.e.
Do they keep it clean and tidy and clean
up after the experiment?)
42
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Explain how, when different states of Bar Graph Template
matter are mixed, some properties Make a Simple Lab Report
change while others remain the same. Note to teacher: For this aspect of the
assessment learners should have an opportunity to
Describe how matter is transported into, write/present a simple lab report after conducting
out of, and within systems. at least one of the experiments. In addition to the
date title, aim, list of apparatus/materials and
Describe the changes in properties they procedure, below are some of the key areas which
observe during and/or after heating, should be included in a report and some
cooling, or mixing substances. suggestions on how to mark those areas:
Describe the effect of cooling and Observations
heating on different states of matter.
1. Uses appropriate section to record
Measure and graph quantities to provide observations
Diagram credit: Amaala Muhammad
evidence that regardless of the type of 2. Correctly records before and after
change that occurs when substances are observations.
Questions:
heated, cooled, or mixed, the total
1. Did the mass of the water change after it turned into ice?
weight is conserved. Recording Results/Data gathered
Why or why not? (no it did not- only change of state)
2. How does your prediction compare with the actual
Develop skills in using a balance to Table:
results? (I expected it to change)
measure mass.
3. What happens to the mass when the ice melted into water?
1. Table has an appropriate title
(no change)
Investigate whether the mass of two or 2. Neatly draws/constructs the table with
4. What do you predict will happen to the mass of the water
more substances change when they are headings, units and all the relevant
when it is frozen again? (return to original mass)
mixed. sections shown?
5. Compare the starting weight of the water in the container
3. Uses the sections of the table
with the mass of the water from the melted ice.
Infer that the mass of water remains the appropriately.
6. Did the mass of the water change when it turned into ice?
same when water changes from solid to 4. Correctly records the data gathered?
Why or why not? (no change- only a change of state)
liquid.
43
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
7. Did moving from one state to another affect the mass of
Conduct an investigation to produce Graph: the water? Support your answer with evidence from your
data that can serve as the basis for graph. (no it did not- graph shows equivalent mass)
evidence, using fair tests 1. Graph has an appropriate title. 8. How did moving from one state to another affect the
2. It is neatly drawn/constructed. water? Support your answer with evidence from your
Identify with examples, physical change 3. Axes and sections are labelled graph. (the water changed state but no mass change)
in everyday living (ST 3 PS MM 2) appropriately.
4. Correctly plots each bar of the graph. Note to Teacher: Repeat the experiment using two other
Classify substances as soluble or substances that melt or freeze quickly such chocolate, butter,
insoluble by their ability to dissolve in Analysis of Data: candle, candy as shown below:
water. (ST 4 ESS ER 9) Assess is learners can correctly calculate the
Experiment Using Butter
difference between the total weight of the
Weigh a certain amount of butter and the container it is in. Record
Measure volume and mass of materials. substances (using standard units) before and after
the mass on your worksheet. Heat the butter until it melts
(ST 4 PS MM 1) they are heated, cooled, and/or mixed.
completely then weigh the butter and the container again and
record the mass. Place the butter in the refrigerator until it returns
Investigate using a variety of ways and Discussion:
to its solid state, weigh it one more time and record the mass of
measurements to compare physical Give relevant background information. Explain
the butter and the container.
properties of certain materials. (ST 4 PS observations/results.
MM 2)
Conclusion:
Attitudes/Values Have learners make conclusions based on the aim
of the experiment and their experimental findings
Appreciate the importance of the
and reward a mark for every correct conclusion.
conservation of mass.
Show persistence when conducting
Note to teacher: For a simplified version of the Retrieved from: https://pixabay.com/photos/food-butter-
experiments that demonstrate the
lab report the teacher may prefill certain sections table-milk-3179853/ & https://pixabay.com/photos/liquid-
conservation of mass.
of a lab report and leave spaces in the report for butter-butter-sauce-stove-792696/
learners to complete.
44
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Use the inquiry approach in conducting Using Experimental Findings
investigations on the conservation of Have learners plot a bar graph for each substance, showing the
mass Learners can make correct predictions on the three measurements.
weight of substances after heating, cooling or
Note to teacher: Repeat the experiment using another substance
Show respect for evidence obtained mixing in a closed system.
such as chocolate.
from investigation on the conservation
of mass Learners can correctly distinguish between
physical and chemical changes by indicating when
Show care for the environment by a new substance has been formed.
appropriately disposing of the chemicals
used. Graph Construction /Analysis
Provide learners with data and have them construct
Demonstrate work habits during the lab
a graph or give learners a graph and have them
activities that ensure personal safety, the
safety of others, as well as consideration
analyse it.
of others and the environment. Retrieved from:
Conservation of Mass Worksheet
https://www.pexels.com/photo/chocolate-bars-on-white-
Follow rules for safe and appropriate surface-6167332/ &
use of scientific tools and chemicals. https://www.rawpixel.com/search/chocolate%20melt?page=1&
path=_topics&sort=curated
Display sensitivity to those learners who
Learners from these three experiments, what can you conclude
may have difficulty using certain tools or
about the mass of a substance when it changes from one state to
identifying certain changes when
another? (The mass remains the same) Learners, when matter
conducting practical and group work.
changes from one state to another, the mass does not change.
Participate actively in whole- class and
So: what could we tell Mary & John?
group discussions on the conservation
If we weigh one of their intact sets of crayons it should have the
of mass.
same mass as one of the melted messes! Then we know whose
mess each pile is to clean up
45
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Communicate the results from the Introducing the Law of Conservation of Matter
various investigations to the class and Retrieved from: https://www.tes.com/teaching-
teacher. resource/conservation-of-mass-worksheet- The Law of Conservation of Matter states that the amount of
6062980 matter stays the same even when it changes state. This simply
Work collaboratively with their group means that when matter changes state, nothing is lost. We saw this
members to carry out the activities on in the previous experiments when the mass remained the same
the conservation of mass. even though the states had changed.
Now, let's do a few more experiments to investigate this but this
time, let’s see what happens when we mix substances. Mixing is
the act of combining two or more different substances.
A mixture is a combination of two substances. Here the
components do not react chemically but are mixed physically.
Depending on the type of components, mixtures are classified as
homogeneous and heterogeneous. A solution is a type of
homogeneous mixture where two or more components are
dissolved such that you cannot see them as separate substances any
longer.
Some examples of substances that are mixed are:
• Sand and pebbles
(heterogeneous)
Retrieved from:
https://www.publicdomainpictures.net/pictures/150000/velka/
pebble-beach-1455121574J7E.jpg
46
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Sugar and water
(homogeneous mixture-solution)
Retrieved from:
https://www.wikidoc.org/images/8/89/SaltInWaterSolutionLiq
uid.jpg
● A Tossed Salad
(heterogeneous mixture)
Retrieved from: https://ndsalud.blogspot.com/2013/08/como-
preparar-una-ensalada-correctamente.html
Let’s investigate what happens to the mass of the substances
when they are mixed.
Investigating what happens to the mass when substances
are mixed
Note to teacher: As learners compare the data, they should
recognize that when two or more substances are mixed, the mass
of the resulting substance equals the sum of the masses of the
original substances. In other words, regardless of the changes that
occur when mixing substances, the total mass of matter is
conserved. It should be noted that some substances, such as the
sugar in the sugar and water mixture disappear when mixed. This
process is called dissolving and the substance that is dissolved is
known as a soluble substance. On the other hand, a substance
47
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
which does not dissolve is referred to as an insoluble substance.
For example, sand does not dissolve in water.
Let’s do an experiment.
Materials for each group:
● 1 clear plastic cup (or beaker)
● Water
● Sugar
● Stirring rod (or spoon)
● electronic balance(s)
Procedure:
Precautions: Be sure to avoid spilling any of the substances during this
experiment.
1. Weigh 20 grams of sugar.
2. In an empty cup, weigh 100 grams of water (i.e. zero an
empty cup then add water until the reading is 100g)
3. Add the 20 grams of sugar to the water.
4. Weigh the cup with the water and sugar mixture and
record the mass.
5. Stir the mixture until the sugar dissolves and weigh the
mixture again.
Question: Learners from this experiment, what can you
conclude about the masses of the substance when they were
mixed? Did the masses change? (No. The masses remained the same.)
48
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Plot a bar graph for each substance showing the measurements
before the substance dissolved and after the substance dissolved.
Use your graph to answer the following questions:
1. Why was the weight of sugar and water the same before
and after mixing? (Nothing was lost or gained during mixing)
2. Why was it so important to avoid spills during this
experiment? (To avoid loss of material)
3. Would the mass of the weighing dish of sugar and water
be the same, more or less, after it was left on a table for
two days. Explain your answer. (Less- evaporation would lead
to loss of water and formation of crystals)
Teacher note: It is important to remind the learners that evaporation of
the water gives us back the sugar crystal so we know that there was no
chemical change only the dissolving process (dissolution)..
A video resource showing the experiment
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4O0PFJQW9SI (1:21
mins)
Activity One – Mixing Sodium carbonate (Washing soda)
and Magnesium sulphate (Epsom salt)
We have seen that when matter changes from one state to another,
the mass does not change, that is, it is conserved. We have also
seen that when we mix certain substances without an indication of
chemical change (heat, gas, light, precipitate), the total mass does
not change (sugar dissolved in water). Suppose we were to mix two
substances that undergo a chemical change to form something
49
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
new, would the mass of the new products be the same as the total
mass of substances we mixed?
In the next activity, we are going to combine two substances that
will react to form something new. Do you think the total mass of
the substances before the reaction took place, would be the same,
more or less than the mass of the new substance formed? Make
your prediction.
Materials for the demonstration
● 2 Clear plastic cups/beakers
● Sodium carbonate (Washing soda)
● Magnesium sulphate (Epsom salt)
● Water
● Graduated cylinder/graduated measuring cup
● Teaspoon
Procedure
1. In a clear plastic cup add 50 mL of water and add 1
teaspoon of Epsom salt (magnesium sulphate). Gently
swirl the cup so that the Epsom salt dissolves.
2. Measure the combined mass of the cup with the Epsom
salt solution in it. Tell learners the mass and have them
record it.
3. To another cup, add 50 mL of water and add 1 teaspoon
of sodium carbonate. Gently swirl the cup until the
sodium carbonate dissolves.
50
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4. Measure the combined mass of the cup with the sodium
carbonate solution in it. Tell learners the mass and have
them record it.
5. Have learners add the two masses together and record and
announce the sum.
6. Hold the cups up so learners can see them and then slowly
and carefully add the sodium carbonate solution to the
Epsom salt solution.
7. Place both cups on the scale to measure the total mass.
Expected results
A white solid will form. At first the solid may appear or look like
clouds of white particles floating in the liquid, but the particles
should eventually settle out to form a solid precipitate at the
bottom of the cup. This is a new substance formed and it indicates
a chemical change has occurred In chemistry it is referred to as a
precipitate.
The total mass should be the same as the sum of the individual
masses found before the substances were mixed and the reaction
took place. Even though the two substances have been changed
into a new substance, all of the particles making up the two
substances that were mixed, are still present in the new substance
formed. Which is why the mass stays the same.
51
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Activity Two: The chemical reaction of baking soda and
vinegar
Retrieved from: https://www.shutterstock.com/search/bottle-
balloon
In the last experiment, we combined two substances that formed
a new product that formed in the beaker/test tube. What if one or
more of the new products formed is a gas? How would we be able
to tell if the mass of the new substances remains the same as that
of the substances we reacted? To study this type of reaction we
can use what is referred to as a closed system.
What are open and closed systems?
Closed systems are systems which have no interaction with their
surrounding environment. Energy may, however, move into and
out of a closed system but mass cannot. This means that all mass
52
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
remains in the system. A sealed box is a good example of a closed
system. The inside is separated from its surroundings.
Open systems are systems that interact with their environment.
Energy and mass can move into and out of an open system. To
make the comparison between the reaction in a closed system and
an open system, it must be done as a fair test.
A fair test compares two or more things. Fair tests invite one to
compare one factor while keeping all others the same. The factor
that is being tested is called a variable. You keep everything else
exactly the same. All of these things that are the same are called
controls, or controlled variables. This means that in order to be
fair, a test must include measurement with scientific tools.
In this two-part activity, you will be comparing a reaction between
baking soda and vinegar/lime juice in an open system and in a
closed system.
Activity Two Part A - The Mixing baking soda and vinegar
in a closed system
Retrieved from: https://www.shutterstock.com/search/bottle-
balloon
53
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Materials needed:
Baking Soda, vinegar/lemon juice, empty soda bottles, balloons,
measuring spoons, funnel
Procedure:
1. Weigh and record the weight of the bottle (empty) on the
scale. Leave the bottle on the scale.
2. Measure out 20 mL of vinegar/lemon juice using a
measuring cylinder. Pour the vinegar/lemon juice into the
bottle using the funnel.
3. Use the measurements of the empty bottle and bottle with
the vinegar/lemon juice to calculate the mass of the
vinegar/lemon juice. Take the bottle with the
vinegar/lemon juice off the scale.
4. Weigh and record the mass of two teaspoons of baking
soda.
5. Blow up the balloon a bit to stretch it out a bit and use the
funnel and teaspoon to carefully add baking soda to it.
6. When baking soda has been added to the balloons, of all
the groups, carefully attach your balloon to the soda
bottle, making sure you have a good seal.
7. Predict what will happen to the mass of the substances
after they have been added together. Will it change or stay
the same?
8. Now, on the count of three, lift up your balloon to tip the
baking soda into the bottle with the vinegar/lime juice.
54
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
9. Observe the balloon to see what changes are taking place.
Also, look at the mixture in the bottle, to see what is
happening.
10. Record what you observed when you added the baking
soda to the vinegar/lemon juice in the bottle.
11. When the reaction stops, place the bottle with the balloon
still attached on the scale and weigh them.
12. Record the mass of the bottle and its contents.
Question:
This experiment is said to be taking place in a closed
system. Why do you think it is called a closed system?
(Nothing from the environment can get in or out of the system)
When the two substances mix, a gas called carbon dioxide is
produced. As the gas leaves the plastic bottle, it goes up into the
balloon. However, due to the tight seal you have created it cannot
escape. The gas has nowhere else to go and it pushes against the
balloon and blows it up, making it larger. Therefore, all of the
products stayed in the system and therefore the mass is the same.
55
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://www.shutterstock.com/search/bottle-
balloon
Note to teacher: Invite learners to perform the vinegar/lemon
juice and baking soda reaction again for a closer observation of the
reaction taking place.
This reaction can also be done in a sealed Ziploc bag, where the
vinegar/lemon juice is placed in a glass or jar and the baking soda
is placed in a cap or very small medicine cup. What type of system
does that make? (a closed system)
The baking soda is poured into the cup and the reaction observed.
As learners take the mass of the system with its contents at the end
of the experiment, they will find that the total mass remains the
same, proving that the mass of substances before and after a
chemical change remains the same.
We will now repeat this experiment using the same amount of
substances used in part A and the same method. This time
however, we will not be placing a balloon over the bottle, before
adding the baking soda to the vinegar/lemon juice in the bottle.
56
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Predict what will happen to the mass of the substances after they
have been added together. Will it change or stay the same?
After completing part B of the activity, respond to the following:
1. Describe the difference between the total mass and the
mass of the bottle with its contents after the mixing of the
substances. (the mass afterwards is less)
2. Why is this system called an open system? Explain.
(The gas that is produced can escape with the container open)
3. Draw the system made up of the bottle, baking soda and
vinegar/lemon juice. Use labels and arrows to show the
movement of matter and energy in the system.
4. Graph the masses before and after mixing the two
substances.
5. Compare the results obtained for the open and closed
systems.
6. Last time you mixed baking soda and vinegar, what type
of system was that? (a closed system)
7. What made it that type of system? (The gas from the chemical
change could not escape from the system.)
In this activity, learners compared the mass before and after a
reaction.
The learner will find that this time the mass is different. Ask
learners to explain the difference found.
57
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Explain and provide learners with a definition of the Law of
Conservation of Mass (write the definition on the overhead/from
board).
Observing the popping of a bag of microwave popping corn
Retrieved from:
https://www.flickr.com/photos/armydre2008/4012916832
Weigh the bag of microwavable popping corn. Place the bag in a
microwave for the period of time stated in the instructions on the
bag.
After the corn has popped, Weigh the bag again. Compare the two
masses. Is there a difference in the masses? (yes mass afterwards is
less)
How can you account for this difference observed? (water vapour
gas that has escaped the corn kernel is lost into the atmosphere so the mass
should be less afterwards)
Now you get to eat the popcorn!
Plot a bar graph showing the masses before and after the
experiment.
In this activity, learners compared the mass before and after a
reaction.
58
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The learner will find that this time the mass is different. Ask
learners to explain the difference found.
Explain and provide learners with a definition of the Law of
Conservation of Mass (write the definition on the overhead/from
board).
Additional Resources and Materials
Fifth Grade Lesson 4.1 Conservation of Mass Time: 7:12 mins
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Disciplinary Core Ideas:
1. The amount (weight) of matter is conserved when it changes form, even in transitions in which it seems to vanish (e.g., sugar in solution, evaporation in
a closed container).
2. No matter what reaction or change in properties occurs, the total weight of the substances does not change. (Boundary: Mass and weight are not
distinguished at this grade level.)
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2012. A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, Crosscutting Concepts, and Core Ideas.
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/13165.
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Mathematics: calculations of mass which involve finding the difference.
Language Arts: Learners can write descriptive pieces to record their observations. Introduction to new vocabulary such as “conservation”, “melting”, “boiling”,
“freezing”.
Social Studies: Principles of conservation, the need for sustainability in the environment, Resources, Pollution, Wants and needs, Culture and materials and kind
of space.
59
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated
● Using a scale to measure luggage mass at airports to ensure that correct weight allowance is maintained
● The use of scales, measuring cups, and measuring spoons in domestic kitchens, restaurants, and guest houses
● The use of measuring instruments to administer the correct dosages of medicines
● Making local coconut oils, hair products, candles, and confectioneries.
● Use of 3D printers to change the shape and form of matter
● Law of Conservation of matter/mass may be linked to sustainability, the effects of various forms of matter which may change from one form to another
and impact the environment in the process (for example solid/liquid chemicals that change into gases that pollute the environment.
● Did you know there was a time when people weighed objects in the palm of their hands?
Items of Inspiration
Life is like a jar of many important and not so important things- be careful how you fill the jar.
See: https://kenosha.extension.wisc.edu/files/2010/10/21-Lifeisajarofgolfballsstory.pdf
60
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 3: Make observations and measurements to identify materials based on their properties.
Clarification Statement: Examples of materials to be identified could include baking soda and other powders, metals, minerals, and liquids. Examples of
properties could include colour, hardness, reflectivity, electrical conductivity, thermal conductivity, response to magnetic forces, and solubility; density is not
intended as an identifiable property.
Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include density or distinguishing mass and weight.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
1. Matter and materials have different properties Properties of Matter
Knowledge that can be used to identify them.
How can I describe an item or material?
a. What does the word property mean when
Define the terms
discussing matter and materials? Welcome, young scientists! Today, we’re going to dive into the
● Soluble b. List three physical properties that a fascinating world of the properties of matter. In my hand I have a
● Insoluble material may have. stick of chalk, it is the same as the stick of chalk that you and your
● Transparent c. State three physical characteristics that partner have. How would you describe it?
● Translucent can be gathered through measuring with
● Opaque certain tools. Guide learners by asking questions such as:
● Magnetism
2. A learner has three jars of powdered chemicals
● What colour is it?
● Electrical conductivity
that are not labelled. One is salt, one is sugar,
● Does it feel hard or soft?
● Density
and the last one is baking soda. To figure out
● Is it easy or difficult to break?
● Buoyancy
which is which, the learner pours vinegar over
● Does it have a scent?
● Elasticity
each of them. One of the powders started to
● How long is it?
● Solubility
bubble.
● What shape is it?
● Thermal conductivity
a. Which of the three substances reacted
with the vinegar? (baking soda)
61
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Identify materials/ objects which can b. What can she do to find out which is salt Record their ideas on the board. Let learners know that there is
be attracted to magnets. and which is the sugar? (iodine will react with not one set of correct answers for this activity.
sugar)
Realise that even though some Remind learners not to smell the chalk or any other substance they
materials may have the same 3. The block gold bar shown below will sink if may be given, without being told to do so. Demonstrate to learners
properties, they may not be magnetic. placed in water, while the wooden raft will how to gently fan air from materials to detect odours.
float.
Tell learners that what they are doing is observing and describing
Locate the North and South poles of a
the chalk by what are called its properties. Properties or
bar magnet.
characteristics enable us to distinguish one substance/item from
another. Some of these properties can be observed and some of
Determine if a magnetic material has a
them have to be measured. Different types of matter have
high or low level of magnetism.
Photos retrieved from:
different They describe how a substance looks and behaves. There
https://pixabay.com/photos/gold-bullion-wealth-
are two types of properties: physical and chemical properties.
Describe what happens when like
finance-2801876/
poles or opposite poles of magnets
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Turtle-
During this unit of study, you will observe and identify materials
interact.
raft-muenster-zoo-germany.jpg
based on their properties. You will be given the opportunity to
observe, describe and measure a variety of physical properties. You
Explain what determines the strength a. State three factors that affects an object's
will also be given the opportunity to see how some substances
of the magnetic force between a ability to float on water (shape, mass, size)
react to certain chemicals. These observations and measurements
magnet and the object that is attracted b. What property does the wood that the
will produce evidence that can be used to identify materials.
to it. raft is made from have, that invites it to
float? (anything that has air pockets is likely to
Activity
State the basic observable properties help it float because the particles of the entire
of materials (colour, texture, shape, object are further spaced- less dense and we know In this activity, each learner will test four white substances. The
size, weight, hardness). by experiment that objects with less densely substances are similar in colour and form, representing the fact
packed particles tend to float on water) that some types of matter share some properties that are
Use a variety of ways and c. What property of the gold bar prevents it immediately identifiable, such as colour or shape. Learners will
measurements to compare the physical from floating? (the particles are packed closely soon find that each powder has other properties that are unique.
properties of materials
The magnifying lens invites learners to visually inspect the shape,
colour and texture of the powders.
62
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Identify objects that float or sink when together making it more dense causing it to sink
placed in water in water) 1. Divide the class into groups of about 3 – 4 learners.
2. Distribute 4 Ziploc bags or clear plastic bags labelled A,
State the properties that objects that 4. Water can exist as a solid, a gas or a gas. Use B, C and D to each group, containing one of the
float have in common. this information to answer the following following: salt, baking soda/baking powder,
questions. cornstarch/arrowroot starch and sugar. Each bag must
Give reasons why certain objects float a. Which two properties identify water contain the same amount of substance.
and others do not. vapour as a gas? (no shape, no volume) 3. Invite learners time to study each substance, discuss some
b. If a learner compares an ice cube to liquid of the properties of the substances and create a list of
List factors that determine if an object water. What are two observations you these properties.
will float or sink when placed in water. think that the learner would make? 4. Ask learners to feel the texture of each substance by
(volume & shape) pinching a small amount between two fingers, keeping it
Determine which properties of all in the bag and taking note of the grain (crystal) size, or
5. Which of the following are physical
materials can be used to distinguish if it is powdery. They can also use the hand lens provided.
characteristics that can be gathered by simple
them from other materials.
observation? Learners, here are some questions to guide you:
Identify materials based on their
a. Colour X ● What do you notice about the appearance of each
properties.
b. Mass powder?
c. Volume ● How does the texture of each powder feel between your
List some physical properties of
d. Texture X fingers?
matter. (ST 3 PS MM 1)
● Can you describe the colour of each substance?
5. Anthony drops a drinking glass on the floor.
● How is powder A different from powder B? What about
Identify some physical properties of The glass breaks into several pieces.
powder C and D?
materials.
● Are there any powders that look or feel similar? What are
those similarities?
Identify some chemical properties of
● Based on what you see and feel, what do you think powder
materials.
A might be? Why?
63
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Distinguish between different Retrieved from: ● Do you think any of these powders are something you’ve
materials based on their observable https://pixabay.com/photos/water-glass-isolated- used at home? Which ones and why?
properties transparent-3155018/
(N.B. Here teacher circulates and listens to conversations while groups discuss
Describe different types of materials a. Which property of the glass caused it the properties and make the list)
based on their observable properties. to break into pieces? (brittle solid)
b. State two other properties that glass 5. Invite groups to share their list of properties (E.g. white,
State the basic observable properties has. (shape & mass) powdery, and solid).
for materials (colour, texture, shape, c. Name another object that has the same 6. Learners can use the information they observe to
size, weight, hardness). properties as the drinking glass. (tea cup) complete column 1 and 2 of the table below.
6. What property do the following items have in N.B. Here teacher will review the term physical properties
Distinguish between physical
common? (elasticity)
properties and chemical properties of
A physical property is a characteristic of matter that is not
substances.
associated with a change in its chemical composition. Familiar
examples of physical properties include colour, hardness and
Cite ways of making hard water soft
electrical conductivity. Some of these qualities can be measured using
and soft water hard, identifying
different kinds of equipment, such as scales, rulers, etc.
situations where hard or soft water is
required. (ST 6 LS ECS 10)
Photos retrieved from:
Demonstrate they understand an
https://pixabay.com/photos/sock-socks-
object can have many properties.
colors-colours-colorful-4330279/
Recognize that the state of matter is a https://pixabay.com/photos/rubber-band-
physical property elastic-fastener-2476/
https://pixabay.com/photos/balloon-pretty-
Account for differences observed During this process, circulate to ensure that learners are observing accurately
colorful-1565746/
between the properties of different and are not making a mess or removing any of the substances from the bags.
materials.
64
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Explain the importance of knowing
7. Which property do these three objects have
the physical properties of a given From their observations, learners should realise that powders are
in common? (solids with shape)
material. similar in colour and form, so explain to learners that when
physical properties are the same for a substance, scientists need
Explain the importance of knowing to rely on chemical properties to help them identify the
the chemical properties of a given substance.
material.
The ability to change from one type of matter into another is a
chemical property. Examples of chemical properties include,
Give an advantage and one
Retrieved from: toxicity, acidity and many other types of reactivity.
disadvantage of a given material with
an identified physical or chemical
https://pixabay.com/photos/mirror-frame-frame- Ask learners to make a list of chemical properties e.g. changes colour, fizzes
property
mirrors-isolated-2407289/ or bubbles.
https://pixabay.com/photos/tin-aluminum-
Give examples of materials with given
canned-big-1528316/ Before you start the next part of the investigation, review the
properties.
https://pixabay.com/photos/kettle-copper- following laboratory rules to follow when working with
kitchen-water-shiny-365501/ chemicals.
Describe with examples, materials that
are opaque transparent, translucent
8. Light cannot pass through a certain material. Examples of some rules which can be discussed are shown
and opaque. (ST 4 PS MM 5)
What property does the material have? below:
(Opacity)
Identify and describe electrical
conductors and insulators 9. In a laboratory experiment, you are given a
beaker of liquid and asked to determine what
Determine the observable properties it is. You observe that:
to be observed in their investigations ● The liquid is clear
● The liquid has a distinct smell
Distinguish between conductors and
a. Which of the following do you think this
insulators
liquid is? Pepsi, water or bleach. Give
65
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
reason for your answer. (colour and smell- Looking at the chemical properties of substances
Skills bleach)
1. Recollect the Ziploc/plastic bags from each group and
Classify materials as magnetic or non- 10. Susan tells James that she has an item behind distribute the following materials to each group.
magnetic her back. She gives James a list of properties ● Four small cups labelled with each of the following
of the item. The list is as follows: (salt, baking soda/baking powder, flour, cornstarch/
Classify a variety of materials as ● The item is a solid arrowroot starch, sugar
insulators or conductors ● The item is shiny ● Hand lens
● The item can be bent with her hand ● Dropper
Investigate using a variety of ways and a. Give two examples of everyday items ● Teaspoon
measurements to compare physical that this mystery item could be. (tin foil ● A sheet of construction paper with three rows and
properties of certain materials. (ST 4 plate, foil wrap) five columns of circles or bottle caps that learners can
PS MM 2) arrange similar to the circles on the construction
11. Read each of the following sentences, decide if
paper.
Investigate the strength of a variety of it is TRUE or FALSE then write the answer 2. Point out the first row of circles using a diagram on the
common materials and recommend on the line near to it. board. Tell the groups that they will need to place one
ways of strengthening materials to a. Copper is used for electrical wiring. teaspoon of each powder in the circle on the construction
make them more force resistant. (ST 5 _________ (T) paper or the bottle caps.
PS FMS 7) b. Absorbent is the opposite of
waterproof. _________ (T)
Predict whether an object/material c. Plasticine can be easily moulded or
will be attracted to a magnet. squashed into different shapes.
_________ (T)
Predict which objects will sink and d. Colour is a physical property that is
which will float. determined through observation.
_________(T)
Predict which objects are conductors e. The physical properties of matter can
of electricity and which are insulators. only be gathered through observation.
_________(F)
66
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Compare the physical properties of Photo credited to: Amaala Muhammad
12. A bolt is shown below.
different materials.
3. Model this by placing one teaspoon of salt on the first circle
Compare the chemical properties of for group one. Point out to the learners that it should be a
different materials. level teaspoon of each substance.
4. Give groups a minute to get each substance out on the
Measure, observe, and document correct circle or bottle cap.
physical properties of two or three 5. Explain to learners that when physical properties are the
substances a. What are two properties of this object? same for a substance, scientists need to rely on chemical
(shiny , heavy, has a shape)
properties to help them identify the substance. Explain to
Collect and record data on the b. In relation to its use, why is it important learners the term “chemical properties”
properties of matter. that it has these properties? (shape and 6. Ask learners to make a list of chemical properties e.g.,
mass make it strong to fasten items)
changes in colour, fizzing or the production of bubbles,
Select and use tools to observe and changes in temperature, acidity, etc.
measure different physical properties Retrieved from: 7. After learners have placed all of the chemicals in the
of materials. https://pixabay.com/photos/hex-bolt-bolt-screw- correct bottle caps or out on the construction paper,
1613931/ present the liquids to the learners. in unidentified cups.
Communicate the results from the Ensure that each learner makes observations about each
various investigations to the class and 13. Some materials conduct electricity. That is, liquid—colour, odour, etc.—to show that properties help
teacher they invite electricity to pass through them. to identify it.
a. Which of the following materials would 8. Tell them that their first reaction test will be with the
Plan and conduct an investigation to you expect to invite electricity to pass water. They should take turns adding a couple of drops
classify different kinds of materials by through them? of water with a dropper to each substance, in the first row
their observable properties i. Wood one at a time and observing what happens.
ii. Paper
iii. Water X NB. The hand lens will be used if they need to look at the
Construct simple circuits and explain
iv. Metal X reactions more closely. Things to watch for are: dissolving,
how they work in terms of the flow of
v. Glass clumping together, changing in appearance, or bubbling.
current.
vi. Plastic
67
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Conduct test to classify objects as
electrical conductors or insulators b. If you were to test these materials NB. Teacher circulates while learners test, observe, and record
using an electrical circuit, how would their observations in the investigation log/chart.
you know if they conduct electricity?
Observe the attraction and repulsion
(illuminate a light in the circuit) 9. Repeat using the vinegar, then the iodine. The water and
of magnetic poles.
vinegar are added to the powders to show different ways
14. You have three different rods, one is made the powders react when mixed with other substances.
Explain how an object’s ability to
from wood, one is made from plastic and the 10. Give learners time to record their observations after the
return to its original shape after being
third one is made from metal. Describe a addition of each liquid in the remaining row of their
stretched (elasticity) affects the height
simple experiment you can use to find out worksheet.
to which it bounces.
which rod is the best conductor of heat
Explain the relationship between the
speed at which an object returns to its
original shape and the height to which
it bounces.
Produce drawings of what an object
looks like at the exact moment it hits a Photo credit: Amaala Muhammad 11. Invite learners to clear their tables and then pass out the four
surface. bags of white substances labelled A, B, C, D and a new piece
14. Mr. Smith wants to buy a plastic sheet to put of construction paper with circles labelled with those letters
Attitudes/Values over a sign, to protect it from the weather. or new bottle caps and tape.
However, he wants the word school to be
Show an appreciation for the fact that seen properly. N.B. The powders in the Ziploc bags/clear plastic bags are the same powders
different materials exist and that these the learners tested, but they do not know which powder is which.
materials have different properties.
12. Tell learners that their task is to identify each of the
Show persistence when conducting unknown substances (A, B, C and D) in the four bags, using
experiments on the properties of the properties of the substances they just tested to help
materials. them. Invite learners to complete the investigation in their
68
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Demonstrate interest in designing groups. Ask them to begin with the grain size and then
simple experiments on the properties check the reaction of each substance to each of the liquids.
of materials 13. Create a List: Write down the properties you observe for
each substance. This list will help you figure out what each
Use the inquiry approach in mystery powder might be.
conducting various investigations on 14. After learners have observed the four substances and have
the on the properties of materials looked at the grain size, ask learners to predict what each
substance is. As groups begin testing, circulate to observe,
Show respect for evidence obtained listen to the science talk that is occurring and ask questions.
from investigation on the on the Ask groups to hold up their findings.
properties of materials
NB. The order of results would be based on what the teacher
Follow rules for safe and appropriate placed in each bag.
use of scientific tools. a. Which of the three sheets shown above
would you recommend to Mr. Smith? (sign 15. At the end of the activity ask learners why they had to
Follow lab rules during the activities 3) identify the substances after they already explored their
that ensure personal safety and the b. Which of the sheets is the most opaque? properties. (Learners may say that if they had stopped after testing
each powder originally, they would not have had the opportunity to use
safety of others. (sign 1)
c. Is an opaque windshield a good idea? (no
the properties for identification purposes).
Participate in investigations to identify can’t see)
Follow-Up Questions
materials based on physical properties
15. In the following worksheet, circle the objects
that can be observed or measured.
After the activity, teacher asks:
that light can pass through.
Work collaboratively with group
1. Concluding Questions:
members to carry out activities on the
a. What did you learn about the different properties of
properties of materials matter from this activity?
b. How did your group work together to make
Stewardship/Respect for Living
observations and conclusions?
Things
69
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
When conducting practical and group 2. Extension Questions:
work, display sensitivity to those
a. How do you think these powders would behave if we
learners who may have hearing
difficulty or who may be visually
heated them up or cooled them down?
b. What other experiments could we do to learn more
impaired or colour blind.
about these substances?
More Physical properties of materials
Demonstrate the following properties for the class using the
experimental demos below:
Hardness, magnetism, electrical conductivity, opacity, buoyancy,
elasticity, solubility, reflectivity and thermal conductivity
https://pixabay.com/photos/wine-wine-glass-
NB. With each demonstration, encourage the learners to question and
glass-chic-drink-224039/
subsequently explain what they are seeing and how it informs their
https://pixabay.com/photos/hamburg-
understanding of the property of matter being demonstrated.
shopping-architecture-3130629/
https://pixabay.com/photos/a-book- Inspecting the hardness of different objects
embossing-leather-book-cover-3088775/
https://pixabay.com/photos/brick-wall-red- Hardness is a property that is often used in science to identify
structure-masonry-1916752/ and/or categorize materials such as minerals. Some materials are
https://pixabay.com/photos/juice-carrot- hard and others are soft.
juice-drinking-food-595699/
https://pixabay.com/illustrations/cardboard- This activity invites learners to compare the hardness of various
box-cardboard-box-carton-220256/ materials.
https://pixabay.com/photos/teddy-bear-toy-
soft-animal-colour-2142/
https://pixabay.com/photos/purse-handbag-
70
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
fashion-bag-female-883112/ ● Learners scrape the nail against the penny, a piece of
https://pixabay.com/illustrations/bottle- chalk, a piece of wood and a rock to see what happens
dropper-container-glass-5947443/ when each is scraped with the nail.
● What are we looking for? When each material is tested
Can pass through the glass or the empty bottle the nail will leave a different type of impression on it.
Each material will also leave some sort of colour on the
Conductivity
nail.
● Review the evidence learners have gathered in their
investigation. Ask the following questions:
1. How were the scratch marks different in the
demonstration? (They were different colours, and the nail
left scratches on them.)
2. What evidence does this provide about the
materials? (It provides evidence that they have different
hardnesses.)
3. How is this information useful?
Thermal conductivity
If lamp Z is broken, when the switch is turned on
which lamps will light?
Objects can transfer their heat energy to other objects through a
phenomenon known as thermal conductivity. Different kinds of
Which lamps will not light?
matter conduct heat differently.
Which lamp(s) will continue to light if W is
The following is a simple investigation to test the thermal
broken?
conductivity of several substances and determine whether each
Which lamp is not affected if W is broken? substance is a thermal conductor or an insulator.
Demonstrate the properties of thermal conductivity as this
requires the use of a hotplate or a Bunsen burner. Put some
water in a beaker or pot on the hot plate or burner to boil. While
71
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Opacity the water is heating, attach a small button to the end of three
different spoons: one metal, one plastic and one wooden, using
Tick the cell to indicate whether these things are melted candle wax. Invite the candle wax to cool and harden.
transparent, translucent or opaque Vaseline can be used instead of the candle wax.
Transparent Translucent Opaque When the water has boiled, place the three spoons into the water,
Clear wax side up. Observe the spoons to see which spoon melts the
plastic
wax or Vaseline® fastest.
Cardboard
Wood 1. What does this say about the thermal conductivity of
Cloth each material?
Aluminium 2. Ensure that learners understand that the material that
wire
melts the wax fastest has the highest thermal
Metal paper
conductivity.
clip
25c coin
Opacity
5c coin
Thumb
● Hold up a block of wood and a piece of paper.
tack
● Do you think light could pass through the block or the
piece of paper?
● Darken the classroom by turning off the classroom lights
Conductivity or closing all of the windows.
● Hold up a block a few inches from the chalk board or
Use the tester to test if these objects are conductors wall. (NB. A dark room can be created using black
or insulators of electricity. Write your answer in the garbage/plastic bags, boxes, etc.)
table below ● Hold the flashlight up to the side of the block that faces
away from the wall. Point the flashlight towards the wall.
● Have the learners predict what will happen when you
turn on the flashlight.
● Turn the flashlight on and discuss what they see.
72
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
i. Why doesn’t light go through the block to the
wall?
ii. Explain that the ability of a material to resist
Object Conductor Insulator
energy such as light from moving through it is
known as opacity. The block is opaque because it
doesn’t invite light to move through it to the
nail
other side.
iii. Is the block totally opaque.
pencil eraser iv. Can they see some light going through part of the
wood?
● Do the same demonstration with the piece of paper,
pen
showing that light can move through the paper onto the
wall on the other side. It is less opaque than the wood, but
coin do they think there is material even less opaque than
paper?
● What about clear plastic or glass?
cloth
Knowing what materials block or transmit light comes in handy
key
OR
To begin this activity, you will need a piece of clear glass, a piece
spoon
of cardboard and a torch.
1. Hold up the clear glass and ask a learner to look at the
A learner connected an electrical tester to the points
lighted torch through it. Can you see the light from the
V, W, X, and Y on a circuit board. The results are
bulb of the torch through the glass? Yes, you can see the
shown below.
light because it invites the light to pass through it, hence
it is said to be transparent.
73
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. Now try to look at the light of the torch through the
piece of cardboard. You cannot see the light because the
POINTS LIGHTED BULB
cardboard does invite light to pass through it. Hence, it
V - W yes is opaque. The objects that do not invite any light rays
to travel through them are opaque objects.
V - X yes
3. Repeat the experiment using a piece of paper, a piece of
fabric, a piece of wax paper, aluminium foil, etc.
V - Y no
4. Classify the materials used as transparent or opaque.
W - X yes
Examples of opaque objects are bricks, walls, books, tables,
W - Y no clothes, and trees.
X - Y no
Homework
1. What are some other objects or materials that we would
not be able to see through?
2. Give four examples in the home where opaque materials
are used and four examples in the home where
transparent materials are used,
3. Give one reason why the material is used in each
Which diagram is likely showing the circuit board? example given.
Buoyancy
Have you ever wondered how boats are able to float in water and
not sink? The reason for this is due to the fact that they are
buoyant. Buoyancy refers to the ability of an object to stay
afloat. Boats are buoyant because they are able to float on the
surface of a body of water without sinking. We say that a piece
of Styrofoam is buoyant because it floats on top of water.
74
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Elasticity
John collects data on the rebound of several objects
when dropped from a height of 100cm.
Type of ball Rebound height Retrieved from:
https://www.flickr.com/photos/wonderlane/4083805329
Tennis ball 20 cm
There are several factors that determine if an object is buoyant or
marble 3 cm
not. What do you think some of these are?
Ping pong ball 15 cm
The material an object is made from, its shape, its mass and its
Football 10 cm size). How can you tell whether an object is buoyant? To do so,
we see if they float or sink in water.
Which object has the greatest elasticity? (tennis ball)
Divide the class into groups of three or four learners. Provide
Which object has the least elasticity? (marble) learners with the following items: A cork, a ball of plasticine,
Styrofoam and a marshmallow.
Retrieved from:
https://pixabay.com/photos/cork-stuff-closure-lid-wine-corks-
3397658/
https://pixabay.com/photos/marshminvites-jumbo-fruit-flavor-
788771/
75
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://media.istockphoto.com/id/1461554434/photo/plasticin
e-balls-isolated-modeling-clay-creativity-modelling-material-
plasticine-on-
white.jpg?s=1024x1024&w=is&k=20&c=yMVjVl7nFHmmyjOi
mCys9NVYEGQK2kz0w9T3mVtwBgM=
https://media.istockphoto.com/id/1278094194/photo/styrofoa
m-blocks.jpg?s=1024x1024&w=is&k=20&c=0EdE-
4wCzR6E0sb8rDrwhbRIirdSyPb2dXMv46ajZEY=
● Place the item, one at a time in the water and observe
whether it floats or sinks.
● Record your observations in the table below.
● After learners finish placing each item in the water.
● Cut each item in half and ask learners to observe the cut
items and state what they notice about the inside of the
cork, the Styrofoam and the marshmallow. (air pockets).
Now ask them to state what they observe about the
inside of the plasticine ball? (uniform packing of clay- no air
bubbles)
76
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Since these items floated and the plasticine sank, this tells us that
items/materials with air pockets tend to make things float. Based
on this information, do you think that metal would float? Why or
why not? (no, it is uniform packing).
Do you think that wood might float?
Have a cross-section of a stick and show learners the pores
inside- the air pockets will make it float. Therefore, densely
packed items or materials tend to sink whereas things that have
air space in them are more likely to float. Ask learners why a boat
might float? (because it has a large air space inside the boat.)
Repeat the experiment with five other items. Before learners
place them in the water, have them predict whether they will sink
or float. Record results in the table below.
Provide learners with a variety of materials to build boats. Once
the boats are done, have learners float them in a plastic
swimming pool or large sink.
● Which boats floated, which sank?
● Give reasons for each result.
77
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Elasticity
1. Divide the class into groups of three.
2. Provide each group with a rubber band and a ruler.
3. Ask each group to measure the length of the rubber band
and to record the length of the band in the table below.
4. After each group has recorded the length of their rubber
band, ask each group to stretch the rubber band as far as
they can. Learners then record this length.
5. They must then stretch the rubber band twenty times to
the length they stretched it the first time. After stretching
the rubber band twenty times.
6. Measure the rubber band again to see what effect the
stretching had on it.
Video - Elasticity
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9INtOjAIytk (2:53 mins)
78
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Discuss the learners’ observations. Introduce the term
elasticity and explain why the rubber band is able to return
to its original length.
● Repeat this activity using a balloon instead of the rubber
band.
● Hold up several items found in the classroom such as
pencils, pens, stapler, etc. and ask learners which ones they
think are elastic.
● Ask learners to try to bend the items to see which one they
could bend and if those items they could bend, return to
their original shape.
● After they try to bend each item, ask them the following
questions.
a. How much could you bend it?
b. Did it return to its original shape or did it form a new
shape?
c. What do you think will happen if it bent or stretched
past that point?
d. Ask learners to describe each item in terms of its
elasticity, how it compares to the rubber band and
how they compare to each other.
e. Ask learners to rank the items in terms of their
elasticity from the least elastic to the most elastic.
The bounce of balls and elasticity
In the next activity, we are going to find out if there is a
relationship between the elasticity of a ball and the height to
which it bounces when dropped from a height.
79
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Take the soccer ball, rubber/bouncy ball and
flannel/tennis ball.
● Drop each one individually from a predetermined height
and record the height to which it bounces in the table
below.
Credited to: Amaala Muhammad
1. Ask learners to analyse the data collected to determine if
there is a relationship between the height to which a ball
bounces when dropped and its elasticity.
2. How are bounciness and elasticity related?
80
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Explain to learners that an object’s ability to return to its
original shape after being stretched (elasticity) is what causes it
to bounce.
The faster and more completely an object returns to its original
shape, the better the object will bounce.
Have the learners come to the board and draw what they think
the soccer ball, rubber ball, and tennis ball look like at the exact
moment these balls hit the ground.
1. Which ball’s shape would change the most as it hits the
ground? What would it look like?
2. Which do you think returns to its original shape the
fastest?
Solubility
● Learners you have in front of you, five different
substances Examples of materials to be identified could
include: Baking soda, salt, sugar, corn starch, powders,
etc.
● Now observe each substance and write down its colour.
Next use your fingers to feel each substance to
determine their relative hardness. Please wash your
hands after this test..
● After all the substances have been tested, ask learners to
see if they can identify the substances. Write the names
of the substances on the board as you explain what each
substance is.
● Do you think the information you have is enough to
differentiate the substances from each other?
81
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● One more test we will do on these substances is to find
out if they are soluble in water.
● You now have five cups of water and five different
spoons. Take a level spoon of each substance and add
them individually to each of the cups of water. Stir each
cup for one minute, put the glass down and check to see
how much of the substance dissolved.
1. What properties did the substances that dissolve have
compared to those that did not dissolve?
2. Which substance dissolved fastest?
3. Now rank the substances from 1-5 in terms of their
solubility, I being the most soluble and 5 being the least
soluble.
4. Suppose you had two bags, one containing sugar and
one containing salt. Describe how you could use your
results to determine which is which.
5. Give the learners some sugar, some salt and some alum.
Based on the amount of each substance that dissolved,
82
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
which do you think was the sugar, salt and the new
substance?
Electrical conductivity
Another property of matter is their ability to conduct electricity.
Electrical conductivity is how well a material conducts electricity
(invites electricity to pass through it). An object that is a
conductor invites electricity to flow through it and complete the
circuit. If the item is not a conductor, the circuit will be broken
and the current will not flow. We call those items or materials
that do not conduct electricity insulators.
In this experiment, we will be using a simple circuit where
electricity flows through the wires to light up the lamp in the
circuit, once the circuit is complete. If the circuit is broken, the
electricity cannot get to the light bulb.
The lamp will shine brightly for solutions/materials that strongly
conduct electricity, less brightly for solutions that weakly conduct
electricity and not at all for solutions/ materials that do not
conduct electricity
Note to teacher: Prepare circuits ahead of time. The circuits for this
investigation can be made using circuit components of the micro science kit.
83
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Phet simulation here:
https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/circuit-construction-kit-
dc-virtual-lab/latest/circuit-construction-kit-dc-virtual-
lab_en.html
● Demonstrate to the learners using an insulator such as a
pencil to show that the current will not flow. We call the
pencil an insulator because it insulates or stops the flow
of electricity.
● Ask learners to identify where the circuit is broken (at the
pencil).
● Then demonstrate to the learners using a nail that is a
conductor. When the light turns on explain that it’s
because the electricity flows through the nail. The nail is
a conductor.
● After the demonstration, provide learners with a variety
of materials to test their electrical conductivity. Before
each item/material is tested, ask learners to predict if it is
a conductor or an insulator.
● Before learners test the items/materials, ask them to
predict whether or not the item/material will cause the
bulb to light up. Learners can record their observations
in the table below.
84
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Explain that most metals make good conductors.
Solutions like salt water will also conduct electricity.
● Ask learners to classify the items/materials as
conductors and insulators. Also ask learners to rank the
materials from highest conductivity to lowest using the
brightness of the bulb.
(Natural fibres like paper, wood and cotton are not conductors.
Synthetic materials like plastics, rubber and polyester fabric are
not conductors. Grains and food items are not conductors
Response to magnetic forces
Magnetism is a property of matter that can be used to identify
materials. Certain materials are attracted to magnets and other
materials are not. Magnetic materials are those which are attracted
to a magnet. Examples of such materials include iron, nickel, and
cobalt, etc. whereas materials like plastic and wood are non-
magnetic. Certain objects may look similar but have different
magnetic properties. The force of magnetism acts on certain types
85
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
of materials, such as the paper clips but not others, such as the
aluminium wire.
In this activity, learners test different materials to see which ones
are magnetic and which are not.
● Hold a magnet to a piece of paper, showing that the
paper is not magnetic because it doesn’t stick to the
magnet.
● Next hold the magnet to a piece of metal, showing that
the metal is magnetic because it sticks to the magnet.
After the demonstration, divide the class into groups of 2 to 3
learners, provide each group with a magnet and several materials
and objects. Ask learners to pass the magnet over each
substance/material/object. Observe if the
substance/material/object is attracted to the magnet or not. Write
down your observations in the table below.
● What makes some substances magnetic and others
nonmagnetic.
● What evidence does this provide about the materials? (It
provides evidence that some metals are attracted to magnets but not
all metals.)
86
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Have learners list the properties that magnetic items
normally have.
It should be noted that:
● Natural fibres like paper, wood and cotton are not
magnetic.
● Synthetic materials like plastics, rubber and polyester
fabric are not magnetic.
● Grains and food items are not magnetic. Magnetic items
are often metallic but not all metals are magnetic.
Strength of magnetism
● Do you think all magnetic objects have the same strength
of magnetism?
● Can you think of anything with weak or strong
magnetism?
● Do the magnets on your fridge all stick with the same
strength? Let us find out!
● Design a simple experiment to determine if magnetic
materials have weak or strong magnetism.
● Data collected from the experiment should establish that
magnetic strength depends on distance between the
magnet and the magnetic object.
Magnets have poles
Provide each group with another magnet so that they have 2
magnets to work with.
87
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Tell learners that magnets have two ends or poles; one is
a North Pole and the other is the South Pole.
● Learners bring the magnets together with the like ends
near to each other.
What do you observe?
● Learners bring the magnets together so that opposite
poles are near to each other.
1. What do you
observe?
2. What can you conclude about the attraction of poles
of a magnet?
Reflectivity
Objects have the ability to reflect light. This is known as the
property of reflectivity.
In this activity, learners are given five different materials:
aluminium foil, cellophane, printing paper, black plastic and
88
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
tracing paper to experiment with. The learners compare the
reflectivity of the different materials, with the aim of finding the
most reflective material.
Working in pairs, using a reflective tester made out of a piece of
paper with a hole in it through and a torch. Ask the learners to
shine the torch through the hole unto each of the materials and
see if the reflection bounced back onto the paper. Ask learners to
rank the materials in terms of their reflectivity, with 1 being the
most reflective.
They should find that the cellophane is the most reflective material
Additional Resources and Materials
Mystery Powders activity: https://letstalkscience.ca/educational-resources/lessons/mystery-powders
Properties of substances: https://byjus.com/question-answer/properties-of-solid-liquid-gas/
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Hard and Soft water: Soaps & Detergents:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jDgSohKVLio (2:32 mins)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ei-rmud9vBU (1:25 mins)
Measurements of a variety of properties (e.g., hardness, reflectivity) can be used to identify particular materials. (Boundary: At this grade level, mass and weight
are not distinguished, and no attempt is made to define the unseen particles or explain the atomic-scale mechanism of evaporation and condensation.)
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2012. A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, Crosscutting Concepts, and Core Ideas.
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/13165.
89
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Mathematics: Measurements and calculations
Language Arts: New vocabulary
Social Studies: How do properties of matter determine whether we consider them safe to use? (e.g. off-gassing of painted objects; leaching of plastics)
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated
The making of Sorrel beer, mauby, and other local drinks involves properties of colour, volume, and mass.
The materials used to make local arrowroot starch and coconut oil go through different states of matter and have different properties at each state/stage.
Our fisher folk making boats, fishing nets and pots must select materials that have hardness and buoyancy
Suitability of materials selected for making baskets, mats and hats.
Item of Inspiration
When speaking of teaching stepwise algorithms instead of constructivist learning: “ For dividing fractions; “Ours is not to reason why just invert and multiply”
90
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 4: Conduct an investigation to determine whether the mixing of two or more substances results in new
substances.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: 1. Read each of the following statements carefully, Demonstration
decide if it is TRUE or FALSE, then write true Add boiling water dropwise to ½ cup of table salt in a jar and stir
Knowledge or false in the space provided. vigorously until the salt just barely dissolves. Place a pencil with
a. A chemical change is easy to reverse. a 10 cm length of string tied to the centre across the top of the
Define the terms:
_________(F) jar so the string dangles into the salt water. We call this solution
b. Changes in states of matter are chemical supersaturated. Invite the solution to cool and slowly evaporate
● Mixture
changes. __________ (F) o v e r coming days. You will notice crystals growing on the string.
● Solution
c. Bubbling is a sign of a chemical change. This is the salt reassuming its solid state. It proves that only a
● Solvent
__________ (T) p h y s i c a l c h a n ge occurred as the salt dissolved in the water. If it
● Solute
● Suspension d. Rusting is NOT a physical reaction. (T) h a d u n d e r g o n e a c h e m i c a l c h a n g e , w e wouldn’t have been able to
● Precipitates (e.g. curdling) e. When an ice cube melts into water, it goes retrieve the salt crystals.
● Physical changes through a chemical change. __________
● Chemical changes (F) Teacher note: depending on what solids are available, sugar and
● Chemical reaction f. Leaves changing colour is a physical change. borax can also be used.
● Reversible and irreversible __________(F)
changes
g. An ice cream melting is a physical change.
__________(T)
Explain the importance of mixing
different substances.
2. Which of the following changes are physical
changes?
Describe different methods used to
a. Cutting a piece of paper. Retrieved from: https://www.sciencebuddies.org/science-fair-
separate mixtures.
b. Crushing a can projects/project-ideas/Chem_p082/chemistry/how-to-grow-the-
List advantages and disadvantages of c. Burning a log of wood best-and-the-largest-crystals
different separating methods.
91
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Differentiate between physical changes d. Dissolving sugar in water. So learners, you can see we made a special mixture, let us review
and chemical changes. e. Boiling an egg the different types of mixtures.
Identify burning, rusting and decaying Answer (a, b, d) What is a Mixture?
as changes that are irreversible
3. A teacher mixes two liquids which are at the
A mixture is a combination of two substances. In mixtures, the
Differentiate between physical and same temperature together in a glass. When she components do not react chemically but are mixed physically.
chemical changes to matter. took the temperature of the two substances that Depending on the type of components, mixtures are classified as
she mixed, she noticed that it increased. What
homogeneous and heterogeneous. A solution is a type of
Recognize the physical changes that kind of change does this suggest? (chemical)
mixture where two or more components are dissolved i.e., the
are involved in forming and separating
solute (usually solid) is dissolved in a solvent (usually liquid) so
mixtures 4. When ice melts, is it a physical or chemical
we can no longer see separate components.
change? Explain your answer. (change of state –
Identify reversible and irreversible can be reversed therefore a physical change
E.g.. Salt dissolved in water would be a type of homogeneous
changes that can be made to
mixture called a solution where salt is the solute and water is the
substances. 5. What is likely type of change when steel wool
solvent.
turns rusty if left in the rain? (chemical)
Recognize when two or more
substances have been mixed or not 6. As a candle burns it undergoes both physical Mixtures versus Solutions- Distinguishing Features
mixed. and chemical changes.
a. List a physical change that a candle
Explain how, when different states of undergoes as it burns. (melting)
matter are mixed, some properties b. Explain why the mass of a candle decreases
change while others remain the same. as it burns. (wax is the fuel for burning that gets
wicked into the burning process)
Give examples of changes in
substances, classify them as physical or
7. Below is a list of words and phrases related
chemical changes, and justify the
to physical changes and chemical changes.
designation.
Define physical change and give
examples of physical changes.
92
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Explain how matter can be changed in 8. Place each word or statement in one of the
ways such as heating or cooling, correct boxes that follow. Retrieved from: https://byjus.com/chemistry/difference-
cutting or tearing, bending or between-mixture-and-solution/
stretching.
Formative Assessment
Identify evidence of the formation of a ● What is the solute in the sugar solution? (sugar)
new substance after two or more
● What is the solvent in the sugar solution? (water)
substances are mixed.
Water is a very common solvent because many substances can
List physical properties of matter. (ST
dissolve in it. Substances that can dissolve in a solvent are said to
3 PS MM1)
be soluble. Conversely, substances that cannot dissolve in a
solvent are said to be insoluble. Below are some common
Identify with examples, physical
solutions:
change in everyday living. (ST 3 PS
MM 2)
Solution Solute solvent
Understand that melting, freezing,
evaporation, and condensation are Sugar solution sugar water
changes of state that can be reversed.
Salt solution salt water
(ST 5 PS MM 2)
Rum alcohol water
Classify substances as soluble or
insoluble by their ability to dissolve in
Suspensions (heterogeneous mixtures)
water. (ST 4 ESS ER 9)
Have learners add some dirt to a beaker of water, stir and then
Understand that melting, freezing,
leave undisturbed for several minutes.
evaporation, and condensation are
changes of state that can be reversed.
Learners, I want you to observe what happens when you mix dirt
(ST 5 PS MM 2)
and water together. Write or record some of the things you see.
This type of mixture is called a suspension.
93
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Describe with examples, the use of 9. Which of the pictures represents substances Questions:
water as a solvent in everyday life. (ST combined to create an entirely new substance?
4 ESS ER 10) a. Compare the suspension to the solution, then answer the
following:
Skills
1. Does the suspension have undissolved particles? (Yes)
Demonstrate how a mixture is made 2. In which mixture can you see layers? (suspension)
by safely combining two forms of 3. Which of the two has large particles suspended in the
matter into a mixture. mixture? (suspension)
Demonstrate a technique that will best b. A suspension, like muddy water, is a type of mixture in which the
separate these two forms of matter solid particles do not dissolve but may remain suspended in the
from a mixture.
liquid and then eventually settle out if left undisturbed.
Compare different mixtures to
determine degree of separation.
c.
Plan and conduct investigations to
determine whether or not a new
substance is made when two or more
substances are mixed.
Recognize that a physical change alters Retrieved from:
the characteristics of a substance https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mud_and_water_sus
without producing a new substance. d. pension_and_clear_water.JPG
Give examples of changes in Sand and Water (Heterogeneous Mixture)
substances, classify them as physical or
chemical changes, and justify the Provide each group with either a test tube or a beaker with water
designation. and a small amount of sand and a spoon or stirring rod to stir the
94
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Combine pure substances to make Fudge https://pixabay.com/photos/walnut-fudge- mixture with. Ask learners to pour the sand into the water, little
different mixtures. candy-milk-cold-672976/ (chemical) by little stirring after each addition.
Infer how a change of different parts Pepper-spice mixture Questions:
of a string telephone will affects its https://pixabay.com/photos/pepper-scoop-
ability to transmit sound waves peppercorns-spices-1914117/ (physical) 1. What happens to the sand when it is first added to the
water? (The sand sinks to the bottom)
Classify changes as physical changes or Cookies https://pixabay.com/photos/cookies- 1. What happens to the sand after the water has been
chemical changes
chocolate-chip-cookies-1264263/ (chemical) stirred? (The sand mixes with the water and the starts to fall)
2. How does the mixture look after a few minutes? (The
Hypothesize about changes that would
Chex mix sand settles to the bottom again)
occur when two or more substances
https://www.flickr.com/photos/epw/6506552919
are mixed.
(physical) 3. What type of change was involved in the mixture?
(Physical)
Compile data from carrying out
Separating mixtures
different investigations physical and
4. State whether the mixture can be reversed/ separated.
chemical changes.
1. The water coming through the tap is muddy. (Yes it can be separated using a method called filtration)
Marla’s mother collects a bucket of water,
Analyse data obtained from physical
leaves it to settle and then throws off the water Teacher note: Please see the section on “Separation” for more
and chemical changes using everyday
on top. The water she throws off is less muddy on filtration.
substances
than that coming through the tap.
Interpret data obtained from their a. What is this method called? (pouring off a Oil and water (heterogeneous mixture)
investigations settled suspension)
b. What happened when the water was left to Provide each group with either a test tube or a beaker with water
Evaluate data obtained from their settle? (it separated out the solid to the bottom) and a spoon or stirring rod to stir the mixture with. Ask learners
investigations on physical and to slowly pour the oil into the water, little by little stirring after
chemical changes. each addition.
Record and interpret physical and
chemical changes using everyday
substances
95
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Plan and conduct investigations to 2. Below is a picture of a strainer. Answer the Questions:
determine whether or not a new questions that follow.
substance is made when two or more 1. What happens to the oil when it is first added to the
substances are mixed. water? (It floats on the water)
2. What happens to the oil and water after the mixture is
Compare the observable properties of stirred? (The oil combines with the water but only for a short
two or more substances before and
time)
after they are mixed to explain
3. What do you notice about the mixture after it was left
whether a new substance with
undisturbed? (The oil floats on the water)
different properties was formed. ed.
4. What can you say about the density of the oil compared
to the water? (oil is lighter than water)
Measure volume and mass of a. Give an example of a mixture that can
5. Why would you call this physical change? (No new
materials. (ST 4 PS MM 1)
be separated into its components using a
substances formed)
strainer. (pasta and water)
Investigate the principle that burning, Combining Substances
b. If you do not have a strainer, what can
rusting and decaying are changes that ➢ Marbles & water (heterogeneous mixture) easily separated
you use in place? (a filter cloth)
are not reversible. (ST 5 PS MM 3· ➢ Salt and water (homogeneous mixture -a solution) can only be
separated by evaporation
3. How would you separate the following
Attitudes/Values
mixture? (by hand)
A good example is the evaporation of the Dead Sea
Appreciate the role that physical and
chemical changes play in our daily
lives.
Show persistence when conducting
investigations to produce data on the
mixing of two or more substances.
Retrieved from:
https://www.npr.org/sections/pictureshow/2022/12/11/11395
Demonstrate interest in finding out
24126/photos-dead-sea-water-level-dropping-sinkholes-erosion
more about the mixing of two or more
substances.
96
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Use the inquiry approach in Retrieved from: ➢ Baking soda and vinegar (chemical change) new product as the
conducting various experiments on the https://pixabay.com/photos/food-eat-diet- identities of the starting components are no longer separable.
mixing of two or more substances planters-trail-mix-2202384/
Chemical Changes
Show respect for evidence obtained 3. Samuel is making a sandcastle on the beach.
from investigation on the mixing of To be able to mould the sand into the In the examples above, it is clear that the physical change in a
two or more substances different shapes she wants, she mixes water mixture invites us to separate out the components where as a
with her sand. chemical change is irreversible (meaning we can’t get back the
Dispose of substances used in a. Is Samuel creating a new substance when starting materials)
different experiments responsibly she mixes the sand and water? Give
reasons for your answer. (no, the sand and How can we tell if a chemical change has occurred?
When conducting practical and group water can be separated into components- physical
work, display sensitivity to those change only) Review indicators of chemical change:
learners who may have hearing ➢ Colour change
4. Explain how you would separate a mixture of
difficulty using different scientific ➢ Gas evolved
sand and iron filings? (using a magnet because iron
tools and identifying changes in ➢ Solid precipitate formed
is magnetic)
colour. Teacher note: if you have tangible samples of each of these to
show learners this is useful.
5. A learner is given three white substances in a
Participate actively in whole-class and
beaker that are not labelled. One is salt, one is
group discussions on the data obtained Observing a Chemical Change
sugar and the third one is baking soda.
from their investigations.
a. If vinegar is added to each of the three
Below are a series of experiments to help us investigate some
physical and chemical changes:
substances, which one do you expect to
Participate in investigations to
react with the vinegar? (baking soda)
determine whether mixing two or 1. Burning of a candle
more substances results in the
b. What changes would you expect to
formation of a new substance. We have reviewed indicators of chemical change. In this
observe when vinegar is added to the
experiment, a candle burns wax in a reaction called combustion.
substance that reacts with it?(a gas given off)
What signs do you see that a chemical change is occurring?
(smoke-gas, heat, light)
97
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
c. Is a new substance formed from the Introduce the unlit candle to the class and ask questions such as:
reaction of this substance and the vinegar? ● What do you need for a candle to burn? (fuel, oxygen and
(yes a gas- carbon dioxide) kindling temperature)
● Where does the wax go when the candle is burning? (it is
6. State three things that can tell you that a
the fuel; it burned)
chemical change has taken place. (gas, increased
● What is the purpose of the wick? (the wicked draws the
temperature, light, precipitate)
melted wax up to be burned- this can be observed by placing pepper
on the surface of the melted wax)
7. Mark an X in the box to identify the evidence
● What happens when a candle is burning? (it is burning
that a chemical change has occurred. Some
carbon in wax with oxygen to form carbon dioxide )
examples may have more than one type of
evidence.
Procedure:
5. Light the candle and ask learners to carefully observe the
candle burning
Discuss where the wax might have gone (changed into carbon dioxide
and water).
The wick of a candle burns long enough for the wax to start
melting. The liquid wax is drawn up the wick to the flame where
it becomes a gas. As a gas, it reacts with the oxygen in the air and
8. Give an example of a chemical change for each creates carbon dioxide and water. This reaction releases energy in
of the following situations: the form of heat. The carbon dioxide and water vapour produced
a. Heat is given off.. are gases; however, the water vapour will only condense once it is
b. A gas is given off. away from the heat of the candle. Some wax particles create a
c. Sound is produced black smear where they land
Another chemical change that occurred in this demonstration is
that of the match striking against the matchbook. When the
98
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
9. The popped corn shown above came from the match strikes against the matchbook, it gives off an odour.
corn kernels on the left. Look at these two Odours are also signs of chemical change.
pictures and answer the questions below.
a. How is popped corn obtained from the Household Examples of a Chemical Change
corn kernels? (heat causes the water in the
Sometimes in the kitchen, a cook will purposely add vinegar to
kernel to expand rapidly)
milk to thicken it or cause it to curdle. When milk is curdled it
b. Is this a chemical or a physical change?
changes its properties and a new thing that is the "curd" is
(When popcorn is popped, liquid inside the
formed . This formed curd cannot be turned back to milk. So it's
kernel is changed to steam. Pressure from the
an irreversible process and that's why it is a chemical change. The
steam builds up inside the kernel. When the
new solid tell us a chemical change happened.
pressure reached a critical stage the kernel pops
turning itself inside out. This is a physical
When eggs are left in the heat for too long we sometimes begin
change.)
to smell a characteristic odour of rotten eggs. When processes
generate a gas or bad odour, it is a good indicator that spoilage is
Physical- Chemical Change Quiz
happening which indicates a chemical change.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MBmBknteSr
Q (10:39 mins)
We add yeast to our bread recipe and we see bubbles that make
the bread rise (carbon dioxide). This production of a gas tell us
Teacher note:
that a chemical reaction happened with the yeast.
The process of dissolving requires energy to
If you leave your bicycle in the rain you eventually see a reddish
surround solute particles and therefore you will
brown deposit on the steel parts especially anything that is not
likely see a temperature drop. This is not an
painted! This is the iron in the steel reacting with oxygen to make
indication of a chemical change just an endothermic
iron oxide. Rusting is a chemical reaction that affects many steel
process.
items (cars, boats, metal roofing) often weakening them.
In all these examples the combination of these components
cannot be reversed because new products are formed in a
chemical reaction.
99
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Separation of Mixtures
Unlike chemical changes which are irreversible, we have ways to
separate out the components of a mixture that represents only a
physical change. These techniques prove to us that a chemical
change did not occur because we can retrieve the starting
materials.
Mixtures that have undergone physical changes can be separated
into its original components. Below is a list of some of the
common methods used to separate such mixtures.
2. Evaporation
Supplemental video resource:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YgdrzYaG91A&t=3s (3:52
mins)
Evaporation is used to separate a soluble solid (i.e. a solid that
dissolves or solute) from the solvent. For example, the salt from
the water in a salt solution.
During evaporation, the water evaporates away leaving the solid
behind.
Method: Prepare a mixture of a small amount of Kool-Aid (or
salt/sugar) and water. Place on a hotplate or a Bunsen burner and
heat. As it boils, ask learners to record their observations. Ask
learners the following questions to guide their observations.
100
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1. Notice the bubbles in the mixture. What does this tell us?
(Evaporation/Boiling is occurring)
2. What is happening to the volume of the water? (Decreases
until it is all evaporated)
When almost all of the water has evaporated, remove the beaker
from the fire and place it on the side for the remainder of the
water to evaporate. What is remaining at the bottom of the
beaker? (solid Kool aid)
3. Separation by magnets
Supplemental video resource:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VSIBzRKIWAQ&t=2s
(1:07 mins)
A mixture of iron filings and sand (preferably white
sand) can easily be separated using a magnet. The iron
filings are attracted to the magnet, but the sand is not.
Method: Prepare a mixture of iron filings and sand. Try to pick
out the iron filings individually. It would be very difficult to pick
out a piece of iron without picking out sand as well. Use a
magnet to pull out the iron filings, leaving the sand behind.
4. Separation by filtration
Supplemental Video Resource:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BihdNtS4BzE (1:56 mins)
101
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Explain the concept of a filter to the learners. A filter is a material
with very small holes that invite certain things to pass through it
but not others. Filters separate based on size, particles that are
small pass through, while particles that are large remain behind.
Ask learners to think about examples of materials that act as
filters. Some examples that learners may give include: cloth,
colander, coffee filter, window screen and strainer.
Demonstrate how you would separate the mixtures of sand and
water and the mixture of flour and water, using filter paper and a
funnel.
Additional Resources and Materials
Growing crystals:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RBB_M74bSFY&t=40s
https://www.fizzicseducation.com.au/150-science-experiments/kitchen-chemistry-experiments/make-your-own-crystals/
Note to teacher: Make certain learners can see a sugar and water mixture in which the sugar crystals have been completely dissolved and none are visible.
Learners, what has happened to the sugar when it was added to the water and stirred? (It dissolved). Now take an even closer look at the sugar and water mixture.
Can you tell which part of the mixture is sugar and which is water? (No). That’s correct, the sugar has completely dissolved in the water and cannot be seen. This
mixture is an example of a homogeneous mixture. Homogeneous means the same - so a homogeneous mixture is the same all the way through. A homogeneous
mixture is a mixture in which different substances or parts are evenly distributed (or the same) all the way through.
Questions:
1. What if we were to add some more crystals of sugar to the mixture without stirring? Would the mixture still be homogeneous? Let’s try it and see.
Note to teacher: Have learners add sugar to the sugar solution without stirring and make their observations
(Answer to question - No)
102
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
2. Explain why the mixture is no longer homogeneous? (The sugar would be seen at the bottom, hence the mixture is no longer uniform)
Here are some other commonly known homogeneous mixtures:
Retrieved from:
https://sciencenotes.org/what-is-a-homogeneous-mixture-definition-and-examples/
Now look at the mixture in Glass B (sand and water). Can you separate the two substances in this mixture? (YES) . This mixture is called a heterogeneous
mixture. A heterogeneous mixture has parts that remain separate.
Retrieved from: https://scienceinfo.com/heterogeneous-mixture-important-properties/
103
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Making Milk curds: Divide the class into groups of four.
Provide each group with 1/4 cup milk (preferably in a transparent glass or beaker, 4 teaspoons white vinegar or lemon juice and a spoon for stirring, a strainer
and some paper towels
Instruct learners to describe the milk (white, liquid, translucent, etc.). Then ask them to describe the vinegar or the lime juice (pale yellow or colourless liquid).
Pour the lime juice or vinegar slowly into the cup with the milk and stir very slowly for about one minute.
Ask learners to discuss their observations. You should notice that solid chunks called curds start to form and separate from the liquid called whey.
Pour the mixture into a strainer and press out all the liquid leaving just the solid clumps or curds behind.
Press the paper towel into the strainer to soak up any of the leftover liquid or whey and remove it.
Have learners discuss and answer the following questions
1. Can the resulting mixture be separated into its original components? - (No)
2. Can the change be reversed?
3. Has a new substance been formed?
4. Is this a physical or a chemical change? (Chemical)
5. Give reason(s) (A new substance is formed)
When old milk is added to tea or coffee it will sometimes form small lumps/solids similar to those formed when the vinegar/lime juice is added to the milk. This
is called ‘curdling” of the milk. Scientists often refer to these masses as “precipitates”.
Curdling happens when the solids in the milk (the proteins and fats) clump together and form a new substance, which are called curds. The curdling is the result
of a chemical reaction between the vinegar (acid) and the fats and proteins. This is also one way of making simple cheese from milk.
Handwarmer packets: https://cen.acs.org/articles/88/i4/Hand-Warmers.html
Physical and chemical changes
There are several other physical changes that matter can undergo, these include changing its mass, texture, volume or state, by mixing one solid with another and
dissolving matter in a liquid such as water. Substances can also undergo what is called a chemical change. Let us look at the following video to see some more
examples of physical and chemical changes.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
The opposite of physical change is chemical change. If these are opposites then tell me, do you think new substances will be formed during chemical changes?
(Yes). Chemical changes result in the formation of new substances because the substances undergo a chemical reaction when they are mixed. Chemical reactions
lead to chemical changes. In other words, chemical changes occur when the components react with each other to form new substances. When chemical
104
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
reactions/changes occur there are usually some observable changes that also happen, such as bubbling, sudden changes in temperature, colour changes, formation
of solids, etc. Tell me what were some of the clues that chemical changes occurred in each of the above reactions? (The baking soda started to bubble when it was mixed
with vinegar and in the second reaction a white solid formed when the sodium carbonate was mixed with the magnesium sulphate) In each of these reactions something new was formed.
In reaction 1, the bubbling indicated the formation of a gas called carbon dioxide and in the second reaction the white solid that formed was a new substance called
magnesium carbonate.
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Art and Craft: Mixing of different colours to create new colours
Mathematics: Measurement, Mass, Volume, Fractions and Percentages (of substances/mixtures)?????
Language Arts: Vocabulary and Spelling (different terms) ,Grammar (adjectives)
Social Studies: Resources, Personal Hygiene, Pollution, The Family, Decision Making
Stretching hair by the use of a hot iron or the use of chemicals.
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated
Elements from Local Culture
● Production of beverages and other drinks by the St. Vincent Brewery, and local wine and drinks makers
● Mixing “mortar” during construction
● Desalination and bottling of water
● During the carnival paint is mixed for body painting at jouvert and other activities
● Burn sugar to make stewed meats and in pelau.
● Ginger and sugar and mauby bark and sugar to make unique local drinks.
● Bending of wire and cutting of cardboard and other materials to make costumes for carnival, local craft, etc.
● Creating steelpans through a combination of physical changes to the drum.
Technology
Many technologies are used to determine if new products are formed and to study these products..
105
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
TVET
Number of areas in TVET utilise both physical changes (e.g. sanding and painting) and chemical changes (hair dressing, dyeing, etc) in their activities.
Environment
● After rainfall mud sometimes mix with water in the river and affect our water system/reservoir
● Hard water resulting from chemicals dissolving in the water as it passes over rocks or drains through soils.
● Rusting of galvanised roofs, rails, vehicles from sea blast.
Items of Inspiration
There are many chemical reactions that occur in products for the home. The teacher has an abundance of examples at their disposal for teaching to this outcome.
106
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Matter and Energy in Organisms and Ecosystems
Purpose of the Subject
The study of science encompasses knowledge, process skills and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of caring not only for themselves,
but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic study of the structure and behaviour of the
physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, learners benefit from leveraging and evaluating available technological tools
to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it.
Strand
Matter and Energy in Organisms and Ecosystems: Understanding how ecosystems rely on the exchange of matter and energy helps humans to better care for
the environment including the constituent plants and animals.
Essential Learning Outcome 1: Use models to describe that energy in animals’ food (used for body repair, growth, motion, and to
maintain body warmth) was once energy from the sun.
Clarification Statement: Examples of models could include diagrams and flow charts
Grade Level Expectation: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge Practicing terminology Importance of Food and the Connection to the Sun
Define the terms: Have learners fill in the blanks in the following Focusing Question to Begin
● balanced diet table:
107
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● carbohydrates Foods Term Use for Body Look at the picture below. What does it show? (different types of
● proteins Rice, (Carbohydrate) Energy food)
● fats potato,
● photosynthesis pasta Have you ever heard someone say it is important to eat a
● simple sugar glucose
Meat Protein (Repair/Growth)
“balanced diet”. There must be a reason why we must balance
Milk & (Fat) Warmth &
● cellulose
our food intake with such a variety of foods. Learners, can you
Cheese Energy Storage
● starch
suggest a reason why a mixture of different foods would be
● vitamin D
most healthy? I will give you hint…different foods accomplish
Food Chains/Food Web
● food chain
different tasks in our bodies! (maybe energy)
● food webs
● trophic levels Learners will design their own food chain / food
● producers web. Teacher will use a rubric to access the food
● consumers chain/ food web.
● decomposers
● nutrients Sample Rubric:
● invasive species Retrieved from: Ministry of Education, Sustainable
● biotic and abiotic Development Innovation, Science, Technology and
Vocational Training. (National Curriculum Revision
Explain the process by which plants Retrieved from: https://www.pickpik.com/appetizer-summer-
With A Special Education Needs Focus - Primary
make their own food. organic-colorful-freshness-cheese-141271
School Grade K-6, 2023)
Explain how the sun provides energy
Teacher -led discussion
for both plants and animals.
What are some examples of food we eat? (Rice, cereal, chicken,
Identify the nutrients needed by the
human body. eggs, fish, mutton, milk, cheese, vegetables, etc.)
Distinguish between food chains and I am going to help you to understand what different groups of
food webs. food can do for our bodies. You will learn some new words
that you will want to write down.
Show how food chains and food webs
are inter-related
108
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
One Page Response Paper Nutrients we get from rice and cereals are starch and sugars.
Give examples of food chains and You have learned that the sun is a source of energy These are commonly referred to as carbohydrates. The body
food webs found in various habitats. that impacts ecosystems through food chains and needs carbohydrates to provide energy for movement and
food webs. work.
Explain the feeding relationships
Write a one-page essay that answers the following
between animals in food chains and
questions: Nutrients we get from meats, eggs, milk and cheese are
food webs
a) How does the sun supply the energy to the commonly called proteins and fats. The body needs proteins
ecosystem? for repair/growth and it requires fats to keep warm or to store
Distinguish producers, consumers and
b) How can air pollution impact the potential energy for later use.
decomposers
for the sun to supply the energy for
ecosystems? Where does the food that you eat come from? (Plants, animals)
Describe factors which adversely
c) What initiatives can we take in our society
affect a food chain/web in the
to limit the amount of air pollution and
Caribbean region. Have you ever wondered where the energy in animals' food
thereby protect the delicate ecosystems?
comes from? It may surprise you to learn that all the energy in
d) How does pollution lead to climate change
Skills and how might that impact species within animals' food was once energy from the sun! In this lesson, we
an ecosystem? will explore how energy from the sun is transformed into the
Identify and observe food chains in food that animals consume and how it is used for various
your community Interpreting Energy Data purposes such as body repair, growth, motion, and maintaining
The sun gives supplies heat and light to the earth. body warmth.
Infer that everything in our ecosystem
There has been some suggestion that increased
relies on each other.
pollution will seriously impact the amount of energy Learners, we have already learned there is a process called
that gets to plants from the un and therefore impact photosynthesis that invites plants to gather energy from the
Draw food chains found in various
energy transfer to ecosystems in general. sun but those same plants get eaten by humans or sometimes
ecosystems.
we eat the animals (cows & goats) that have eaten those plants.
By reference to the energy output graph below, In that way, the energy from the sun eventually gets to us
Draw food webs found in various
answer the following questions: through the food we eat.
ecosystems.
Click on the link below to enjoy a short video on
In the context of food chains, classify
photosynthesis.
animals based on their feeding
109
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
relationships (herbivores, carnivores Retrieved from:
and omnivores) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3pD68uxRLkM (4:52
min) .
Hypothesize the effects of various
situations, activities or events that can
affect food chains and food webs.
Communicate effectively in class
discussions on various topics.
Interpret sun’s energy graph
Review of photosynthesis
Graph surface temperature data Retrieved from: https://www.climate.gov/news-
features/understanding-climate/climate-change-
Extrapolate surface temperature data incoming-sunlight#
Identify biotic and abiotic factors
What is the approximate amount of energy given
within a food chain/food web
off by the sun as measured in watts per square
meter? (1360-1361 watts/m2.)
Attitudes/Values
While the earth goes through a normal cycle of Retrieved from: https://ssec.si.edu/stemvisions-blog/what-
Appreciate the importance of the sun,
average temperature change, the increase in photosynthesis
plants and animals to our survival.
greenhouse gases from burning excessive fossil fuels
Lead initiatives to limit air pollution so has caused temperatures to rise worldwide The sun is the ultimate source of energy for almost all life on
as to maintain adequate sunlight for (greenhouse effect). These increases have the Earth. Through a process called photosynthesis, plants and
photosynthesis and energy transfer to potential to kill plant species that are responsible for other photosynthetic organisms convert sunlight into chemical
ecosystems. photosynthesis and energy transfer to ecosystems. energy in the form of a simple sugar called glucose. Glucose
serves as the primary source of energy for all living organisms,
Lead initiatives to limit fossil fuel including animals.
consumption to protect the energy
transfer in ecosystems that may be
110
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
impacted by global warming and Average Earth Surface Temperature Change by There are other ways the sun’s energy gets transformed. Today
elimination of species. Decade we are going to learn how that happens and how we can draw
pictures that show how everything in our ecosystem relies on
Work collaboratively with each other
Have learners extract data from the following graph each other.
when completing assigned tasks or
and use it to draw their own graph.
activities.
Photosynthesis
Stewardship/Respect for Living
Background information:
Things
Plants use a process called photosynthesis to make food.
When conducting practical and group
During photosynthesis, plants trap light energy with their
work, display sensitivity and offer
assistance to peers who may have leaves. Plants use the energy of the sun to change water and
physical or learning challenges. carbon dioxide into a sugar called glucose.
Retrieved from:
Participate actively in classroom Glucose is used by plants for energy and to make other
https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/features/Global
discussions. substances like cellulose and starch. Cellulose is used in
Warming/page2.php
building cell walls. Starch is stored in seeds and other plant
parts as a food source. That's why some foods that we eat, like
Have learners make a data table (temperature
rice and grains, are packed with starch!
increase per year every ten years) based on the
graph from 1960-2010.
In small groups, learners will test for starch.
Sample data e.g. Test for Starch & Sugars made/stored in Plants
Temperature increase Average for the year
(degrees Celsius) Carbohydrates in food can take the form of sugars, starches,
0 change 1960
and fibre.
0 change 1970
0.1 degree increase 1980
0.2 degree increase 1990
0.3 degree increase 2000
0.5 degree increase 2010
111
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Task How to Test for Starch in Foods
a) Learners should duplicate the data in
drawing their own graph Iodine solution is used to test for starch in foods. Iodine
b) They should extend their x axis to include solution is an orange or reddish-brown liquid
up to 2030
c) They should draw a line on their own graph 1. Prepare a test sample by placing small pieces or crushed
that follows the trend (the slope) and
food in a petri dish or drink cork (preferably white) or on a
predict (extrapolate) what the temperature
white tile. NB. Liquid samples can be used as well.
increase could be predicted for 2030.
2. Add 2 to 3 drops of iodine solution on the food sample
Rubric: labelled graph 5 marks/extrapolated value 5
and observe.
marks
3. If starch is present, the orange colour of the iodine will
change to blue-black.
Retrieved from:
https://everythingaboutbiotech.tumblr.com/post/68804615
7627310080/food-tests
112
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Answers Teacher demonstrates the test for reducing sugar.
1.nutrients 2. food 3.
producers How to Test for Sugar in Foods
4. photosynthesis 5. herbivores 6.
Benedict's solution is used to test for simple sugars, such as
omnivores
fructose or glucose. Benedict's solution doesn't identify the
7. scavengers 8. nutrients 9. fungi
specific sugar in a sample, but the colour produced by the test
10.chains 11.humans 12. web
can indicate whether a small or large quantity of sugar is
present. Benedict's solution is a translucent blue liquid
Retrieved from:
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/food-chain-
1. Prepare a test sample by mixing a small amount of crushed
vocabulary-worksheet--471048442258100231/
or grated food with distilled water.
2. In a test tube, add 40 drops of the sample liquid and ten
Food chains and Food Webs
drops of Benedict's solution.
3. Warm the test tube by placing it in a hot water bath or
container of hot tap water for five minutes.
4. If sugar is present, the blue colour will change to green,
yellow, orange or red, depending on how much sugar is
present. Green indicates a lower concentration than yellow,
which is a lower concentration than red. The different
colours may be used to compare the relative amounts of
sugar in different foods.
113
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://everythingaboutbiotech.tumblr.com/post/6880461576
27310080/food-tests
The Sun Provides Energy
Picture of human growth cycle- (Class discussion or in small
groups)
Retrieved from:
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/scienc
e/18811
Retrieved from: https://k8schoollessons.com/human-life-
cycle/
114
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Reading and Comprehension Questions to ask during guided discussion.
Have learners answer questions (in small groups or as
individuals in a whole class discussion), e.g.
- What is the picture showing us? (How a baby grew/ develop and
how he moved)
- What does he need to move and grow? (Energy)
- What does our heart, hands, etc. require to work? (Energy)
- Where do we get our energy from in order for us to grow,
move and have our body function properly? (We get our energy
from the food we eat.)
- Where does the food we eat come from? (The food we eat comes
from plants and animals)
- We know that plants need water, soil to grow. What else is
needed for plants to grow? (sunlight). So energy from the sun
grows the plants which we eat and then we get the energy
when we eat the plants. Its like a cycle isn’t it? Lets’ draw a
picture of that process.
- Have you ever heard that humans gain vitamin D from
exposure to the sunlight? (When your skin is exposed to sunlight, it
makes vitamin D from cholesterol. The sun's ultraviolet B (UVB) rays
hit cholesterol in the skin cells, providing the energy for vitamin D
synthesis to occur.)
115
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Reading and Comprehension - Animals also get Vitamin D from exposure to sunlight and
then we eat the animals for energy -another cycle! (an animals’
Nutrition skin secrete oils or waxes which coat and impregnate its fur or feathers.
Sunlight then interacts with the oil and produces vitamin D, which is then
All living things- plants, animals and human beings need
ingested by the animal or bird when it grooms itself.) In this way the
food. Foods contain certain substances called nutrients which
suns’ energy gets passed to animals directly and through plants
build and maintain the body and give it power and energy to
they eat and then we eat the animals (another cycle of energy)
do work. Some of these substances or nutrients are Proteins,
Let us draw another picture to recall that whole process.
Carbohydrates, Fats, Vitamins and Minerals.
Food Chain and Food Webs
Proteins are body-building foods. They replace and repair
worn-out and broken-down tissues. They are found in foods
such as meat, milk, fish, cheese, eggs, peas, beans and lentils.
Growing children need a good supply of proteins. They need
more than adults. Carbohydrates contain starches and
sugars. They supply the body with power and energy to do
work. They are found in rice, flour, bread, roti and ground
provisions like yam, dasheen, tannia, eddoes and cassava.
People who do physical work or labour on the fields need
more carbohydrates than those who work in offices.
Fats supply us with energy and warmth. You will find them
in butter, margarine, cheese and certain kinds of meat and
Retrieved from
vegetable oils. Most animals store up fat in their bodies.
https://images.twinkl.co.uk/tw1n/image/private/s--
Later, they use it as energy. We should avoid eating too
dQdi2MEr--
much fat, especially animal fat which we get by eating food
/c_fill,q_auto:eco,w_600/v1/create/library/Rainforest-
from animals. Too much fat in our diet can cause clogging of
Heroes-Final-Pattern-Page.png
our arteries or the tubes that carry blood to our heart.
Vitamins protect the body against certain diseases of the
skin, eyes and bones. They are contained in whole milk, egg,
116
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
meat, fish, yellow vegetables like carrots and dark, leafy Learners, do you know what an ecosystem is? (An ecosystem is
greens like spinach. They are also found in oranges and other made up of all of the living and non-living things in an area.
citrus fruits, tomatoes and leafy vegetables. This includes all of the plants, animals, and other living things
that make up the communities of life in an area. An ecosystem
Minerals are of different kinds. They are important for the also includes non-living materials—for example, water, rocks,
general health of the body. You can find them in milk, soil, and sand.)
cheese, egg yolk, cabbage, cauliflower, bananas, liver, heart,
kidney, whole-wheat, fish, nuts, dates, asparagus and Retrieved from:
spinach. https://kids.britannica.com/kids/article/ecosystem/433377#:
~:text=An%20ecosystem%20is%20made%20up,rocks%2C%2
It is wise to eat a balanced diet. This means that you have a 0soil%2C%20and%20sand.
daily intake of a little of each of the different kinds of food
mentioned. You must not eat more than your body requires
to give you sufficient energy to go about your daily work. If
you eat more than you require, you will store up the excess
food in the form of fat. After a while you will become obese
or overweight, especially if you are lazy and not in the habit of
doing daily physical exercise. Obesity is harmful to health
and can cause serious illnesses that are life-threatening.
Therefore, you must always bear in mind that proper eating is
the key to good health.
https://cdn.britannica.com/59/232059-050-70F0B14D.jpg
Sample Questions
Can you give examples of different ecosystems? (examples the
3. Why are nutrients essential to the body? (Nutrients
sea, forest, mangrove, swamp, rainforest).
build and maintain the body and give it power and
energy to do work.)
Let us now briefly describe these ecosystems. (using pictures
learners will describe these ecosystems- example animals and
117
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. Which of the following is not stated in the last plants found in these ecosystems, are these ecosystems found
paragraph? in their country)
a) over-eating can cause over-weight
b) Eating less causes you to lose weight. Organisms in ecosystems rely on each other for food. Do you
c) Over-eating without exercising may be worst for know the name of the order of events in an ecosystem, where
you.
one living organism eats/ feeds on another organism? (a food
d) Obesity can lead to serious illness
chain)
3. Which of the following can you infer or conclude from the
last paragraph?
Useful Anchor Text for Teaching Reliance in Ecosystems
a) obese people are over-weight
Wolf Island by Celia Godkin
b) excess food is stored as fat
YouTube® Read Along:
c) exercise can help in preventing you
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N6LsBdRnboI (6:29
from adding weight.
mins)
d) being lazy or inactive also contributes to over-weight
4. Give a word or phrase for each of the following:
a) Substances which build and maintain the body Food chain
(nutrients)
b) Body-building foods (proteins) A food chain consists of different relationships we call trophic
c) Foods that give power and energy (carbohydrates) levels. The trophic level of an organism is the position it
d) A diet which contains a little of each of the different occupies in a food web. Within a food web, a food chain is a
nutrients ( a blanched diet) succession of organisms that eat other organisms and may, in
turn, be eaten themselves. The trophic level of an organism is
Source: A Basic English Course Primary Level 4 the number of steps it is from the start of the chain. Trophic
(Revised Edition) Uric Narinesingh pages 134-135
levels have the same nutritional relationship to the primary
Click on the link below to complete a quick sources of energy.
assessment on Invasive Species.
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/biolog
y/1498344
118
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Trophic Levels
■ Producers
■ Consumers
➢ Primary consumers
➢ Secondary consumers
➢ Tertiary consumers
■ Decomposers
Retrieved from: https://www.onlinebiologynotes.com/food-
chain-trophic-levels-and-flow-of-energy-in-ecosystem/
or
Answer sheet
119
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://medium.com/@ellisnelson.au/difference-between-
food-chain-and-food-web-1a1ce5af24c1
Video Resource for Learning About Food Chains
Pose the following questions before learners watch the video so
as to promote active listening/watching
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hLq2datPo5M (4:57min)
1. Where does all energy come from for living things? (the
sun)
2. How does the energy get from the sun to animals? The
sun is necessary to make plants grow. The animals eat the
plants.)
3. What are producers? (plants are producers because they make
their own food).
4. What are herbivores, carnivores, omnivores and
decomposers?
● some animals (herbivores) eat plants.
● some animals eat other animals (carnivores)that
have eaten plants.
● some animals eat both plants and animals
(omnivores)
● decayed plants and animals contribute fertilizer to
the ground where plants again begin to
grow.(action of decomposers)
120
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Have learners discuss and answer questions in small groups.
Distinguishing Food Chains
Have learners observe the two following diagrams
Retrieved from:
https://www.bing.com/images/search?view=detailV2&ccid=xi
Cn jAuv&id=3116F171EB2DBF6CCE8B13A7A16222B33082F
Retrieved from 6B9&thid=OIP
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/science/2
140053 - Which diagram shows a food chain? (Diagram 1)
- What is a food chain? (The flow of energy in the form of food
from plants to animals and other animals in series.)
121
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
- What does the arrow in a food chain represent? (The
arrows represent the direction of the flow of energy)
- What does diagram 2 represent? (Food web/ combination of
food chains/ ecosystem)
- What do you understand by the terms:
- producers (Organisms (plants) that can capture energy from the
sun and make their own food by the process of photosynthesis)
- consumers (Organisms (animals) that feed on plants and other
animals)
Another component of many food chains is called a
decomposer. A decomposer is any organism that breaks down
or eats decaying material for its energy source. Decomposers are
important within the environment because they break down the
Retrieved from
bodies of dead animals or plants, and recycling those materials
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/science/2
back into the Earth.
140053
Some examples include fungi, bacteria and insects
122
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://sciencenotes.org/wp-
content/uploads/2022/04/Biotic-vs-Abiotic-
Retrieved from: https://www.expii.com/t/decomposer-
Factors-Worksheet.pdf
definition-role-10471
Differences between food chains and webs
Food chain Food web
Single/ linear flow Many connected
of energy paths of energy flow
One food source for Some animals have
animals more than one food
source
Retrieved from:
https://www.purposegames.com/game/types-of-
ecosystems-quiz
123
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Identify the following ecosystems: Similarities between food chains and webs
• Shrubland Ecosystem
• Tropical rainforest They start with plants
• coral reef
Involve the flow of energy from plants to animals
• dessert
• Grassland
- Why do food chains and webs start with plants? (Plants
• Mangrove Swamp
make/ produce food which provides energy but animals cannot, they
• coastal
eat plants or other animals that eat plants)
• Tundra
- Where do plants in food chains and webs get their energy
to make food?
(The main source of energy for plants to make food is the sun)
Explain to learners that the energy released from food was once
energy from the sun that was captured by plants during a
process called photosynthesis.
Food provides animals with the materials they need for body
repair and growth and the energy they need to maintain body
warmth and for motion. The food of almost any kind of animal
can be traced back to plants.
Have learners observe a chart and/ or watch video to sum up
discussions on the sun as the source of energy in foods.
124
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
E.g. Chart
Retrieved from:
https://www.bing.com/images/search?view=detailV2&ccid=C
yCf4Tjg&id=7BDC2290AA8B25F709C115610721E004841A0
E6B&thid=OIP.
Learner Formative Assessment
Think about plants and animals in your community and make
a list. Now draw an example of a flow chart/food chain that
shows how the energy is transferred from the sun to other
living things.
How does pollution affect food chains and webs? Ask learners
their ideas about why pollution might disturb a food chain or
food web. (kill off members, stall growth, limit offspring)
125
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Pollution disrupts food chains and webs by affecting the health,
reproduction, and survival of organisms at various trophic
levels.
“Pollution, in its various forms, can have a profound impact on
food chains and webs. For instance, air pollution can lead to
acid rain, which can acidify soils and water bodies. This can
harm or kill certain species of plants and animals, particularly
those at the bottom of the food chain, such as algae and
plankton in aquatic ecosystems. This can have a knock-on
effect on the rest of the food chain, as these primary producers
are the main source of energy for other organisms.”
Quoted verbatim from:
https://www.tutorchase.com/answers/ib/ess/how-does-
pollution-affect-food-chains-and-webs
Ask learners how global warming might disturb a food chain?
(changes in climate affect habitat and could kill of f members of an
ecosystem; water level changes may impact habitat and limit growth and
reproduction of species)
Invasive species and Interrupting food chains
What does the word “invade” mean to you?
(move into a place where you don’t belong)
We know that wars are often caused by one ruler invading the
country of another ruler with the sole intent of taking over the
new land for their own.
126
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
An invasive species maybe a plant or animal that more often
accidentally moves into an ecosystem where it usually doesn’t
exist. Because they are a new species in the system, there is
great potential to upset the balance of prey/predator,
.producer/consumer etc.
Invasive Species
Invasive species are plants, animals, or microorganisms that are
not native to a particular ecosystem and have the potential to
cause harm to the environment, economy, or human health.
These species often have no natural predators or controls in
their new environment, inviting them to multiply rapidly and
outcompete native species.
https://sciencenotes.org/invasive-species-definition-and-
examples/
How Do Invasive Species Interrupt Food Chains?
Do you know how invasive species can interrupt a food chain?
(teacher listens to learners responses and make notes)
127
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Teacher will then explain that Invasive species can disrupt food
chains by preying on or outcompeting native species. They can
also alter the availability of resources, such as food and habitat,
which can have a cascading effect on other organisms in the
ecosystem.
For example, if an invasive species preys on a native species
that is an important food source for another species, it can lead
to a decline in the population of the second species. This can
then affect the predators or other organisms that rely on the
second species for food, causing a disruption in the food chain.
We can help prevent the spread of invasive species.
Are there any animals which are new to your school, garden or
community? (perhaps the invasive species may be reported on
the news). Can you list a few? (teacher listens to learners suggestions
and make notes)
Teacher then explains ways we can prevent the spread of
invasive species.
Preventing the spread of invasive species is crucial to protect
native ecosystems. Here are some ways we can help:
1. Clean your gear: When visiting natural areas, make sure to
clean your shoes, clothes, and equipment to remove any seeds,
insects, or other organisms that could be carrying invasive
species.
128
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. Don't release pets or plants: Never release pets or plants
into the wild. They may become invasive and disrupt native
ecosystems.
3. Plant native species: Choose native plants for your garden.
They are adapted to the local environment and are less likely to
become invasive.
4. Be a responsible boater: Clean your boat and equipment
before moving to a new body of water to prevent the spread of
aquatic invasive species.
We will now watch a short you tube video on invasive species.
Useful Video Resources to Exemplify the Reliance of
Species on One Another
As learners watch the following videos, the teacher should post
the following questions to consider as they watch.
1. What do you notice about the relationship between plants
and animals in an ecosystem? (The animals rely on the plants,
since the animals are consumers..)
2. What do you think will happen if you remove something
from an ecosystem?( The plants and other organisms may not grow
and thrive.)
3. Invasive species are living things that often get added to an
ecosystem by mistake. What do you think happens to
ecosystems when an outside species is added? (They cause
damage to the area.)
129
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4. Can you think of an invasive species (plant or animal) that
has invaded your community? (lion fish)
Retrieved from: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bJEToQ49Yjc
(6:22 mins)
Retrieved from: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gYNAtw1c7hI
(3:32 mins)
130
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Biotic/Abiotic
The learners will be engaged in a discussion about ecosystems
and energy systems.
What makes up an ecosystem? (learners will give their responses and
teacher will take notes)
The teacher will then say, “The ecosystems are made up of
both living (biotic) and non-living (abiotic) components. Do
you know what the word "biotic" means? (the teacher will write
their responses on the board.)
Teacher will then explain to the learners that Biotic factors refer
to all living organisms within an ecosystem.
Biotic factors interact with each other and with their
environment, playing important roles in the functioning of
ecosystems.
“Can You list a few examples of biotic factors?” (teacher will listen
to the responses and record them on the board)
- Plants: Trees, flowers, grass, and other vegetation.
- Animals: Birds, mammals, reptiles, amphibians, and insects.
- Microorganisms: Bacteria, fungi, and protists.
131
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Biotic factors can be further classified into producers,
consumers, and decomposers.
Producers, such as plants, are able to produce their own food
through photosynthesis.
Consumers, such as animals, obtain their energy by consuming
other organisms.
Decomposers, such as bacteria and fungi, break down dead
organisms and organic matter, returning nutrients to the
ecosystem.
The teacher will then ask the learners if they know what the
word "abiotic" means. (the teacher will write their responses on the
board.)
The teacher will then explain that Abiotic factors, on the other
hand, are non-living components of the environment that
influence the living organisms within an ecosystem. These
factors can include physical and chemical characteristics of the
environment, such as temperature, sunlight, water availability,
soil composition, and air quality.
“Can You list a few examples of abiotic factors?” (teacher will
listen to the responses and record them on the board)
- Temperature: The average temperature of an area.
- Sunlight: The amount of sunlight an area receives.
- Water availability: The presence of water and its availability
to organisms.
- Soil composition: The type and quality of soil in an area.
- Air quality: The composition of gases in the air.
132
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Abiotic factors can have a significant impact on the distribution
and abundance of biotic factors within an ecosystem. For
example, certain plants may only be able to survive in specific
temperature ranges, while some animals may require a certain
amount of sunlight to thrive.
Components of an Energy system : Distinguishing
Biotic/Abiotic
The teacher will ask the learners to review what abiotic and
biotic means. (Abiotic factors are the non-living things in an ecosystem.
and Biotic factors are the living things in an ecosystem.)
The teacher will then ask the learners to group the factors
within an ecosystem that fall into these categories. They will
choose at least 5 living things they have identified and suggest
how they are related in the ecosystem. (They must suggest
how these components of the system are related to energy
from the sun.)
Field Trip
Learners will observe their local environment (or participate in
a virtual field trip). Learners will list six examples of abiotic and
biotic factors.
133
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Difference between food chains and food webs
https://www.careerpower.in/school/biology/difference-between-food-chain-and-food-web
Differences between food chain and food webs
https://medium.com/@ellisnelson.au/difference-between-food-chain-and-food-web-1a1ce5af24c1
Global Warming Poses a Threat to Food Chains
https://www.uwa.edu.au/news/article/2021/march/global-warming-poses-threat-to-food-chains
Additional Resources and Materials
134
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Retrieved from: https://www.superteacherworksheets.com/food-chains/food-web-worksheet_WQRQM.pdf
Food chain: https://www.k12reader.com/worksheet/whats-eating-you/view/
Food web power point: https://slideplayer.com/slide/9241839/
How does climate change influence food web dynamics?https://www.tutorchase.com/answers/igcse/biology/how-does-climate-change-influence-food-web-
dynamics
135
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Mathematics: interpreting, graphing climate data
Social Studies: List ways in which food chains and webs can be disrupted in nature example natural disasters, interference of man example clearing forested
areas for building homes and roads, overfishing
Language Arts: Writing descriptions of various ecosystems. Expository essay on the various types/kinds of nutrients. Writing about how pollution and global
warming can affect food chains and food webs.
TVET: Creative ways of growing foods example using plastic bottles to grow lettuce, setting up a hydroponics system
Agriculture: Growing foods containing the various nutrients.
Art and Craft: making food chart showing the different groups (nutrients) of food
Health: Preparing a balanced menu and preparing a balanced meal. Preparing a balanced intake of your food for a day for breakfast, lunch, supper
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are Integrated
School trips to visit and learn information about ecosystems in their country example mangrove swamps, forests,
Visiting various hydroponics, aquaculture, farms or places with green houses.
Setting up a school garden to supply nutritious foods, for example vegetables.
Items of Inspiration
Learners can research on how
(a) pollution can affect food chains
(b) how global warming poses a threat to food chains.
136
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 2: Support an argument that plants get the materials they need for growth chiefly from air and water.
Clarification Statement: Emphasis is on the idea that plant matter comes mostly from air and water, not from the soil.
Grade Level Expectation: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge Research Report Materials: Picture of plants/Plants near a window being watered
Learners should create a report that outlines the Alternatively, the teacher can bring the learners outside into the garden to
Define the terms: following: take care of some plants.
● growth
● air
➢ What do we usually think that plants need
● oxygen to survive? (nutrients, water, sunlight)
● carbon dioxide ➢ Which variables of plant growth did you
● soil investigate?
● sunlight ➢ What did you find were the optimum
● controlled experiments amounts of water, soil, sunlight?
Retrieved from:
● valid ➢ The research question asked “Can a plant
https://www.bhg.com/gardening/houseplants/care/watering-
● reliable get its nutrients without soil? What were
houseplants/
● photosynthesis your findings?
(the science of hydroponics demonstrates that water
● respiration
● glucose and air are MOST important and that soil is not What living thing are we observing? (Plants)
● hydroponics necessary) Do you have any plants at home? (Yes/No)
● nutrients ➢ Explain using the concept of Do you have orchids at home?(Yes/No)
photosynthesis and a detailed diagram, how Look at the video below.
Explain the main steps of the scientific the sun’s energy is centrally important to
method the growth of plants.
137
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Describe basic science process skills. Rubric:
Question responses-content 5 marks/grammar &
State the materials necessary for plants punctuation 5 marks/ diagram 5 marks/
to grow.
explanation 5 marks
Account for the need for plants to
Photosynthesis Vocabulary
obtain nutrients to grow.
Place the word photosynthesis in the centre of this
Frayer square and ask learners to fill in the 4
Explain the process of photosynthesis
in plants. quadrants with the appropriate information.
Skills
Design and implement a controlled Photosynthesis Worksheet
experiment
Observe plant growth in seeds and
seedlings.
Infer that sunlight, water and carbon
dioxide are necessary for
photosynthesis in plants. Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/shorts/Ed6NNpfAO1o
Measure plant growth using scientific
instruments.
How do you and your family take care of the plants at home?
(Water them, ensure they have sunlight, remove old leaves, etc.)
Predict the results of experiments.
Why do you think we/people water plants? Why do plants need
water? (To grow)
Construct hypotheses to guide plant
experiments. What else do you think plants need to grow? (sunlight, carbon-
dioxide/air)
Investigate the conditions necessary The learners' responses are noted.
for plant growth.
138
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Graph data on plant growth to identify Brainstorming:
patterns and trends.
The learners are placed in groups. Each group will be given the
Interpret the results of the graph.
following: (1) cards with the following words: sunlight, water,
soil and air. (2) blank index card (3) poster board (4) markers and
Demonstrate interest/curiosity while
(5) glue
conducting experiments.
Sample cards:
Attitudes/Values
Appreciation of the importance of
materials for the growth of plants.
Respect for evidence.
Appreciation of importance of
scientific method.
Work cooperatively in groups.
Stewardship/Respect for Living
Things
When conducting practical and group
work, display sensitivity and offer
“Sunlight Picture” Retrieved
assistance to peers who may have
https://davisphinneyfoundation.org/sunlight-and-parkinsons/
physical or learning challenges. Retrieved from:
https://education.gov.gy/web2/index.php/learners
“Water Picture” Retrieved from
Participate actively in classroom
-resources/primary-school-resources/grade-
https://www.ruralsprout.com/houseplants-to-grow-in-water/
discussions.
5/grade5-worksheets/grade-5-worksheets-
science/5991-grade-5-science-week-6-2022-
consolidated-worksheet/file
139
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Comprehension Task “Soil Picture” Retrieved from
Read each question carefully, then shade the letter https://www.thespruce.com/success-tips-for-transplanting-
next to the correct answer. and-moving-gardens-1402470
“Air Picture” Retrieved from
https://www.airplantsupplyco.com/blogs/articles/6081302-
epiphytes
The learners will discuss the following question in their groups:
What material is MOST important for plant growth?
Each group must select an option/card and write down a reason
for their choice based on what they know about the plants on an
index card.
The groups share their answers with the class.
The teacher gives each group a poster board with a graphic
organizer to stick their card.
Sample graphic organizer with cards:
Answer key
140
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: Science Made Easy
A preparation tool for Primary Science
Examinations. Jonathan Benn and Brisshana Benn
(2021). Ministry of Education, Co-operation
republic of Guyana
Assessment
Retrieved from: https://www.edrawmax.com/article/scientific-
graphic-organizer-examples.html
retrieved from
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/134052526388039
920/
141
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Answer Key: Introducing the Scientific Method/Process
Plants can grow under certain conditions. They
need water, air, light and warmth. If a plant does Scientists are naturally curious persons. Science is all about
not have these things it will slowly die. A healthy accounting for unusual occurrences, asking questions and
plant has green leaves and stands up strongly. A finding answers to them. Traditionally, scientists have tried to
plant that has been deprived of nutrients will lose solve problems and explain their solutions using a stepwise
its leaves. A plant that has been deprived of light process which we will talk about today. While these steps are
will turn yellow, thin and spindly. important, in real science research, they are part of a cycle of
To stay healthy a plant needs to take water and science with multiple entry points, that involves good questions,
nutrients from the soil . A plant takes carbon experimental design, testing, analysing results and asking more
dioxide from the air and uses it with water and questions. (Teacher note: see cycle of science lower in the
light to create food. template)
Assessment For the purposes of conducting science experiments in
elementary school, it is useful to consider the traditional process
Write a friendly letter to your friend's dad who is a called the Scientific Method. Our graphic organizer gives us the
farmer, explaining the importance as to why plants main steps in the Scientific Method. [Teacher can identify steps
need the basic conditions in order to grow healthy and discuss the steps from the graphic organizer]
and produce more fruits or food. Learners, it is important in designing an investigation that we
apply the notion of a controlled experiment.
For example: If we were going to decide which pair of running
shoes would result in the fastest track time for an athlete, what
the experiment look like?
I think you would agree:
1) The person running has to stay the same
2) The same track must be used
3) The starting and finish lines must be the same
4) The timing of the run must be measured the same
5) It would b best if the person running did so at the same
time of day with equivalent rest
142
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
These are called experimental controls and we can have better
confidence that we choose the fastest running shoes because
took care to control many of the variables that might impact the
measured time of a lap of the track.
So, whenever you do an experiment that compares multiple
variables, you should think about what controls you can apply
so your results are valid (the experiment answers the question
with confidence there are no confounding variables) and
reliable (the results are reproducible)
We are using the scientific method to find out what plants
need to grow and why.
***Learners, as you conduct this experiment, I want you to think
about how you are doing a controlled study- what variables are
you maintaining as constant?
[The groups will carry out an experiment based on their chosen
material/condition. (To save time, the class may set up each
Retrieved from:
experiment on each material/condition for plant growth
https://www.lcps.org/cms/lib4/VA01000195/Cen
simultaneously and then the groups independently record their
tricity/Domain/7963/Friendly%20Letter%20Rubri
data).]
c.pdf
Plants Are Producers: A Comprehension The research question will be written in their graphic organizer.
Literacy Task (A question usually initiates and guides the scientific process)
Read the passage below carefully and answer the
following questions The learners, with the teacher’s assistance, will develop a
Cross-Curricular Focus History/Life Science hypothesis based on the question. A hypothesis is a guess based
People are consumers. We have to spend large parts on the information we know. This guess will invite us to carry
of our days finding, buying, cooking and eating our
143
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
food. Did you ever think it might be nice to be able out steps to collect data that will tell us if our guess is a good one
to make your own food like plants do? Plants are and provide answers to our questions.
producers and perform a process called
photosynthesis using light from the sun, water and Hypothesis:
carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide is one of the gases
we exhale when we breathe. The end result of this If plants get no/little ___________, then their growth rate will
chemical reaction is sugar for the plant to feed on. _______________ (increase/decrease).
The plant releases water and oxygen, a gas all animals
need to breathe, into the air. Now that we have our hypothesis, the next step of the scientific
process (Scientific Method) is to test it.
So how do plants do it, and why can't we? Plants have The learners will gather the materials and set up the experiments
special structures called chloroplasts that animals by following the experimental procedure in order to observe and
don't have. Chloroplasts are round, flat organelles collect data. The teacher will provide guidance.
that are arranged in stacks called grana. These stacks
are filled with chlorophyll. Chlorophyll is what gives In carrying out the scientific method/process, scientists design
leafy green plants their green colour. Their main job experiments or investigations that test their hypothesis/guess.
is to absorb light from the sun. Chloroplasts can The experiments will give the scientists the data necessary to see
absorb every colour except green. Light activates the if their guess was valid or not.
chlorophyll. It creates an energy that splits molecules
of water, separating them out into hydrogen and
oxygen. Chemical reactions take place. Hydrogen Experiment #1: How does water affect plant growth?
from the water combines with carbon from the
carbon dioxide we breathe out. Oxygen is released Materials: 5-10 plants the same size and age (learners can grow
into the air. tomato or red bean plants in preparation for these experiments),
4 pots the same size, soil, cup measure, ruler, observation sheet,
People and plants make perfect partners. Plants rely
tape, marker, and water.
on the carbon dioxide from the air that we breathe
out, and we rely on the oxygen that they produce.
Procedure:
This is one good reason for protecting plant life on
1. Use a measuring cup/balance to place the same
Earth. Algae fields near the poles produce a constant amount of soil into five different same-size pots. The
144
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
supply of oxygen for us. So do the many plants of same type of soil should be in each pot. (You can also
Earth's rainforests. We need plants in order to put two plants under the same conditions)
2. Plant each plant to the same depth in a pot
survive.
3. Label the plants: A-no water, B- 120 ml water, C- 240
ml water, D- 360 ml water, and E- 480 ml of water.
Conservation projects around the globe are aimed at
4. Place the plants in a place where they can get about the
protecting our natural resources, including numerous
same amount of sunlight e.g. by a window.
species of plants. Our quality of life and the very
5. Measure the height of the plant on the first day
quality of the air we breathe depend upon our green 6. Add the required amount of water to the plants every
plant partners. day at the same time for 4 weeks.
7. Measure the height of each plant for 4 weeks.
Answer the following questions based on the 8. Record all data in the observation table
reading passage. Don’t forget to go back to the
Sample Observation Table:
passage whenever necessary to find or confirm your
answers.
1. Why are plants called producers?
2. Where do plants get their green colour?
3. Explain the relationship between people
and plants. Why are we good partners? After the groups have collected data over the past four weeks,
the learners stick their completed observation table in their
4. What would happen if there were not graphic organizer.
enough plants on earth?
Overall growth in height (cm) can be calculated for each plant
5. What is chloroplast? as well as the percentage increase. Learners will also draw a
graph to show the results. (Mathematics Integration) and they will
answer the questions below.
145
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Some questions to guide the analysis of the data from the
observations table: [use for all experiments 1 - 4]
● Which plant showed the biggest increase in height?
● How much water did we put each day in this plant?
● Which plant showed the least amount of growth?
● Which plant began to wilt?
Discussion of Results
Water is needed for growth. Let us learn more about why plants
need water.
Retrieved from
https://www.k12reader.com/worksheet/plants-
are-producers/
Retrieved from:
https://youtu.be/KUrHihEOhaw?si=cOUh60Y6ca4hzUDK
(1:10)
Can you identify three ways plants use the water they take in
from the video? (Transportation of chemicals, for photosynthesis, helps
plants stay upright. )
The importance of water to your plants goes beyond merely
keeping them alive. Water is also a necessary element to help
plants thrive. Water is what invites for the uptake of vital
nutrients from the soil. It is also water that helps to carry sugar
146
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
and other elements that may be required by flowers or fruit.
Water itself has to be broken down and changed into a new
chemical during photosynthesis.
● If a plant's soil is given too much water the roots can
rot. The plant leaves begin to wilt and there is poor
growth as it is not getting enough oxygen and
nutrients. Eventually, the branches become affected
and the plant dies.
● If a plant is not given enough water, the nutrients it
needs cannot travel through the plant.
● A plant cannot grow if it doesn't have healthy roots, so
the proper balance of water is key when growing
plants.
Experiment #2: How does air affect plant growth?
Materials: 4 plants the same size and age (learners can grow
tomato or red bean plants in preparation for these
experiments), 4 pots the same size, soil, cup measure, ruler,
observation sheet, tape, clear bags, and water.
Procedure:
1. Use a measuring cup/balance to place the same
amount of soil into four different same-size pots. The
same type of soil should be in each pot. (You can also
put two plants under the same conditions)
2. Plant each plant to the same depth in a pot
3. Measure the height of each plant and place in the
observation table
4. Add 240 ml of water to all the plants and place them in
a place where they can all get sunlight.
147
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5. Place clear bags over two plants and tape them to the
bottom of the pots. Zip-lock bags can also be used.
6. Measure the height of the plants after one week.
7. Water the plants with 250 ml water and record the
height at the end of the week for 4 weeks. Record all
measurements in the observations table. Learners will
also draw a graph of their results.
Sample Observation Table
After the groups have collected data over the past four weeks,
the teacher will guide the learners in interpreting the data. The
learners stick their completed observation table in their graphic
organizer.
Systematically collecting data is very important in carrying out
the scientific process/method. The data will be used to tell us
whether our guess is supported by the data we collect. In
science, we use evidence from scientific investigations to create
knowledge and solutions to problems around us.
Discussion of Results
Plants primarily get the materials for growth from the air and
water. Air contains many gases. They include nitrogen, oxygen,
carbon dioxide, and water vapour. Plant utilize the carbon
dioxide in the air to make their food, in a process called
148
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
photosynthesis. The plants also use oxygen to generate energy.
Sunlight provides the energy that is required to create food
through photosynthesis.
Experiment #3: How does sunlight affect plant growth?
Materials: 4 plants the same size and age (learners can grow
tomato or red bean plants in preparation for these
experiments), 4 pots the same size, soil, cup measure, ruler,
observation sheet, and water.
Procedure:
1. Use a measuring cup/balance to place the same
amount of soil into four different same-size pots. The
same type of soil should be in each pot. (You can also
put two plants under the same conditions)
2. Plant each plant to the same depth in a pot
3. Measure the height of each plant and place in the
observation table
4. Add 250 ml of water to all the plants
5. Place two plants in a place where they can get a lot of
sunlight.
6. Place two plants in a dark cupboard where they can get
no sunlight.
7. Water the plants with the same amount of water at the
same time every day for 3-4 weeks.
8. Measure the height of the plants each week (try to do it
on the same day) and place the measurement in the
results table. Learners will also draw a graph of their
results.
149
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Sample Observation Table
After the groups have collected data over the past four weeks,
the teacher will guide the learners in interpreting the data. The
learners stick their completed observation table in their graphic
organizer and draw a line graph to show their results.
Experiment #4: How does soil affect plant growth?
Materials: 4 plants the same size and age (learners can grow
tomato or red bean plants in preparation for these
experiments), 4 pots the same size, loam, clay, sand, cup
measure, ruler, observation sheet, and water.
Procedure
1. Use a measuring cup/balance to place the same
amount of loam, clay, and sand into three different
same-size pots.
2. Label the pot with loam ‘loam’, the second pot with
clay ‘clay’, and the third pot ‘sand’.
3. Plant each plant to the same depth in a pot
4. Measure the height of each plant and place it in the
observation table
5. Add the same amount of water to all the plants and
place them in a place where they can all get sunlight.
150
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6. Water the plants every day for three weeks. Measure
the height of the plants each week and place them in an
observation table. Learners will also draw a graph of
their results.
Sample Observation Table
After the groups have collected data over the past four weeks,
the teacher will guide the learners in interpreting the data. The
learners stick their completed observation table in their graphic
organizer.
Discussion of Results
Loam has the water and nutrients plants need to grow best.
Plants in poor soils will struggle to grow, even if optimal water
and light are available. Clay soil is sticky and doesn't have much
air in it. It tends to hold a lot of water. It is not ideal for plant
growth for this reason. Sand on the other hand does not hold
any water and many plants will struggle to get the water and
nutrients needed to grow.
Extension: [The teacher can ask the learners to research the types
of plants grown in clay and sand conditions. What adaptations
do these plants have to ensure they survive in these types of soils?
A farmer may also serve as a guest speaker and deliver a talk
about growing different crops.]
151
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Review of Photosynthesis
Retrieved from:
https://www.hortidaily.com/article/9197158/faster-plant-
growth-through-more-efficient-photosynthesis/
We get our energy from the food we eat. Plants do not get food
in the same way as we do. Plants take materials from the
environment around them, the carbon dioxide in the air, and
water from the soil to make their food (photosynthesis). Plants
use the energy from the sun to power the process of
photosynthesis. The first product of photosynthesis is glucose
(sugar).
Light is not a material; it is energy. Leaf cells trap light energy and
use it to convert water and carbon dioxide into sugar. The sugar
is stored as chemical energy in the plant. When this process takes
place, leaf cells release oxygen as a byproduct. This process is
called photosynthesis.
152
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Plants absorb water from the soil and take it in through their
roots. The water travels up the stem and reaches the cells in the
leaves where photosynthesis occurs most often. Plants must have
water to invite the nutrients to be absorbed.
The nutrients from the water are used to convert the sugar
produced from photosynthesis to other essential substances such
as proteins that the plants need.
Plants invite carbon dioxide from the air to enter their leaves
through tiny holes, and it enters the leaf cells. Without air,
plants would be missing one of the ingredients necessary to
create glucose.
Reference: https://www.varsitytutors.com/5th_grade_science-
help/support-how-plants-need-air-and-water-to-grow
Let us watch a video that reviews how photosynthesis takes
place in plants. As you watch, write done answers to the
following questions:
● What are the raw materials needed for photosynthesis?
(carbon dioxide, water, sunlight)
● How do they get these? (water absorbed from roots; carbon
dioxide from the air through the pores in the leaves)
● What are chloroplasts? (The place where photosynthesis takes
place)
● What is chlorophyll and its role in photosynthesis?
(green pigment found in the chloroplast of leaves, traps the
sunlight necessary for photosynthesis)
153
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● How are the products of photosynthesis used? (glucose
used to make other food or stored; oxygen released into the
atmosphere)
● Why are plants called the lungs of the world? (They
utilize carbon dioxide and produce the oxygen we need to breathe
and respire)
Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D1Ymc311XS8 (3:41 mins)
Experiment showing the oxygen created by the plants
Retrieved from: https://www.kids-fun-science.com/plant-
experiments.html
The Teacher can guide the learners to see the oxygen created by
plants using this experiment. [Materials, procedure, and
observation table can be accessed via the link]
154
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Growing Plants without Soil
The Teacher will use the following picture to initiate a
discussion on whether plants can grow in the absence of soil.
Retrieved from: https://letpot.com/en-ca/blogs/hydroponic-
plant-growing-knowledge-and-tips/how-to-grow-hydroponic-
cherry-tomatoes-indoors
Learners, I saw a picture of a greenhouse where they were
growing tomatoes all year round. But look at this picture. There
is no soil, only water and air to grow the tomato.
Guiding Question: Can plants be grown without soil?
The learners can grow basil in water
https://manoa.hawaii.edu/sealearning/sites/default/files/5LS_
Plants%20Without%20Soil_Activity%20Sheet.pdf
Learners can be engaged in lab work to investigate growing
plants without soil (Hydroponics)using the link:
https://www.sciencebuddies.org/science-fair-projects/project-
ideas/PlantBio_p045/plant-biology/hydroponics-gardening-
without-soil
155
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
So is soil necessary for a plant to survive, or can plants survive
in just water? What if the water had all of the nutrients in it that
soil does?
Plants can survive without being planted in soil. The science of
growing plants in nutrient-rich water is hydroponics. The word
hydroponics means "working water" and comes from the Latin
words hydro, meaning "water," and phonics, meaning "work."
In hydroponics, the nutrients are available at the plant's roots.
So, without any work, the plant gets its food and nutrition. A
plant with roots in the soil has to work hard to extract its
nutrition from the soil, and it can waste a lot of energy doing that.
But a plant in nutrient-rich water can spend its energy growing
bigger leaves, fruits, and flowers in a shorter amount of time.
One benefit of growing plants hydroponically is that the
nutrients in the water can be completely controlled, and the
plant can receive exactly the right amount of nutrients at exactly
the right time. Another benefit of hydroponics is that it works
in areas where the soils are not arable (not suitable for farming)
and in areas where there is no soil.
Air in Soil
We know that the soil usually contains nutrients for growth but
there is something else about the soil that is very helpful for
plant growth.
156
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Seed Experiment as a Demonstration
Conduct a demonstration experiment for the learners.
1. Place a radish or lettuce seed in a cup of soil and add
water to dampen the soil. Place the cup by the window in
full sunlight.
2. Boil water to remove all gases and then let it cool.
Place a seed in a cup of that water, then add 1 mL of
vegetable oil and again put the cup in full sunlight.
(repeat 1 & 2 above) in 2 more pairs of cups and talk about the
importance of multiple trials in science)
3. Continue to add water to both soil and soil-less cups.
The seeds will crack and begin to sprout. The seed in the
water cup will sprout and leaves will remain covered with
water and eventually die, whereas the soil cup will have a
little plant growing.
**This experiment can also be conducted with wet paper towels
in zip lock bags)
Ask learners what they noticed about the two cups? (the soil
plant lived and the water plant died.)
157
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://www.giftofcuriosity.com/seed-
experiment-3-do-seeds-need-air-to-grow/
Ask learners why they think the water plant died? (no nutrients
like the soil)
But we know that plants are sometimes grown with just water
in greenhouses. They call that hydroponics. They must add
nutrients to the water to help the plant grow.
But learners, there is something else that is different. The
water/oil that was added to the seed in the cup without soil
kept air away from the leaves. Do you think maybe air is
important for plant growth?
In the cup of water, the plant had no access to carbon dioxide
and limited access to the energy from the sun so it couldn’t
make food for itself.
So what have we determined in this experiment?
158
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
· Plants need access to nutrients either through the soil
or through water that has been supplemented with
nutrients (hydroponics)
· Plants need access to the sun because the energy is
used to make food for the plant to grow (photosynthesis)
Plants need access to air because it contains carbon dioxide
which can be converted to glucose which is food for the plant.
Plants which grow without soil
There are some special plants which need trees for support.
They do not harm the tree. Look at the photos below.
Retrieved from:
https://cdn.britannica.com/50/5650-050-
77351097/Epiphytes-orchids-roots-air-moisture-plants-
hosts.jpg
159
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from
https://www.epicgardening.com/epiphytes/
Have you seen these plants before in your garden or in the
community? (yes /no)
Do these plants need soil to grow? (yes/no)
What do these plants need to grow? (sunlight, air, water)
Drawing Conclusions from experimental data and
discussion of results. (Completion of Graphic Organizer)
This step of the scientific method/process provides a summary
of what you found out by carrying out the scientific
method/process.
Each group will use these statements to write conclusions about
the experiment and their hypothesis on an index card. The
teacher will provide guidance.
160
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The data _______________ (supported/did not support) my
hypothesis. I found that
________________________________.
The index card with the conclusory statements will be added to
the graphic organizer.
The Science Process Skills
Learners, we used science process skills when we engaged in the
scientific process. The science process skills are the things
scientists do when they study and investigate. Scientists use the
science process skills to carry out the steps in the Scientific
Method.
Here are some of the science process skills that we used to find
out about the materials plants need for growth
[The teacher can play the video or create a chart on the six basic
science process skills.]
Retrieved from:
https://youtu.be/mJv9Mbq9eTM?si=BokD7a3Tg-LunZ0n (2:57
mins)
161
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Let us discuss: How did we use these science process skills
in our investigations?
Observing
What part of our bodies do when we are observing our plants?
(our senses)
We use our senses to see, hear, smell and feel. This enables us to
take down information about what we are observing.
Measuring
What did we measure about our plants? (height) Why? (to tell us
which one grew faster) What did we use? (ruler/ tape measure)
When we measure we use science instruments that can give
accurate data that can help us explain what we are investigating.
Comparing
What did we compare in our investigations? (Plants grown in
different conditions) Why? (To see which one grows faster)
We compare things to see similarities and differences.
Classifying
People put things into categories based on their similarities and
differences. This is what we do when we classify things.
Inferring
When we state an idea based on what we observe and measure,
we are inferring.
162
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Let’s think about our experiment where we grew plants in the
cupboard and some in direct sunlight.
When we looked at their height measurements and observed how
they looked over time, what were we able to say about the plants?
(Those in sunlight grew faster than those in the cupboard. Those in the
cupboard were wilting)
This is inferring! Our observations invited us to come make
those statements.
When we infer we use our data to form conclusions about what
we are studying.
Can you think of other examples where the class used the science
process skill inferring? (conclusions made from the various experiments)
Communicating
Scientists always share their findings. This enables other
scientists to critique their work and verify their findings.
163
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Science as a Cycle of Investigation Basic and Integrated Process Skills
Controlled Experiments
https://www.khanacademy.org/science/biology/intro-to-biology/science-of-biology/a/experiments-and-observations
164
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
How plants use water: https://extension.wvu.edu/lawn-gardening-pests/news/2021/03/01/how-plants-use-water
Activities on plant and air: https://kidsgardening.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/Plant-Needs-Air-3.pdf
What plants need to grow: https://letstalkscience.ca/educational-resources/backgrounders/needs-plants
https://www.varsitytutors.com/5th_grade_science-help/support-how-plants-need-air-and-water-to-grow
https://thewonderofscience.com/mlsep72
https://thewonderofscience.com/mlsep71
https://www.sciencebuddies.org/science-fair-projects/project-ideas/PlantBio_p045/plant-biology/hydroponics-gardening-without-soil
https://teaching.betterlesson.com/lesson/633008/where-do-plants-get-the-materials-they-need-day-1-gathering-evidence-to-support-your-claim
https://www.education.com/download/worksheet/70188/photosynthesis-fill-in-the-blank.pdf
Type of Air plants
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=21MryORNtCw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VUX0VXLY-o8
Worksheets:
https://education.gov.gy/web2/index.php/learners-resources/primary-school-resources/grade-5/grade5-worksheets/grade-5-worksheets-science/5991-grade-
5-science-week-6-2022-consolidated-worksheet/file
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/science/778199
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Mathematics: Measuring plant growth using various instruments, for example measuring tape. Graph data on plant growth to identify patterns and trends.
Social Studies: The use of technology in growing plants before and now.
Language Arts: Writing a simple expository paragraph explaining the process of photosynthesis.
TVET: creating various designs for a simple hydroponics farm or other gadgets that can be used to grow plants, for example seed boxes.
Agriculture: Conducting experiments to find out which soil type is best for plant growth example, which soil retains the most water? Undertaking a project and
creating a simple hydroponics farm.
Health: Safe practices when using substances like fertilizers in the growing of plants to avoid pollution and damage to the body.
165
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated
Researching how plants were grown in the past and the technology used now in plant production. Research various method of plant propagation such as air
layering, placing cutting in water to grow roots etc.
Visiting farms which are using modern technology, for example greenhouses, hydroponics and vertical columns
Researching on the effects of climate change/global warming on the growing of plants.
Researching GMOs and drought resistant crops.
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research)
How The Scientific Method Inspired My Teaching Approach retrieved from chrome-
extension://efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj/https://files.blogs.illinois.edu/files/1499/180076/103545.pdf
166
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 3: Develop a model to describe the movement of matter among plants, animals, decomposers, and the
environment.
Clarification Statement: Emphasis is on the idea that matter that is not food (air, water, decomposed materials in soil) is changed by plants into matter that is
food. Examples of systems could include organisms, ecosystems, and the Earth.
Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include molecular explanations.
Grade Level Expectation: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge Reviewing the Anchor Text Salamander Room Introduction
Learners, ecosystems are great recyclers!
Define the terms: Ask learners these questions: What do you think I mean by that?
• Ecosystems ➢ Describe the habitat that the boy was trying A hint…think about how plants use the sun to grow, gather
• Habitat to recreate in his room. water from the water cycle and take nutrients from the soil and
• Fresh water ecosystem ➢ What type of an ecosystem did the then what?
salamander live in?
• Marine ecosystem (they get eaten by animals or they die and fall to the ground).
➢ As an ecosystem, outline some of the
• Terrestrial ecosystem That is a part of it for sure but what happens after that?
relationships between the plant and
• Energy transfer Today we are going to talk about how the recycling continues!
animals.
• Fertilize ➢ While the boy was well-intentioned, what Let us do a review first.
• Decompose
could be done to better protect the
• Bacteria salamanders’ natural habitat? What can you tell me about ecosystems?
• Fungi 1) Different types depending on climate
• Nutrients Transfer of Energy & Recycling Matter in my 2) Inter-connected with producers and consumers
• Decomposers Ecosystem 3) They involve food chain which are susceptible to changes
• Recycling On a single page, have learners describe and draw a 4) We have to care for them otherwise they can be disrupted
• Compost diagram of how plants and animals recycle matter
• Herbivore and transfer energy in their own island ecosystems.
• Carnivore Rubric:
• Invasive species
167
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Describe features of a fresh-water ➢ comprehensive inclusion of plants and What is an Ecosystem? Introduction
ecosystem. animals 5 marks
➢ neat and logical diagram 5 marks The ecosystem is an amazing place filled with exciting creatures.
Describe the features of a marine ➢ grammar and punctuation in description of
Let us review what an ecosystem includes by watching a short
ecosystem. the model diagram 5 marks
YouTube ® video.
Describe the features of a terrestrial Look at the worksheet “Types of Ecosystems”
ecosystem. below. Click on the link, read each description and
match it to the correct picture.
Account for the importance of plants
within an ecosystem.
Describe how does energy transfer to
ecosystems originate at the sun?
Skills
Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SYNEjBvPkps (6:09
Classify ecosystems as terrestrial,
minutes)
freshwater and marine
To further elaborate and engage the learners in a discussion on
Describe your own ecosystem
ecosystems, the book “The Salamander Room” will be viewed
highlighting how the main characters try to create an ecosystem.
Describe how does energy transfer to
ecosystems originate at the sun?
Retrieved from:
Interpret an anchor text (Salamander
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/science/1
Room)
191601
Communicate effectively when
working in groups
168
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Construct models of the different Answer Sheet Retrieved from:
ecosystems https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hZrtzCA9pmY (3:18
mins)
Attitudes/Values
Alternative Introduction
Work collaboratively in groups to
complete given tasks. Have learners view the short clip of Lion King seen in the link
below:
Stewardship/Respect for Living
Things The Lion King 3D - 'Morning Lesson With Mufasa'- Official
Disney Movie Clip (youtube.com) (1:13 mins)
When conducting practical and group
work, display sensitivity and offer
The Teacher will ask learners the following questions:
assistance to peers who may have
physical or learning challenges
1. What is the key message of Mufasa’s speech? everything
in an ecosystem is important; life is recycled; everything is
Participate actively in classroom
connected
discussions.
2. What did Mufasa mean when he said: “When we die
we become the grass?” We decompose and become food for
the grass.
3. Can you create the food chain described by Mufasa?
grass → antelope → lion
Retrieved from:
Different types of Ecosystems
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/science/1
191601
Ecosystems vary.
There are three broad categories of Ecosystems. Can you
identify them? (the learners will list them - fresh water, marine
and terrestrial)
169
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Project The teacher will then explain that each of these types of
ecosystem can hold a huge variety of living conditions
We have learnt that there are many types of (habitats)
ecosystems. Below is a model of an ecosystem and
Freshwater Ecosystems include wetlands, ponds, reservoirs,
a video to guide you. You are free to try another
lakes, rivers and groundwater. Freshwater is an ideal resource as
type of ecosystem you are comfortable with.
it can be used for lots of things, including agriculture, sanitation
and transportation. Plus, freshwater is drinkable and helps to
Retrieved from:
sustain a huge variety of organisms, including reptiles, birds,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SpSev_Bf8uc
mammals, worms, fish and amphibians. Plants, phytoplankton
and algae are all in abundance too and form the skeleton of the
Sample ecosystem project
freshwater food cycle.
Retrieved from:
https://i.ytimg.com/vi/SpSev_Bf8uc/sddefault.jpg
Excerpt from slides at: https://slideplayer.com/slide/7765872/
Differentiated Instruction
Ocean Ecosystems cover around 70 per cent of the Earth's
For those learners who are particularly interested in
surface. Included amongst marine ecosystems are the oceans,
agriculture, you may want to assign a PowerPoint®
coral reefs and coastal areas. These ecosystems differ from
presentation project where they present to their
freshwater as the water contains salt. Plants and animals living
classmates about two related processes in the
amongst these types of ecosystems must therefore be tolerant
recycling that happens in ecosystems- namely:
of salt. Many fish, such as flounder, sea bass, whales and
170
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
➢ The carbon cycle dolphins are examples of the diverse animal life found in the
ocean ecosystem.
Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p3R-dB9K4ss
(3:28 mins)
Excerpt from slides at: https://slideplayer.com/slide/7765872/
➢ The nitrogen cycle Terrestrial Ecosystem is a network of plants, animals and
other organisms that live on an area of land. These ecosystems
endure great movements in temperature, which the lifeforms
must adapt to or be tolerant of. Terrestrial environments
include grasslands and forests and provide many of the items
which humans need to survive. These include food and
materials for shelter or clothing.
Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=uip
4Q6t7yfQ (5:53 mins)
171
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Excerpt from slide at: https://slideplayer.com/slide/7765872/
Now that we have refreshed our memories, we will now select
an ecosystem we are comfortable with and create a model
depicting the relationship among abiotic and biotic factors
which help create food chains and food webs.
In today's session, we will do a quick review as a class in order
to refresh our memory.
Energy Transfer and Decomposers: A Review
Let's start off with an example of energy transfer using cows
and goats. (Cows and goats get energy to live by eating grass that has
grown because of rain and energy from sunshine. This is energy
transfer.)
As humans we get energy by eating meat and vegetables.
When animals, like cows process food, they create waste. The
manure can be used to fertilize the growth of more plants. This
is a cycle of plants being eaten and also being grown again.
Plants that die and begin to break down are said to
decompose. This decomposition is assisted by bacteria and
fungi (e.g. mushrooms). This puts nutrients back into the soil.
(see soil nutrients here https://www.soils4teachers.org/lessons-
and-activities/teachers-guide/soils-food-health)
172
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Decomposers
Some plants and animals are decomposers. Decomposers are
responsible for recycling materials within ecosystems. They
feed on dead and waste matter causing it to decompose.
During this process, they release carbon dioxide and minerals
into the environment which can be reabsorbed and re-used by
plants. Decomposers include fungi, bacteria and some kinds of
worms.
Retrieved from: Caribbean Primary Science Level 6 2024.
Contributors Karen Morrison, Lorraine DeAllie, Lisa
Greenstein, Catherine Jones. Hodder Education
One product of decomposition is called compost. This
broken-down vegetable matter can also be used for fertilizer to
grow more plants.
In many industries (e.g. cocoa and nuts) when they remove
shells to access the desired food, the shells are often recycled as
fertilizer.
(The teacher will draw the food chain on the board and engage
the learners in a short discussion, where they will answer a few
assigned questions.)
173
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: Caribbean Primary Science Level 6. 2024
Impression Number 10 Contributors Karen Morrison, Lorraine
DeAllie, Lisa Greenstein, Catherine Jones, Hodder Education.
Questions
a. Look at the diagram above. What name is given to the
diagram? (Ans. Food chain)
b. Identify the type organisms in the diagram. (Ans. herbivore-
grasshopper, carnivore – rat, carnivore – snake, carnivore- eagle)
c. Look at the mushroom in the picture. To which group of
organisms does it belong? (Ans. Decomposers)
Decomposers are organisms that break down or feed on dead
and decaying matter or organisms.
174
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Put on your thinking caps, can you list a few examples of
decomposers? (Ans: worms, bacteria, sowbugs, mushrooms)
Now that you know a little more about decomposers, explain
why you think that decomposers are important in a food chain
or ecosystem. (Ans: When the decomposers break down the dead matter
it acts or serves as nutrients that are absorbed by plants as food.)
Retrieved from: https://medium.com/@kitchenem/why-are-
decomposers-important-to-the-food-chain-health-tips-
e42591753f5c
Interrupting a Food Chain
A picture of the above will be posted on the board or shown on
the screen. Invite the learners a few seconds to observe the
picture and ask the following questions.
175
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1. What might happen to this ecosystem as a result of bringing
in monkeys? (the cycle /chain would be interrupted, and some species will
die off for lack off food)
2. What would happen if humans began killing the eagles or
eating all the mushrooms? the cycle /chain would be interrupted, and
some species will die off for lack off food)
Activity
As part of a class project, the learners will construct a school
houmous (compost) pile to create fertilizer for a small garden
on the school grounds. (The food grown can be used by the kitchen for
the school feeding program)
They can:
● Designate a location
● Create information posters to direct their peers to add
organic matter to their pile
● Dig a growing plot to use their decomposed fertilizer
● Creating a Compost pile instructions:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q5s4n9r-JGU (5:19 min)
176
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Steps to creating a compost
Retrieved from: https://www.notsomodern.com/how-to-
compost/
177
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Conclusions From Our Learning About Ecosystems as
Recyclers
• Plants get water, nutrients and energy from sunshine in
order to grow.
• Plants are eaten by animals who then produce waste
• Waste supplements the soil and replaces some if the
nutrients, fertilizing the soil
• Plants die and fall to the ground
• Plants decay and such things as fungi, bacteria and
insects further break the plant down to replace
nutrients in the soil
• Rich soil invites for seeds to grow into plants with the
warmth of the sunshine and moisture from the water
cycle.
That is how some matter and energy is recycled through
ecosystems!
178
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Caribbean Primary Science Level 6 2024 Impression 4. Contributors Karen Morrison, Lorraine DeAllie, Lisa Greenstein, Catherine Jones. Hodder Education. (Living in an ecosystem
page 68 - 74)
Retrieved from: https://byjus.com/question-
answer/name-two-microorganisms-which-act-as-
decomposer-how-is-this-activity-useful-to-us/
179
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Composting Tips: https://www.oregonmetro.gov/tools-living/yard-and-garden/composting/tips-composting-success
Using Sargassum Seaweed as Fertilizer, Biofuel or Food? : https://phys.org/news/2023-05-food-fertilizer-fuel-solutions-caribbean.html
Compare fertilizer use across the Caribbean nations in kg per hectare of arable land:
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/AG.CON.FERT.ZS?end=2021&locations=XJ&skipRedirection=true&start=1961&view=chart
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Mathematics: Designing graphs to show living things in an ecosystem example number of animals, plants etc.
Social Studies: Identifying the different types of ecosystems in their country.
Language Arts: Write descriptions about various ecosystems. Write a paragraph about if there were no decomposers.
TVET: Constructing models of ecosystems.
Agriculture: Identifying the importance of decomposers in the environment.
Health: Research ways ecosystems can be polluted and ways it can be reduced.
Art and Craft: Learners can design models of the various ecosystems.
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated
Families from rural communities, “the country” often dispose of kitchen waste in the backyard where it can decompose and later be used as soil for the kitchen
garden.
6 Steps To Start An Organic Compost Program At Your School https://cleanriver.com/resource/6-steps-start-organic-compost-program-school/
Items of Inspiration:
Research on reasons as to what may cause ecosystems to change over time.
180
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Earth Systems
Introduction to the Subject
The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of caring not only for themselves, but as
responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic study of the structure and behaviour of the physical and
natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, learners benefit from leveraging and evaluating available technological tools to study and
therefore understand the world and their relationship to it.
Strand: Earth Systems
Earth’s major systems are the geosphere (solid and molten rock, soil, and sediments), the hydrosphere (water and ice), the atmosphere (air), and the biosphere
(living things, including humans). These systems interact in multiple ways to affect Earth’s surface materials and processes.
Understanding the scope of the earth’s resources and the systems that cycle and maintain those resources, is instrumental in humans being good stewards of the
environment.
Essential Learning Outcome 1: Develop a model using an example to describe ways the geosphere, biosphere, hydrosphere, and/or
atmosphere interact.
Clarification Statement: Clarification Statement: Examples could include the influence of the ocean on ecosystems, landform shape, and climate; the influence
of the atmosphere on landforms and ecosystems through weather and climate; and the influence of mountain ranges on winds and clouds in the atmosphere. The
geosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere, and biosphere are each a system.
Assessment Boundary: Assessment is limited to the interactions of two systems at a time.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
181
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge Video Resource: Introduction of Systems Learners, have you ever thought about how vulnerable living
things like humans, animals and plants are to the earth’s natural
Define the terms: While the earth system is one sphere, it comprises processes? Earth events can have alarming effects that go beyond
• Hydrosphere several distinct spheres that are all interconnected. what we initially anticipate, impacting often many of the earth
• Biosphere systems.
As they watch the video Take for example, volcanos in the Caribbean and worldwide.
• Geosphere
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N3EqcUN Learners, describe your experience when La Soufriere erupted in
• Atmosphere
dIl8 (7:47 mins), learners should write down their Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. Was your community impacted-
• Lithosphere
definitions of: explain how.
• Lava 1. Biosphere
• Pyroclastics 2. Geosphere In the first instance, we have a great fear of the molten rock that
• El-Nino 3. Hydrosphere presents as lava and pyroclastics (airborne molten rock). These
4. Atmosphere are very dangerous components of what we call the geosphere.
But the clouds of dangerous gases travel into the air and affect also
Identify the characteristics of each of Learners should also look for answers to the the atmosphere which we ultimately breath. In island and coastal
the four spheres. following questions: nations that eruption can impact water temperature and wildlife
1) Why does the atmosphere have so much that make up the hydrosphere. Residing near the eruption, means
Give examples of how earth system carbon dioxide now compared to many all living things (biosphere) can experience necessary relocation
spheres can interact. years ago? (burning fossil fuels) from their ecosystem, damage to habitat or death. In our next few
2) How does atmospheric carbon dioxide lessons we are going to look at the different earth systems but also
Identify within pictures, the four become part of the biosphere? (i)added to consider how they necessarily interact.
spheres that comprise Earth system calcium, it forms calcite, which contributes to the
science. shells of organisms Reviewing the Earth Systems
(ii). Carbon dioxide from the atmosphere The diagram below gives details about the interaction of spheres
Skills becomes part of the biosphere mainly through the for the teacher. Note that sometimes, the geosphere is called the
process of photosynthesis, where plants convert it lithosphere.
Rationalize how real earth events can into food and oxygen. During photosynthesis,
impact the 4 spheres. plants take in carbon dioxide and, using sunlight
and water, convert it into glucose (food) and
Construct models of earth systems oxygen.
182
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3) How does the calcite contribute to the
Research how earth events can affect geosphere? (The shells, coral, limestone, etc.,
earth sphere systems. die and get compacted into the soil in the earth’s
geosphere)
Investigate how volcanoes and 4) What % of the water on earth is salt
hurricanes can impact earth sphere water oceans? (~97%)
systems. 5) How does the atmosphere interact with
the biosphere? (Through photosynthesis carbon
Compare the impact of mountain
ranges on wind patterns and cloud Video Resource: Interaction of Spheres Retrieved from: https://environmental-geology-
formation by constructing a model After watching the video: dev.pressbooks.tru.ca/wp-
that demonstrates how these https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hXZPRocj content/uploads/sites/73/2021/07/figure-1.2.1.png
landforms influence atmospheric XsU (5:49 mins), your task is to identify at least three
conditions and local climates. ways the different spheres interact. The labelled interactions of Figure 1.2.1 can be summarised as
follows:
Interpret models of earth systems. The water cycle is the movement of water between the
hydrosphere (oceans, rivers, lakes) and the atmosphere (air). 1. During a volcanic eruption, gases (including H 2 O, CO 2 and
Assess potential impact of spheres on Water evaporates from the surface of oceans, lakes, and SO 2 ) from the geosphere mix with the atmosphere, while
humankind rivers into the air (atmosphere) as water vapour. It then volcanic rock fragments (ash) remain suspended in the
cools and condenses to form clouds. Eventually, it falls back atmosphere for a short time (weeks). Atmospheric gases
Classify components of earth’s to the Earth as precipitation (rain, snow), replenishing the (especially Carbon Dioxide (CO 2 ), water (H 2 O ) and
systems as geosphere, atmosphere, water in rivers, lakes, and oceans (hydrosphere). oxygen(O 2 ) react with rocks of the geosphere during
biosphere and hydrosphere. weathering (an example is provided below).
Nitrogen fixation in legumes is a natural process where 2. There is an exchange of gases between the biosphere and the
Communicate their understand nitrogen-fixing bacteria convert atmospheric nitrogen into a atmosphere because of photosynthesis, in which CO 2 in the
through models, written work and form that plants can use. This process enriches the soil with atmosphere combines with H 2 O to produce glucose (C 6 H 12 O 6 )
presentations essential nutrients. In agriculture, planting legumes and and O 2 , and respiration, in which glucose combines with O 2 to
practising crop rotation are key strategies for maintaining produce CO 2 and H 2 O and energy.
Predict how changes to one earth soil fertility, reducing the need for chemical fertilisers, and 3. There is an exchange of water via evaporation and
system affect another. promoting sustainable farming practices. condensation and of liquid water as rain between the
hydrosphere and the atmosphere.
Construct graphic organizers that 4. Components of the biosphere (e.g., plants) extract chemicals
compare sphere interaction. (e.g., phosphorous, potassium, magnesium, sulphur and
183
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Investigate how human interactions Earth System Matching calcium) from the geosphere, and in turn deposit material that
impact earth systems gets incorporated into the geosphere.
Learners write a letter in each circle for the earth 5. There are two-way chemical transfers between the rocks of the
Attitudes/Values system represented in the picture below. geosphere and the surface water of the hydrosphere (for
example, some elements in rocks dissolve into surface water
Demonstrate an understanding that during weathering and then may be deposited from surface
the spheres work together and it is our water to form new rocks).
responsibility to care for our earth 6. There are two-way chemical transfers (including elements such
systems. as calcium, potassium, sodium, sulphur and carbon) between
the rocks of the geosphere and the groundwater of the
Demonstrate an understanding that hydrosphere.
earth events can cause big problems 7. There are two-way chemical transfers between groundwater
with our earth sphere systems and we and the biosphere.
need to be prepared to mitigate hose 8. Components of the biosphere (especially carbon-bearing
problems in our everyday life. organic matter) and the hydrosphere accumulate as sediments
(geosphere) on the floor of the ocean (and lakes).
Consistently ask questions and
clarifications during investigations After discussing, the teacher will place learners into four groups.
including questions that exhibit the Each group will be given the task of researching a system.
desire to do follow up activities
Learners can use books, magazines, and computers/computer labs
Work effectively in groups, accepting to assist with the research. Each group will be given chart paper or
Retrieved from
responsibility for their part in the task- manilla paper.
https://www.exploringnature.org/db/view/Earth
its success and failure.
-Systems-Matching-Geosphere-Hydrosphere-
Learners explore various materials found in the different spheres to
Atmosphere-Biosphere
Understand that all animals in the be able to describe and define each sphere.
biosphere play a part in the
Quiz on Biosphere, Geosphere, Atmosphere,
community and should be treated with The teacher will provide learners with the following questions to
and Hydrosphere
care, attention and respect. guide the research:
1. What does the prefix on your word mean?
1. What is the biosphere?
As we construct models, accept and ● Hydro-
a) The part of Earth where life exists
obey safety precaution warnings and ● Geo-
b) The layer of gases surrounding Earth
help to explain to others why such ● Bio-
c) The solid part of Earth
warnings are important ● Atmo-
d) The water on Earth's surface
184
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. Which of the following is part of the
Understand human impact on earth’s geosphere?
system and how it can be mitigated. a) Rivers and lakes
b) Plants and animals
When conducting practical and group c) Mountains and rocks
work, display sensitivity and offer d) Air and clouds
assistance to peers who may have
Retrieved from: https://study.com/learn/lesson/the-four-spheres-
physical or learning challenges. 3. What makes up the atmosphere? of-earth-geosphere-hydrosphere-biosphere-atmosphere.html
a) Rocks and minerals
b) Living organisms 1. Where is your system located?
When conducting practical and group c) Water in rivers and oceans 2. What makes up your system?
work, display sensitivity and offer d) Gases like oxygen and nitrogen 3. Are there numbers or data related to your system?
assistance to peers who may have
4. How does your system impact us?
physical or learning challenges. 4. The hydrosphere includes:
a) All the rocks on Earth
Participate actively in classroom b) All the air surrounding Earth https://betterlesson.com/lesson/resource/3210509/guiding-
discussions. c) All the water on Earth questions
d) All the living things on Earth
Each group will present their findings as they become experts in
5. What is the main gas found in the atmosphere? the systems researched.
a) Oxygen
b) Nitrogen Interactions Between Spheres
c) Carbon dioxide
In groups, learners should be asked to create a labelled diagram of
d) Hydrogen
how two or more spheres may interact through earth systems and
6. Which of the following is a part of the processes. Groups are expected to share their diagrams (including
an explanation) with their classmates.
biosphere?
a) A mountain
The Place of Humans in the Biosphere and Beyond
b) A river
c) A cloud
Learners think about the humans in the biosphere and how our
d) A tree
actions impact all of Earth’s spheres. In a one-page response
paper, they should explain how the behaviour of people in their
own country have dramatically and negatively impacted one or
more spheres. Their paper should end in a description of how
185
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
7. What does the geosphere consist of? citizens could work together to mitigate impacts on the
a) Only the Earth's surface environment.
b) The Earth's core, mantle, and crust
c) The Earth's water bodies The Hydrosphere and Climate
d) The Earth's atmosphere
There is growing evidence that water temperatures within the
8. Which sphere interacts with the geosphere to Caribbean are increasing. This not only poses potential harm to
cause weathering of rocks? marine animal habitat but is an example of how the hydrosphere
a) Biosphere can affect the atmosphere.
b) Atmosphere
c) Hydrosphere Explain to learners the El-Nino affect on climate
d) All of the above
Quoted verbatim from:
9. Rain and snow are part of which sphere? (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/El_Ni%C3%B1o%E2%80%93Sou
a) Geosphere thern_Oscillation )
b) Biosphere
c) Hydrosphere “El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO) is a global climate
d) Atmosphere phenomenon that emerges from variations in winds and sea
surface temperatures over the tropical Pacific Ocean. Those
10. Which sphere is affected by deforestation? variations have an irregular pattern but do have some semblance of
a) Geosphere cycles. The occurrence of ENSO is not predictable. It affects the
b) Atmosphere climate of much of the tropics and subtropics, and has links
c) Hydrosphere (teleconnections) to higher-latitude regions of the world. The
d) Biosphere warming phase of the sea surface temperature is known as El Niño
and the cooling phase as La Niña. The Southern Oscillation is the
Answers accompanying atmospheric oscillation, which is coupled with the
1. a) The part of Earth where life exists sea temperature change.”
2. c) Mountains and rocks
3. d) Gases like oxygen and nitrogen
4. c) All the water on Earth
5. b) Nitrogen
6. d) A tree
7. b) The Earth's core, mantle, and crust
8. d) All of the above
186
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
9. c) Hydrosphere Formative Assessment Labelled Web of Hurricanes
10. d) Biosphere Have learners draw a labelled web of the impact hurricanes have
on the different spheres you have discussed.
Modelling the Spheres
Atmosp
here
Creating a 3D model of the water cycle can be a
fun and educational project for learners to Geosph Hurric Biosphe
ere anes re
understand how water moves through Earth's
spheres (atmosphere, hydrosphere, geosphere,
biosphere). Below is a step-by-step guide to create Hydros
phere
a simple yet effective 3D model using materials
commonly found at home or in the classroom. Possible Interactions
Materials Needed: Hurricanes:
• Large Styrofoam® or cardboard sphere • Cause the atmosphere to generate great winds and often
(as the base) extensive rainfall
• Modelling clay or play-dough • Cause damage to the geosphere by promoting erosion due
• Blue cellophane or coloured paper to high winds damaging plants and high water levels
• Small plastic trees, plants, or figurines causing flooding
• Cotton balls or polyester fibrefill • Cause big changes in waterways (hydrosphere) through
• Craft glue, tape, scissors flooding and overflow of river banks
• Markers or coloured pencils • Cause damage to living things where high winds can
• Optional: Toothpicks, thin wire, or string change habitat and kill living things (biosphere)
for creating connections
Humans Impact Earth Systems
Steps to Create the 3D Water Cycle Model: Teacher should engage a discussion of the behaviour of humans, in
1. Prepare the Base Sphere: caring for the earth, can have negative impact on the spheres that
• Use a large Styrofoam® or cardboard make up earth systems. The learners should brainstorm and offer
sphere as the base for your model. This suggestions.
represents the Earth.
2. Represent the Geosphere: The Teacher notes:
• Landforms: Use modelling clay or play- • Polluting atmosphere
dough to create mountains, hills, valleys,
• Polluting hydrosphere
and other landforms on the surface of the
• Poor water-use practises
sphere.
187
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Labelling: Use markers or coloured • Mining that impacts geosphere
pencils to label these landforms directly • Deforesting that impacts biosphere
on the sphere as "Geosphere."
• Extinction of habitats in the biosphere
3. Depict the Biosphere:
• Climate change due to greenhouse effects
• Plants and Trees: Place small plastic trees,
plants, or figurines on the landforms you
created with clay.
• Labelling: Label these plants and trees as
"Biosphere."
4. Create the Hydrosphere:
• Water Bodies: Use blue cellophane or
coloured paper to create rivers, lakes, and
oceans on the surface of the sphere.
• Labelling: Label these water bodies as
"Hydrosphere."
5. Represent the Atmosphere:
• Clouds and Sky: Use cotton balls or
polyester fibrefill to create clouds around
the sphere, representing the atmosphere.
• Labelling: Label this area as
"Atmosphere."
6. Show Interactions:
• Arrows or Connections: Use toothpicks,
thin wire, or string to create arrows
between the different components
(geosphere, biosphere, hydrosphere,
atmosphere) to show interactions. For
example:
o Arrows from the atmosphere
(clouds) to the biosphere (plants)
to represent rain.
o Arrows from the hydrosphere
(rivers) to the geosphere (soil) to
show water infiltration.
188
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
7. Add Labels and Explanations:
• Use small pieces of paper or cardstock to
write labels for each sphere (geosphere,
biosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere).
• Write brief explanations of the
interactions and attach them near the
corresponding arrows or spheres.
Mountain Range Model – Geosphere
Interacting with Atmosphere
Learners will explore how mountain ranges impact
wind patterns and cloud formation through
research and multimedia resources.
3D Model Construction:
o Using materials such as foam,
cotton balls, and markers,
learners will construct a model
that shows how mountains affect
atmospheric conditions.
Comparison Presentation:
o Learners will compare the
weather patterns on the
windward and leeward sides of
189
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
mountain ranges and explain the
differences in cloud formation
and precipitation.
Rubric for Assessment:
1. Model Accuracy and Detail:
• Excellent (4): Model accurately depicts
the interactions between spheres with
detailed and realistic features.
• Good (3): Model accurately depicts the
interactions with some detail.
• Fair (2): Model depicts interactions with
minimal detail and some inaccuracies.
• Needs Improvement (1): Model lacks
accuracy and detail.
2. Comparison Analysis:
• Excellent (4): Comparison is thorough,
well-explained, and supported by detailed
examples.
• Good (3): Comparison is clear and
supported by examples.
• Fair (2): Comparison is mentioned but
lacks depth and supporting examples.
• Needs Improvement (1): Comparison is
unclear or missing.
3. Creativity and Presentation:
• Excellent (4): Model is highly creative,
well-organized, and effectively presented.
• Good (3): Model is creative, organized,
and clearly presented.
• Fair (2): Model shows some creativity and
organization but is somewhat unclear.
• Needs Improvement (1): Model lacks
creativity, organization, and clarity.
190
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4. Collaboration and Participation (if group work):
• Excellent (4): All group members actively
participated and collaborated effectively.
• Good (3): Most group members
participated and collaborated effectively.
• Fair (2): Some group members
participated and collaborated.
• Needs Improvement (1): Few group
members participated or collaborated.
The Far-Reaching Impact of Earth Events:
Volcanoes
Have learners conduct internet research to identify
how each of the earth’s systems were impacted by
the occurrence of a volcano which initially
involves the geosphere.
Count Research Impa
ry cted
earth
syste
ms
SVG https://www.youtube.com/watch
?v=Q-JY6uxpbIQ
Monts
errat https://www.youtube.com/watch
?v=ESYjE2FVGT4
Icelan https://www.youtube.com/watch
d ?v=gzeNb2Wa-kM
New https://www.youtube.com/watch
Zealan ?v=qzaFejmPEvU
d
191
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learner groups would be assigned one of these
volcanoes and create a PowerPoint® or media
presentation (poster) where they explained the
event and spoke to how the geosphere ultimately
impacted the hydrosphere, atmosphere and
biosphere.
Rubric: evidence of research 5 marks/quality of
explanation 5 marks/quality of media resources 5
marks/grammar & punctuation 5 marks
Additional Resources and Materials
Earth System Models for Children to Construct:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4_wp1YlXaaQ (1:37 mins)
https://countonkupe.com/earths-sphere-interactions-modeling-in-science/
https://x.com/SarahKrauseOPS/status/1162810414482284546
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Earth Systems:
https://education.nationalgeographic.org/resource/earths-systems/
https://scied.ucar.edu/learning-zone/earth-system
https://www.sciencelearn.org.nz/resources/3274-earth-systems-and-climate-change
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Social Studies: care of the different spheres is a responsibility of citizens and initiatives to protect our environment are great social causes.
Mathematics: researching statistics around damage to the environment (all spheres)
Language Arts: researching information and communicating information in different formats
TVET: building models/ technologies that monitor earth systems
192
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 2: Describe and graph the amounts of salt water and fresh water in various reservoirs to provide evidence
about the distribution of water on Earth.
Assessment Boundary: Assessment is limited to oceans, lakes, rivers, glaciers, ground water, and polar ice caps, and does not include the atmosphere.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge Water Source Description Introduction
Learners complete this table after viewing and Learners are each given a clear cup containing water
Define the terms: discussion on water sources They are told; Learners, what you have in front of you is the most
• ocean They use water sources relevant to their own important liquid in the whole world. Let's observe it.
• lakes countries Learners look at, smell and finally drink their cup of liquid, which
they identify as water.
• streams Source of Description Form (solid,
Learners briefly discuss why water is the most important liquid.
• rivers water liquid, gas)
They are asked, Where do you think the water, you just drank,
• pipes
came from? They name the different sources of water (pipes, river,
• ponds E.g., Contains large liquid lake, well, pond, spring).
• springs ocean amounts of salt Sometimes we call water sources like lakes or ponds or dammed up
• reservoirs water reservoirs. What you probably were less familiar with is the
• glaciers quantity of water that is stored in the oceans (salt water), glaciers
• polar ice cap & polar ice caps (fresh water).
• estuary
Working with Vocabulary
• density
• conservation
Teachers can use the graphic organizer below to
• desalination
check for comprehension of terminology associated
with water sources and uses.
Demonstrate they understand the
water cycle.
193
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Account for differences in freezing They are shown posters or PowerPoint® media of various water
points of fresh and salt water based on sources. They discuss any one they did not previously identify.
experimental observations.
Explain the process of desalination.
Identify the main sources of water for
your community & country
Distinguish the chemical difference
between fresh and saltwater
Identify bodies of water that contain Retrieved from: https://media.geeksforgeeks.org/wp-
fresh or saltwater. content/uploads/20231108114717/Sources-of-Water.png
Demonstrate awareness that a large
portion of fresh water on earth
originates in the ice that makes up the Retrieved from:
glaciers, ice bergs and polar ice cap. https://www.pinterest.com/pin/340584790569110
462/
Describe how humans make use of
earth’s water resources. Models of Water Sources: Make a Diorama
Demonstrate awareness that estuaries The teacher can access simple materials such as
are unique points of contact of fresh paper, plasticine, sticks, pipe cleaners etc. and pose
and salt water that potentially have a list of requirements for the diorama to display
impact on habitats. such as:
➢ Three sources of water
Skills ➢ Realistic habitat
➢ Evidence of water cycle
Classify water sources.
Retrieved from:
Make predictions about water
https://i.pinimg.com/originals/11/6b/c5/116bc567a5f04e5c273d
distribution on earth.
c2fea219b311.png
194
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Make predictions about the relative Sample Diorama Fresh and Salt Water: Sources
distribution of fresh and saltwater on
earth, They identify sources of each type of water
Interpret the data for distribution of
both fresh and salt water on earth.
Graph available data for distribution
of water by source.
Retrieved from:
Conduct experiments that distinguish Retrieved from:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/321585727/figure/fig1
the properties of fresh and salt water. https://i.ytimg.com/vi/sbPaPDqatp0/maxresdefau
/AS:1144354739630080@1649846839105/Freshwater-drinking-
lt.jpg
sources.ppm
Infer from experiments that density of
objects (like eggs & potatoes) Sample Scoring Rubric for Diorama
determines how they will behave in
fresh and salt water.
Research information on water use in
communities.
.
Communicate community initiatives to
conserve water.
Investigate information around
engineering approaches to access fresh
water.
Retrieved from:
Retrieved from:
Attitudes/Values https://study.com/academy/lesson/diorama-
https://www.teacharesources.com/wp-
rubric-tips.html
content/uploads/2020/03/11634-Fresh-Water-and-Salt-Water-
Explain the importance of taking care
Sources-300x215.png
of our fresh water sources and
conserving water.
195
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Classification of Water Sources Learners write a top ten list for the ways they use water and which
Explain ways that communities are type of water they use
working to maintain and conserve Have learners show their understanding of pie They can discuss which type of water source is most commonly
water sources. charts by answering the following questions: used for everyday activities
Investigate the impact of estuaries on
the biosphere. Where is the Water on Earth?
Learners identify the oceans/water sources on a globe or world
Collaboration & Cooperation within map.
group activities. Ask Learners:
Can you identify how much of earth’s water is salt? Fresh?
Stewardship/Respect for Living Can you identify the sources of each?
Things Call on volunteers to share ideas.
Safety in using tools and processes for Collect probability data related to the amount of earth’s water by
building models gently tossing an inflatable globe from learner to learner, recording
each time the right thumb lands on water. (Tally in a given table.)
When conducting practical and group Toss the ball to the learner and ask them to say where their thumb
work, display sensitivity and offer landed. Instruct learners to record the type of water in a data
Retrieved from: https://vt-vtwa-
assistance to peers who may have table…. Continue until every learner has at least one chance to
assets.varsitytutors.com/vt-
physical or learning challenges. catch the globe.
vtwa/uploads/problem_question_image/image/90
852/Screen_Shot_2020-07-01_at_9.15.58_AM.png
Participate actively in classroom Sample Table:
discussions. 1. What does the green represent?
2. What does the blue represent?
3. What percentage of earth’s water is
saltwater?
4. What percentage of Earth’s water is
freshwater?
5. How much more salt water is there than
freshwater?
Answers: 1. Saltwater, 2. Freshwater, 3. 97%, 4.
3%, 5. 94% more
196
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
How is the Water Distributed Across the Globe?
Place these sources of water under the correct Ask Learners:
heading What have you learned about water distribution on earth?
What does this knowledge cause you to wonder about?
Fresh water Salt water
Show five gallons of water in an aquarium tank or bucket to
learners and tell them “Let’s say this is all the amount of water in
Lake, Sea, River, Spring the world.”
Ocean, Stream Ask Learners:
What percentage of this water is available to all living things? (Less
Multiple Representations of Data than 1 drop)
What percentage of this water do you think is salt water?
Explain that 97% of earth’s water is located in oceans.
Now ask learners what percentage of this bucket do you think is
fresh water?
Remove 3% of the water from the bucket. One at a time, remove
from the clear container each amount as called by learners and
record in a table as shown below:
250 mL
Retrieved from:
https://media.cheggcdn.com/study/e65/e65cdd32- 79 mL
b832-4a05-b352-58024b82daa5/4918-3-1rq-i1.png
0.6 mL
To help learners understand the relative distribution 0.6 mL
of fresh water, have them take the data from the pie
chart and make a bar graph showing percentage on
the y axis (ordinate) and type of water on the x axis
(abscissa)
197
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Activity Worksheets for Fresh Water/Saltwater
Experiments
How does food colouring react with fresh
and saltwater?
Prediction: What do you think will happen when
food colouring is added to fresh water?
Prediction: What do you think will happen when
food colouring is added to saltwater?
Observations: What did you see happening?
Retrieved from: https://vt-vtwa-assets.varsitytutors.com/vt-
Freshwater S altwater vtwa/uploads/problem_question_image/image/90852/Screen_Sh
ot_2020-07-01_at_9.15.58_AM.png
Why do you think the food colouring reacted the
way it did? Demonstration: Teacher shows learners a measuring cylinder
containing 1000 ml of water coloured blue.
Two other measuring cylinders are placed on the table in front of
Does an egg float or sink in fresh and them.
Teacher says, Learners, I will now pour water from my cylinder
saltwater?
into these two cylinders. One will have all the saltwater on Earth
and the other will get all the freshwater. Which one do you think
Predictions: What do you think will happen to
will have more?
the egg in freshwater?
Learners respond giving predictions and explanations
Teacher then pours 970 ml into the saltwater cylinder and 30 ml
Predictions: What do you think will happen to
into the fresh water cylinder
the egg in saltwater?
Learners discuss the accuracy of their predictions
Observations: What did you see happening?
198
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Freshwater Saltwater
Explain why your observations occurred
Mixing salt and freshwater
C olour of freshwater Colour of saltwater Retrieved from: https://1.bp.blogspot.com/-
Xm4aUNovP6g/WmCrOsDo-
HI/AAAAAAAAI8s/Lymevy4BkUoRrcIFURMcHU8Bfdc22Jaew
Prediction: What do you think will happen? Use
CLcBGAs/s1600/P1430467.jpg
your knowledge of colour mixing.
Ask Learners:
Observation 1: After fresh water is placed on
What have you learned about water distribution on earth?
saltwater
What does this knowledge cause you to wonder about?
Observation 2: After glasses have been flipped
f or the first time Supplemental Video Resources on Water Bodies and
Freshwater
O bservation3: After second flip of glasses https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bNWuQD7QHBc (3:47
mins)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oaQCiwzjnCM (4:16 mins)
Observation 4:
Review the Water Cycle
Learners, do you remember the water cycle? It describes how water
moves on Earth. Let’s review by watching a video
See:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IO9tT186mZw (2:53 mins)
199
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Does fresh or saltwater freeze faster?
Hypothesis: I think ________water will freeze
faster
Provide an explanation for your results
Freshwater observation sheet
Place a tick to show where your liquid is at each time
interval
Retrieved from: https://www.activityvillage.co.uk/the-water-cycle
Write the temperature at each time
Fresh and Saltwater Experiments
s n im s n im s n im s n im s n im s n im I w n i t m h a la n n y d i s r l u a n n - d o a ff n d in c t o h a e s t f a o l r c m o u o n f t r r i i v e e s r f s r e a s n h d w st a r t e e a r m a s n d en s t a e l r tw in a g t e th r e m ix
0 2 0 4 0 6 0 8 0 0 1 0 2 1 ocean.
These mixing points are often referred to as estuaries.
Liquid
Understanding the properties of these types of water (including
density) is important with regard to future science studies around
Starting to
ocean currents and habitat changes for marine life.
freeze
Divide learners into groups so they can cycle through 5 experiment
Hard on top
centres.
Frozen
Set up the entire experiment area with the following items for each
Temperature group
1 beaker/ clear jar containing fresh water (water from tap)
1 beaker/ clear jar containing salt water (2 tablespoons salt to 1
cup water)
1 egg
1 small potato
2 colours of food colouring
200
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2 smaller clear glasses
½ sheet of cardstock
Saltwater observation sheet
Thermometer
Cellophane tape
Place a tick to show where your liquid is at each
Observation record sheets
time interval
Access to a freezer is also needed
Paper towels for cleanup
Write the temperature at each time
Experiment 1
How does food colouring react with fresh and saltwater
s s s s
s
n
s
n
First invite learners to fill in the prediction section of their
n
im
n
im
n
im
n
im
im im observation sheet
0 0 0 0 0
0 0
2
Steps:
2 4 6 8 1 1
1. Pour salt water into one of the small glasses and
Liquid freshwater into the other to about 1 inch from the rim
2. Add 3 drops of food colouring into the salt water
Starting to 3. Repeat for the freshwater glass with the same colour
4. Observe the reaction for 1 minute
freeze
5. Record observations
Hard on top
Frozen
Temperature
Responding to Water Shortages Retrieved from:
https://i.ytimg.com/vi/W5MY3SJvrCY/maxresdefault.jpg
Engineering Solutions
Because the majority of water exists on earth in the Why the difference?
form of salt water, it is no surprise that humans https://www.youtube.com/shorts/u6opOMYVGk8
have tried to develop technologies to remove the (The food colouring is less dense than salt water so it sits on top!)
salt.
201
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners should conduct research using the links Experiment 2
below to look at simple ways individuals have Does an egg float or sink in fresh and saltwater?
solved this problem as well as industrial-scale Does a potato float or sink in fresh and saltwater
approaches. In groups they should prepare a poster Invite learners to record their predictions on the observation
that outlines these two approaches and be prepared sheets
to explain it to classmates. Steps:
1. Gently drop the egg into the beaker/ clear jar containing
Primary sources: fresh water
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AawLiTT2m9s 2. Record your observation
https://ig7.ir/en/reverse-osmosis-ro/ 3. Remove the egg and dry off with paper towels
4. Gently place egg into the beaker/ clear jar of saltwater
Rubric: 5. Record your observations
➢ Clarity of poster information 5 marks 6. Repeat steps 1 - 5 using the potato
➢ Quality of information sources presented 5
marks
➢ Quality of presentation 5 marks
➢ Grammar and punctuation 5 marks
Responding at Home and in the Community
In essay format, learners will write a two-page
researched essay that responds to the following
questions:
➢ What are the main water sources in your
community? Retrieved from: https://qph.cf2.quoracdn.net/main-qimg-
➢ What is the water consumption data that is 7d6cb800cb1e3d41f3ba3b63237b8865
publicly available for your country? (The egg is more dense than fresh water so it sinks but less dense than salt
➢ What are the conservation approaches that water so it floats/ The potato sinks in fresh water because it is more dense and
your community currently uses? floats on salt water because it is less dense; see also:
➢ In general, how is water used in your home; https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ClbkGhW5jAk )
categorize types of uses as low
consumption, medium consumption, high
consumption.
202
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
➢ What ways can your household better Experiment 3
conserve water? How do differences in density of fresh and salt water affect
➢ What ways could your school better mixing?
conserve water? Steps:
➢ What new initiatives could you imagine, as 1. Colour the beaker of saltwater using food colouring (e.g.
a concerned citizen, that would help your blue)
community to be more conscious of our 2. Colour the beaker of freshwater using a different colour
water resources and ways to be responsible (e.g. yellow)
about it use? 3. Invite learners to record their predictions on observation
sheets
Sample Rubric for Essay 4. Pour each type of water into a separate glass up to the rim
5. Place cardstock on the glass containing the freshwater so it
forms a seal
6. Turn upside down and place over the glass containing
saltwater
7. Remove the cardstock so there is nothing preventing the
waters from mixing
8. Observe what happens where the waters meet
9. Take a photo
10. Hold both glasses firmly so no water spills and rotate
them (glasses can also be taped around with cellophane
tape
11. Observe again and take another photo
12. Repeat steps 10 and 11 until they have been mixed
thoroughly
Retrieved from:
13. Record observations on sheet
https://www.slideshare.net/slideshow/rubrics-in-
essay/29222266
203
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://www.science-sparks.com/wp-
content/uploads/2013/08/density-water-trick-1024x1024.jpg
(explanation : Adding salt to water increases its density, so the less dense
plain water sits on top. The two don’t mix see: https://www.science-
sparks.com/magic-and-density/)
Experiment 4
Does fresh or saltwater freeze faster?
Invite learners to record a hypothesis on their observation sheet
Steps:
1. Fill one plastic container of saltwater and the other of
freshwater
2. Measure the temperature of each water sample
3. Place both containers in the freezer
4. Check each container every 20 minutes and record
observations in the data tables provided
5. Measure the temperature each time and record it
204
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://i0.wp.com/thehomeschooldaily.com/wp-
content/uploads/2023/06/Screenshot_232.png?fit=446%2C280&
ssl=1
Explanation:
Saltwater freezes at a lower temperature than fresh water. Adding any solute to
a water will reduce its freezing point or raise its boiling point.
The individual particles that make up salt (known as ions) arrange themselves
around the water molecules. In doing so, they shield the water molecules from
interactions among themselves, making it less likely that they will find each
other and form ice. Quoted verbatim from:
https://salinity.oceansciences.org/learn-more.htm?id=12
205
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Using Our Water Responsibly
Have learners fill in the table based on their community use of
water.
Top ten list for water use
Use Type of water
E.g. 1. Bathing Freshwater
E.g. 2. Diving Saltwater
3.
4. etc.
Show learners this pie chart and make the point that the 3% of
earth’s water is fresh yet we only have access to 1% for drinking
because 2% is stored as ice in glaciers and ice caps)
206
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://media.cheggcdn.com/study/e65/e65cdd32-b832-4a05-
b352-58024b82daa5/4918-3-1rq-i1.png
Knowing that only a very small amount of the earth’s water is
available for us to use, what are some of the ways we care
responsibly for this small amount of water? Have learners make a
list of possible measures conservation. (prevent water pollution, cut
waste of wash water, recycle grey water, collect rainwater, prevent dumping of
industrial effluent in rivers and streams)
The teacher should designate a poster in the classroom to put
the learners’ ideas in an effort to encourage water resource
management initiatives.
Additional Resources and Materials
Water Distribution:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e-FoTmQVL5c (1:45 mins)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oaQCiwzjnCM (4:16 mins)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GxqvvAaW9MQ (8:39 mins)
Water Consumption/Conservation
https://www.sdg6data.org/en/region/Latin%20America%20and%20the%20Caribbean
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6yCAPAqXodc (4:52 mins)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JyzvcrZIuf0 (3:29 mins)
207
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Common Sources of Drinking Water
Retrieved from: https://drowwater.com/the-ten-most-common-sources-of-drinking-water/
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Mathematics: interpretation and construction of graphs of water data (e.g. distribution, consumption, costing)
Social Studies: responsible use of water; politics of access to water sources including diversion of waterways and indigenous land use
Language Arts: Researching, reading and communicating issues around water access and use.
TVET: Design of models to showcase water sources; technologies for capturing water; desalination of saltwater
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated
Water collection systems.
Water conservation initiatives.
Presentations from local inventors or other resource plants on desalination units/plants
Items of Inspiration
Water consumption and conservation are citizen responsibilities. Children at a young age should be made aware of the importance of a sustainable water supply.
208
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 3: Obtain and combine information about ways individual communities use science ideas to protect the
Earth’s resources and environment.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum Outcomes
Learners are expected to:
Sorting Recyclable versus Non-recyclable Our Environment
Knowledge Waste Learners should be shown the following pictures of a typical scene
in the Eastern Caribbean.
Define the terms: "solid waste means any garbage or refuse, sludge
• Polluting from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply
• Environment treatment plant, or air pollution control facility and
other discarded material, resulting from industrial,
• Conservation
commercial, mining, and agricultural operations,
• Turbid
and from community activities. Nearly everything
• Reservoirs
we do leaves behind some kind of waste.”
• Water diary Retrieved verbatim from:
• Consumption https://www.epa.gov/hw/criteria-definition-solid-
• Atmosphere waste-and-solid-and-hazardous-waste-exclusions
• Humid
• Acid rain The following excerpt classifies materials as
recyclable:
• Environmental destruction
• Clean air
• Environmental activists
• Scrub
• Solid waste
• Industrial effluent
• Fracking
• Phosphate detergents
209
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum Outcomes
• Plastic recycling Learners, what comes to mind when you see these pictures? Let’s draw a web of
• Fossil fuels words that captures your reaction.
State properties of clean air and
describe conditions of air e.g. hot,
cold, sticky. (ST 1 ESS ER 4)
Response
Define the term solid waste, p t ic o t t u h r e e s
identifying methods of managing this
waste in home/school/community Retrieved verbatim from:
(recycling, composting etc.) (ST 2 LS
https://www.sinobaler.com/recyclable-waste-
ECS 23)
unrecyclable-waste/
Define the term environmental The teacher could present the excerpt above and a
destruction and investigate the factors cardboard box containing a range of garbage. (a shameful environment, disappointment, anger, disgust, uncaring, indifferent)
that cause and prevent this
Learners should use the information above to
destruction. (ST 2 LS ECS 24) decide what could potentially be recycled. Teacher This thoughtless disposal of garbage means we are polluting the
could use the following data table to have learners earth for future generations.
Identify the role of recycling and other record their results. An extended activity would
named conservation methods in the have the learners organize and implement a Divide the class into 8 groups where two groups each get a single
maintenance of a balanced waste clean up drive in their community. picture to think about. Ask them to work in their group to respond
environment. (ST 3 LS ECS 6) to the following questions:
Sample table:
Demonstrate awareness that 1) Can you identify the main environmental concern? (garbage is
sustainable use of resources would Item Potentially Non- polluting the seashore)
help to minimize pollution and Identified Recyclable Recyclable 2) Have you seen a similar concern in your community?
destruction of the environment. (ST 3 Plastic bottle X (a walk on any beach will identify garbage)
STSE 1) Paper bag X 3) What are the objects you see in the picture that don’t belong?
Banana peel X (plastic bottles, plastic bags, packaging of food, rope)
Describe correct methods of garbage (compostable) 4) What are the causes of this problem? (people dispose of containers
disposal. (ST 5 ESS ER 3) Rusty nail X used for convenience products in nature rather than proper bins)
210
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum Outcomes
Identify that air is needed for burning, Evaluating Comprehension and Critical 5) What are the action items you might undertake to help solve the
and describe how the process works. Thinking problem? (plastics can be disposed of in proper bins and recycled or taken to
(ST 5 ESS ER 7) landfill sites)
Industrial Effluent and Fuel Transport as Water
Explain the importance of 'clean' air in Pollution One of the words you may use to describe these pictures includes
their country. (ST 5 ESS ER 11) environment. I am sure you have heard the word before. As a
Learners will use the following primary sources to review, I want each of you to place the word environment in the
Identify and name natural sources of
write a two-page summary of the mode of pollution centre of this four-square and complete the quadrants.
water. (ST 5 ESS ER 12) and the impact on our environment.
Rubric: description of event 5 marks/description of
Describe, with examples, the effects of
impact 5 marks
water shortage in the environment and
human activity. (ST 5 ESS ER 13)
A) Many industries small and large will use
local streams to cool machinery but more
Identify and describe how water may
dangerously, to dump chemical waste
be polluted, and how human activities
(called industrial effluent). The heating of
help in this situation. (ST 5 ESS ER
water or pollution with chemicals can
14)
potentially kill marine life which in turn
upsets the local ecosystem.
Identify and name marine pollutants,
https://www.fairplanet.org/story/how-the-fashion-
explaining how each damages the
industry-pollutes-our-water/
environment. (ST 5 LS ECS 7)
https://www.perchenergy.com/blog/environment/
Describe how human activities may what-is-thermal-pollution-causes-impact
result in air and water pollution. (ST 5
B) Transportation of Fossil fuels has Our environment includes air, soil and water.
LS ECS 8)
contributed to some of the biggest water
Describe different methods of pollution disasters the earth has ever Ask learners why these (air, water and soil) are important and
disposing of solid waste materials and experienced. should be conserved.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-latin-america-
demonstrate most appropriate
68413102 Have learners work in small groups to brainstorm 3 negative
methods of disposal. (ST 6 ESS ER 1)
https://www.history.com/topics/1980s/exxon- impacts of not protecting our air, soil and water. Share and review
Describe and discuss how burning can valdez-oil-spill their lists on the board asking them to explain their examples using
cause air pollution. (ST 6 ESS ER 4) a spokesperson from each group.
211
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum Outcomes
List and explain which activities of Contentious Issues – Pros and Cons Writing Comprehension of the Word Conservation
humans may affect the water supply
and pollute our scarce resources. (ST 6 Fracking is a technique recently developed for the Read the following passage to learners and ask them to surmise
ESS ER 8) oil industry. While it seems to be a useful and what the word conservation must mean based on the context in
efficient technology, many opponents fear the the passage.
Discuss ways of preventing and strategy has the potential to damage water supplies.
reducing water pollution. (ST 6 ESS Learners should research the topic fracking and “Felix was really worried. His garden was not doing well. At the
ER 9) write up a two-page-response paper that responds beginning of the growing season the rains came and everything
to the following questions: (5 marks for each seemed to grow well. But he did not conserve water in a barrel or
Compare pro and con opinions on component below) bucket and now, with no rain and a dry well, he had virtually no
contentious issues (e.g. fracking) 1) What is involved in the “fracking water left to nourish his plants. He realised too late that
technique”? (you should draw a picture as it conservation of resources like water is very important in
Compare clean and dirty water. is helpful in your description) agriculture.”
2) What are the positive aspects of using this
Distinguish clean and polluted air. technique? Through discussion arrive at a working definition for conservation.
3) What are the negative aspect of using this (Conservation refers to the methods used to prevent wasteful
Explain how acid rain is created by technique? use of a resource)
industry. Learners may use the following as a primary source:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Uti2niW2BR Cleaning Water
Skills A (5:03 mins)
A jar of muddy water can be poured through a funnel with the
Explain to their classmates the need Water Pollution Inventory following filters used. Learners should report on the properties of
for environmental conservation in the water after it has been subjected to a filter.
their country, outlining possible Learner groups should be tasked to use the
scenarios if such protection is following list to do an inventory of their home and Initial Description (brown -yellow)
neglected. (ST 3 LS ECS 7) community to judge whether clean water practises sample
are being followed. Learner groups can report back Paper filter
Classify litter as recyclable and non- on their findings and, as a class, they might would Sand
recyclable. (ST 5 ESS ER 4) learn to write a formal letter to local politicians Gravel
voicing their cumulative concerns. Nylon fabric
Plan and participate in clean-up drive
in their school. (ST 5 ESS ER 5)
Which filter did the best job removing colour from the muddy
(turbid) water? And why? (paper-smallest pores))
212
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum Outcomes
Design, construct and use discarded Ten Things You Can Do To Reduce Water Imagine the filtering that happens as rainwater passes through
materials to make useful items. (ST 5 Pollution meters of soil to join underwater reservoirs.
ESS ER 6) “Just because it disappears, doesn’t mean it goes
away”
Compare devices that burn different
fuels from the amount of pollution 1. DO NOT pour fat from cooking or any
they cause. (ST 5 ESS ER 8) other type of fat, oil, or grease down the
sink. Keep a “fat jar” under the sink to
Compare the amount of air pollution
collect the fat and discard in the solid waste
in two named areas. (ST 5 ESS ER 9) when full. Retrieved from: https://www.sfi.ie/site-files/primary-
2. DO NOT dispose of household chemicals science/media/pdfs/col/cleaning_water_activity.pdf
Hypothesize as to the reasons for the
or cleaning agents down the sink or toilet.
differences exhibited in ST 5 ESS-ER
3. DO NOT flush pills, liquid or powder Caring for Water
9 above (ST 5 ESS ER 10)
medications or drugs down the toilet.
4. Avoid using the toilet as a wastebasket. Put some water in a container and cover it. Tell the learners you
Classify litter, using actual examples, as
Most tissues, wrappers, dust cloths, and have the most important thing in the world under the cloth and
recyclable and non-recyclable. (ST 6
other paper goods should be properly ask them to guess what it is.
ESS ER 2)
discarded in a wastebasket. The fibre
Design and construct a device to reinforced cleaning products that have Explain the importance of water. Ask the learners to name all the
become popular should never be discarded ways people use water and write down their answers. To track the
detect air pollution. (ST 6 ESS ER 5)
in the toilet. amount of water individuals/families use in the home, we are
Investigate the amount of air pollution 5. Avoid using a garbage disposal. Keep solid going to have learners keep a “water diary” (see below)
found in two distinctly different areas wastes solid. Make a compost pile from
and suggest a 'theory' to account for vegetable scraps. Ask the learners to keep a water diary for a day or two to see how
the reasons for the differences. (ST 6 6. Install a water efficient toilet. In the they use water and discuss their results. Are their opportunities to
meantime, put a brick or 1/2 gal container conserve the water in your home?
ESS ER 6)
in the standard toilet tank to reduce water
Design, construct and demonstrate the use per flush. Invite an Expert
use of a device to determine the 7. Run the dishwasher or clothes washer only
turbidity of water. (ST 6 ESS ER 10) when you have a full load. This conserves Consider inviting presentations from local water management
electricity and water. authority. Have learners create a set of interview question sin
8. Use the minimum amount of detergent advance.
and/or bleach when you are washing
213
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum Outcomes
Investigate ways in which polluted clothes or dishes. Use only phosphate free
water can be made clean. (ST 6 ESS soaps and detergents.
ER 11) 9. Minimize the use of pesticides, herbicides,
fertilizers. DO NOT dispose of these
Interpret information passages. chemicals, motor oil, or other automotive
fluids into the sanitary sewer or storm
Infer from pictures the environmental
sewer systems.
concerns.
10. If your home has a sump pump or cellar
drain, make certain it does not drain into
Use graphic organizers to clarify
the sanitary sewer system.
terminology.
Research modes of pollution. Retrieved from: https://www.simsbury-
ct.gov/water-pollution-control/pages/ten-things-
Complete inventories of water usage. you-can-do-to-reduce-water-pollution
(consumption)
Protecting Our Water: Why Phosphate -Free
Perform water filtering experiments. Detergents?
Perform air pollution detection Phosphate detergents are well known to produce
experiments. the shiniest, clear glassware with no soap stains.
However, this useful chemical technology has
Construct graphs from data. potentially detrimental effects on the environment
Interpret graphical information. when the effluent from dishwashers and clothes
washers is dumped into lakes, rivers and streams.
Attitudes/Values The phosphates promote an abundance of algae and
weed growth which depletes oxygen in the
Demonstrate awareness that waterway thereby killing fish and ultimately turning
unplanned scientific and technological the waters murky. Retrieved from https://resource-
activities may impact humans and the bank.scholastic.co.uk/resources/110745
Learners should be tasked with doing an inventory
environment in such a way that there
of home use detergents to see what is phosphate-
is little to leave behind for succeeding Rank the learner answers showing the most frequent uses of water
free and determine where their waste water
generations. (ST 1 STSE 4) to the least frequent for your community sample. Share with the
eventually resides. They can write a lab report on
their findings.
214
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum Outcomes
Demonstrate awareness that Testing for Air Pollution With a Simple Tester class to establish some strategies for reducing consumption
unplanned and excessive Science and (means use of).
Technological activities may destroy Clean air has the properties of being light and
the earth as we know it, resulting in refreshingly cool to breath. Sometime our air gets Graphing the Consumption Data
polluted by substances in the atmosphere. Let us
untold disasters. (fracking, oil
design our own Have learners estimate how much water their family is using at
exploration, global warming etc.). (ST
home (gallons per day) by referring to the following data table (see
2 STSE 2)
Prepare sample cards using instructions here also: https://water.usgs.gov/edu/activity-percapita.php)
Demonstrate awareness that humans (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PZdt3GnUgr
w (1:37 mins) and place the cards at two different Type of water use Gallons per use
must realise that in their attempts to
places in the school yard. Using a magnifying glass, Full tub 36
understand the world and exploit the
analyse the amount and size of particles collected at Shower 5 gallons per minute
environment to fulfil their needs there
two distinct locations. Account for differences. Teeth brush 1 gallon per minute
are consequences. (ST 2 STSE 1)
(weather conditions including wind; passerby traffic could Washing face 1 gallon
Demonstrate awareness that the real influence) Dishwasher (new) 6 gallons
impact of scientific and technological Hand wash dishes 2 gallons per minute
activities may take years to be seen. New Clothes washer 25 gallons per load
(ST 4 STSE 2) Toilet 2 gallons per flush
Drinking water 8 glasses = 0.5 gallons
Demonstrate an understanding that
human production processes make Have learners graph their relative usage of different types with a
goods and products which may impact pie chart; an example shown below.
the environment. (ST 5 PS MM 4)
Demonstrate an understanding that Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PZdt3GnUgr
humans desire to acquire
w (1:37 mins)
understanding and to produce
materials for their needs, and there
may be consequences not anticipated.
(ST 5 TE UT 1)
Appreciate that the earth’s water and
air resources are sensitive to the abuse
of humans.
215
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum Outcomes
Burning Fossil Fuels Produces CO & Retrieved from https://www.epa.gov/watersense/how-we-use-
2
Demonstrate interest/curiosity to Contributes to Global Warming water
sample human habits like water
consumption. Have learners review the graph below and answer In brainstorming session, have learners suggest ways they could
the following questions. conserve water at home. These could be posted around the
Demonstrate an attitude of inquiry 1) Which fuel produces the most CO /kg fuel classroom as a conservation reminder. The following chart can be
2
into new technologies that might burned? (3.2 Diesel) used to guide teachers and learners.
impact the overall health of the earth. 2) Which fuel produces the least CO /kg fuel
2
burned?
When conducting practical and group (2.75 Natural gas)
work, display sensitivity and offer
assistance to peers who may have
physical or learning challenges.
Participate actively in classroom
discussions.
Retrieved from:
https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Comparison-
of-CO-2-emission-for-different-fuels-
11_fig1_274698881
Dirty and Stagnant Water Can Cause Disease
Learners should be tasked with writing a research
paper on the various waterborne diseases that have
Retrieved from: https://solarschools.net/knowledge-
plagued the Caribbean in the last decade.
bank/sustainability/reduce-reuse-recycle/reduce/water-usage
Rubric:
216
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum Outcomes
Comprehensive coverage 5 marks Pollution of Water
Explanation of source of diseases 5 marks
Demographic of countries most affected 3 marks Efficient use of water must be combined with protection of our
Grammar and punctuation 5 marks water supplies.
From our initial pictures, it is obvious that plastic garbage is often
deposited into our water both in the sea and near ground water
sources.
“Unlike other materials, plastic does not biodegrade. It can take up
to 1,000 years to break down, so when it is discarded, it builds up
in the environment until it reaches a crisis point. This pollution
chokes marine wildlife, damages soil and poisons groundwater, and
can cause serious health impacts.”
Quoted verbatim from:
https://www.un.org/africarenewal/magazine/may-
2023/understanding-plastic-pollution-and-its-impact-lives
Plastics are often recyclable, and many schools and communities
have begun recycling programs where drink bottles and plastic
packaging are separated in bins
Does your community have a depot for recycling plastics? If so
your class can begin a recycling program; if not, learners should be
encouraged to reuse plastic containers such as cups, bottles, plates
and utensils.
217
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum Outcomes
Retrieved from: https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Overall-
mechanical-recycling-process-of-waste-plastics_fig2_354740283
Protecting Our Air
Combustion (burning) of wood and fossil fuels requires air but it
also produces unburned gases that pollute our atmosphere.
Carbon dioxide is also formed in combustion, and this adds to
global warming that makes our air seem more humid (containing
water) rather than dryer. The result of this warming is climate
change which impacts habitats and ecosystems.
“Climate change refers to long-term shifts in temperatures and
weather patterns. These shifts may be natural, but since the 1800s,
human activities have been the main driver of climate change,
primarily due to the burning of fossil fuels (like coal, oil and gas),
which produces heat-trapping gases.”
Quoted verbatim from:
https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/what-is-climate-change
218
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum Outcomes
Industry also frequently creates other gases that appear as smoke
from stacks. You will later learn more about the chemistry of
sulphur and nitrogen oxides. These gases when released into the
atmosphere can combine with water, oxygen, and other chemicals
to become sulfuric and nitric acid respectively. These drop from
clouds as dilute acid rain causing agricultural soils to be acidic and
not suitable for some plants unless treated with lime (a neutralizing
agent). This same acid rain falls in ponds and lakes causing a
change in the aquatic environment. It is clear that industry, while it
contributes convenient and useful products to humankind, it can
also lead to environmental destruction by disturbing our clean
air and destroying our water resources and associated ecosystems.
This potential harm has been challenged by many environmental
activists which has led to political pressure to “scrub” the gases
that leave industrial stacks and limit dangerous effluents to local
waterways.
Teacher note: “A scrubber is a waste gas treatment installation in
which a gas stream is brought into intensive contact with a liquid,
with the aim of inviting certain gaseous components to pass from
the gas to the liquid. Scrubbers can be employed as an emission-
limiting technique for many gaseous emissions.” Quoted verbatim
from: https://emis.vito.be/en/bat/tools-overview/sheets/gas-
scrubbing-general
Additional Resources and Materials
Turbidity of Water- DIY Tube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bBl6KMyvS0M (2:59 mins)
Waste water treatment: https://www.coleparmer.com/tech-article/eight-stages-of-wastewater-treatment-process
Water recycling: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sCKPaNiOJDc (3:12 mins)
219
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Recycling plastics:
https://www.recyclenow.com/how-to-recycle/plastic-recycling
https://www.recyclenow.com/how-to-recycle/recycling-symbols
Paper Recycling Process Diagram and Explanation: https://www.lactips.com/news/what-is-the-paper-recycling-process/?lang=en
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Mathematics: Collecting, Drawing and interpreting graphical data on air and water pollution /consumption.
Social Studies: problems of pollution and sustaining clean air and water are issues that all citizens should be schooled in
Health: Clean air and water are crucial to sustained good health and wellness/waterborne illnesses can be devastating to communities
Language arts: Research, comprehension of information and writing about social issues of environmental concerns including water quality and disease
220
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Space Systems: Stars and the Solar Systems
Introduction to the Subject
The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of caring not only for themselves,
but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic study of the structure and behaviour of
the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, learners benefit from leveraging and evaluating available
technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it.
Strand: Space System: Stars and the Solar Systems
Learners benefit from understanding the place of the earth within interplanetary space as it defines certain characteristics of life on earth given the
influences of celestial bodies such as the moon and the sun.
Essential Learning Outcome 1: Support an argument that the gravitational force exerted by Earth on objects is directed down.
Clarification Statement: “Down” is a local description of the direction that points toward the centre of the spherical Earth.
Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include mathematical representation of gravitational force.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
221
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge Learners, I have a question for you that you can help
me with. A tennis player will serve a tennis ball by
Define the terms: throwing it up in the air and hitting it with a racket.
• earth When they throw it up, they move their hand and
• force apply a force upward. Describe for me what
• gravitational force happens after the ball leaves their hand? (the ball begins
• gravity going upward but eventually slows to a stop and then begins falling)
• invisible
So, the tennis player has to adjust their timing to swing
• mass Retrieved from
the racket at the ball just at the right time!
• velocity https://www.istockphoto.com/search/2/image?me
• acceleration diatype=illustration&phrase=toy+rocket
• air resistance
• surface area Learners are presented with a diagram of a model
• tides rocket and the following scenario.
Simon launched a toy rocket his parents bought
Demonstrate that the force of gravity
him. As it slowly ascended into the sky, he
pulls objects towards the earth.
wondered just how high it could go. “I am worried I
will never see it again” he said.. His parents told
Compare the effects of gravity on the
rate at which an object falls. him: “What goes up must come down, it will fall back Retrieved from:
down to the earth eventually, then you can collect it https://kids.britannica.com/learners/assembly/view/54
up and launch it again”
Show that the bigger the object, the 079
bigger that force of attraction that
draws other objects to it. Why does the ball slow down after it leaves their hand
and eventually stop? (the force they apply upward stops as soon
Explain the effects of air resistance on as the ball leaves their hand but another force works against that
the shape of an object as it falls.
upward motion to slow and stop the upward motion)
222
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Account for the difference in gravity Introductory question We call the force that acts against that upward motion
between earth and moon the force of gravity.
What does the statement " What goes up must
Do all objects that we send upward with a force come
come down and fall to the Earth eventually,
Skills back down again? (yes) Have you ever thrown something
mean?”
up in the air that didn’t come down again? (no)
Observe that gravity prevents objects Ans: (The force of gravity pulls objects towards the earth.)
from floating off into space.
So it seems that the force of gravity is constant all
Complete the worksheet below.
around us and it acts on all objects to pull them down to
Infer what will happen if two objects
the earth. We know that spacecraft have successfully
of the same size and shape, one empty
landed and remained on the moon so it must also have
and filled are released from the same
gravity!
height.
Today we will look at the nature of that force; how does
Predict the direction an object will go
it act on different objects?
when dropped.
Construct different parachutes and As a review, the teacher with access to technology may
discuss which one will reach the pose the following questions for learners to watch for as
ground first when dropped. they view the following video on gravity.
Conduct experiments to observe the What is Gravity? (youtube.com) (6:42 mins)
effects of gravity on different objects
of varying mass and size.
a. What is gravity? (an invisible force that pulls
everything together.)
Collect data from experiments and b. What effects does gravity have on an object?
they will record, analyse and interpret (pull things downwards)
the data to make predictions on c. How do we know there's gravity on
gravitational force. Earth?(everything falls down/ to earth)
Retrieved from
d. Does the sun and the moon have gravity? (yes)
e. Gravity is stronger (closer to OR further away)
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/science/1
from an object. (gravity depends on distance just like a
279996
magnet)
223
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Attitudes/Values f. What would happen if there was no gravity
acting on objects? (they will float away)
g. Does gravity pull all objects to the surface of
Develop an appreciation for Science
the earth? (Yes, this is how it is different from a magnet
by recognizing the importance of
which normally only attracts certain metals gravity pulls
gravity as a force which keeps things
down on all objects, whether it is made up of wood, metal
including humans grounded to the
, rock, plastic ,paper)
earth..
h. Can we see gravity?
(No , it is an invisible force)
Work collaboratively/cooperatively
i. Invite learners to stand and jump . Ask them
with peers on classroom activities and
why they did not just stay in the air when they
discussions on gravity. jumped. (because gravity pulls us back down).
When conducting practical and group
Engage learners in a word wall activity on gravity.
work, display sensitivity and help peers
For Objects of Equal Mass, Does Shape Make a
Retrieved from:
who may have physical or learning
Difference in How Quickly an Object Falls?
challenges. https://wordwall.net/resource/37041756/gravity
Activity
What would you need?
1. A4 paper 2. Thin card 3. Scissors
Step 1 Loosely scrunch an A4 piece of paper into a ball
and hold in your hand at shoulder height. In the other
hand, hold a flat piece of paper. Ask learners what they
predict will happen when you release both pieces of
paper simultaneously? (the crumpled ball will fall fastest)
Step 2. Drop both pieces of paper at the same time
from shoulder height.
224
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners complete the worksheet on tides Which piece reaches the floor first? (crimpled paper)
below. Ask learners why they think this happens? (the
uncrumpled paper floats on air on the way down.)
Ask learners: when people skydive from airplanes,
what do they use to float on air? (parachutes catch the air
and slow them down)
When scientists talk about the air slowing falling objects,
they refer to it as air resistance.
So in a correct sentence, we could say that air resistance
causes pieces of flat paper or parachutes to fall slowly.
But learners, what do they have in common? (they take
up more space as they fall) We say that they have more
surface for the air to push on. This is called surface
area.
In a complete sentence then…the surface area of a
parachute gives more places for the air to resist the
falling motion.
Retrieved from
tides_worksheet.pdf (weebly.com) What if there was no air to resist the falling object?
A famous scientist named Galileo dropped a feather and
a ball and found that the feather fell much more slowly
because of air resistance.
225
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Group Activity But scientists today have created a special experiment
Place learners in groups and carry out similar that invites us to remove the air and once again drop the
activities.). ball and the feather. What do you think happened?
You are right, they fell to the ground exactly at the same
Learners will plan and execute how to determine the
time. If we could go to the moon where there is no air
effect of Earth’s gravitational pull on these objects.
we could duplicate this experiment!
Materials for groups
See:
➢ tennis balls
Galileo's Famous Gravity Experiment | Brian Cox |
➢ leaf
BBC Two (youtube.com) (3:34 min)
➢ mango
➢ paperclip
Learners will drop a tennis ball and a leaf from the
same height simultaneously.
1.Which object fell first?
(The tennis ball fell faster than the leaf.)
Why do you think that happened? (the leaf floated in
the air rather than dropping fast because it has a larger
surface therefore the air resistance will be greater.)
Learners will conduct similar activities with the
mango and paperclip.
Screen captured from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QyeF-_QPSbk
226
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Invite learners to make paper planes and let them Review
launch them into the sky.
Let's write a new statement on what we know now.
1. What happened to the paper planes?
● The shape of objects will determine how fast
(After a few seconds they slowly descended.)
they fall from a height to the ground. (e.g. a
crumpled paper will reach the ground faster than
2.Why did this happen? a flat surface , because there’s less air resistance.
(The force of gravity prevents objects from floating
indefinitely.) ● In the absence of air resistance, objects fall to
the surface of that planet at the same rate.
Learners will also make paper planes of various
1. Surface Area: A crumpled piece of paper has less
sizes and observe which will drop first.
surface area than a flat sheet of paper. When you
Have two learners drop two bottles simultaneously crumple the paper, it forms wrinkles and folds, reducing
from a high place while the others observe. the overall area exposed to the air.
Learners can repeat the experiment to ascertain
their observations.
2. Air Resistance: Air resistance depends on both the
velocity of the falling object and its geometry. Imagine a
Lesson 2 Act 1 HowFall wkst
race car and a truck moving at the same speed. Which
draft5_TEDL_dwc.doc (teachengineering.org)
one experiences more air resistance? The truck, because
The two bottles: one filled with water and the of its larger surface area. Similarly, a crumpled paper
empty one, will hit the ground at the same time. No
encounters less air resistance due to its reduced surface
matter the mass of the object, in the absence of air
area, inviting it to fall faster.
resistance, it is being pulled down towards the Earth
at the same rate of acceleration, because the force of
3. Terminal Velocity: If there were no air resistance, all
gravity acting on them is at the same time.)
objects would fall at the same rate regardless of their
shape or mass. However, air resistance plays a crucial
role. As an object falls, its velocity increases until air
resistance balances out gravity.
227
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners look at a video on how objects fall, then answer
questions based on the video.
Why do heavier objects fall faster? | #aumsum #kids
#science #education #children (youtube.com) 1:07min
a. Will the weight of an object affect the speed at
which it falls? (yes, the heavier the object the greater the
force of gravity)
b. Why would the lighter object fall to the ground
last? (it has greater air resistance)
c. Would it be possible for a light and heavy object
to fall to the ground at the same time? (yes if there
Learners will be engaged in a word wall/Kahoot is no air resistance)
activity on Air resistance. They will be able to view
their scores at the end of the activity. More on Parachutes
Air Resistance Quiz
Pupils are asked to look at the video on how to construct
Visit the following website for a review quiz on air a parachute
resistance:https://wordwall.net/resource/10216867 DIY Parachute Science Experiment | Easy At-home
/science/air-resistance Experiment for Kids - YouTube( 2:11 mins)
The following graph gives information about time taken
for different parachutes to fall to the ground. Have
learners respond to the questions about the graph.
228
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Build a Parachute Activity
Learners will be placed into 4 small groups to
construct 4 parachutes of various sizes. Each group
will be given the dimensions to construct a
parachute. Upon constructing their parachutes ,
learners will drop them from a certain height and
observe what happens.
Pupils will draw a table like the one below to record
their findings.
Retrieved from: https://owlcation.com/stem/A-grade-
GCSE-Physics-experiment-Investigation-into-the-effect-
of-parachute-surface-area-in-relation-to-its-fall-time
a. Which parachute has the widest radius? (the one
with 12cm)
b. Which parachute will reach the ground first? (the
one with the smallest radius)
c. Which one will take the longest time to reach
the ground? (the 12 cm radius) Why? (the parachute
with the largest surface area because the larger the surface
They will answer the following questions
area the more air resistance that will act on it)
1.Which parachute took the least time to land?
2. Which parachute took the most time to land?
3. Arrange the parachute in the order they landed,
from the one which took the least time to land to
the one which took the most time to land.
Pupils will construct a line graph and will plot the
points at the rate the parachute falls based on the
data collected.
229
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will complete the worksheet below. How Does Surface Area Make a Difference: An
Explanation
Teacher: Draw diagrams to explain to learners how air
resistance affects objects with a wider radius.
Retrieve from:
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/science/1
711987
Rubric 1 mark per question. (10 marks)
Retrieved from: https://owlcation.com/stem/A-grade-
GCSE-Physics-experiment-Investigation-into-the-effect-
of-parachute-surface-area-in-relation-to-its-fall-time
230
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Look at the diagram below and answer the The Nature of Gravity as a Force
following questions:
As an object falls from a high point, it travels faster and
faster as it descends to the ground. This is called
acceleration because the velocity is increasing. Since the
increase in velocity is due to gravity, we call it
acceleration due to gravity
Moon Has Gravity That Pulls on the Earth & its
Water!
The tides can be explained easily using an analogy of a
magnet. Magnetic pull is dependent on the distance from
the magnet to the object it is attracting (metal).
When the moon’s gravity acts on the earth, it pulls on 3
things, A) the water on the earth facing the moon, B) the
earth itself and C) the water on the opposite side of the
earth.
Retrieved from:
Learners, what do you think the moon pulls the hardest?
https://www.physicsclassroom.com/mmedia/newtl
(the closest of the three, the water on the side facing the moon.)
aws/efff.gif
That is where we get a high tide.
TRUE or FALSE:
The moon also pulls the earth away from the water on
1. The elephant and the feather each have the
the backside leaving a high tide opposite the moon.
same force of gravity.
2. The elephant has more mass, yet both
Learners, what do you think the moon pulls on the least
elephant and feather experience the same of these three? (the water on the opposite side of the earth)
force of gravity.
231
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3. The elephant experiences a greater force of The moon essentially leaves that water alone and behind
gravity, yet both the elephant and the feather because of only a weak attraction, We get a high tide on
the opposite side facing the moon.
have the same mass.
4. On earth, all objects (whether an elephant or
a feather) have the same force of gravity.
5. The elephant weighs more than the feather,
yet they each have the same mass.
6. The elephant clearly has more mass than the
feather, yet they each weigh the same.
7. The elephant clearly has more mass than the
Screen capture and explanation retrieved from:
feather, yet the amount of gravity (force) is
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3RdkXs8BibE
the same for each.
(5:10 mins)
8. The elephant has the greatest acceleration,
yet the amount of gravity is the same for Because the water is fluid to flow all-around the earth as
each. it rotates , we get too low tides on the other two sides
perpendicular to the side of the moon.
Ans: (all answers are false)
Learners will write an essay explaining at least three
main points why the force of gravity is important.
This activity will be graded.
Rubric
● Defining the term gravity (2 marks)
● Identifying and explaining at least three critical
Retrieved from:
reasons why gravity is important. (12 marks)
● Summarizing the main points. (1 mark)
https://www.abc.net.au/education/how-the-moon-
Total points : 15 affects-the-tides-on-earth/13920350
232
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Challenge Question: Space Walks and Gravity Because the earth is rotating once every 24 hours we get
two high tides and two low tides very day.
When we watch videos of astronauts walking on the
moon they appear to be bouncing across the Challenge questions:
surface. 1) What do you think happens to the tides when
See: the sun is aligned on the same side as the moon.
(the tides tend to be higher because the sun’s gravity also
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NHeOpJh5Q
pulls the same water as the moon)
-M (0:30 mins)
2) What do you think happens to the tides when
Why does this happen?
the sun is opposite the moon?. (the tides tend to be
lower because the sun’s gravity also pulls the same water
(the gravity that a body possesses depends on its mass. The as the moon but in the opposite direction)
moon has much less mass than the earth and therefore less
gravity. With less gravity the force that astronauts must exert
is less on the moon. Because normal walking on earth takes
more force per step, the astronauts must adapt to using less
force on the moon to walk normally! It appears like they are
hopping because they are so strong)
233
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QFooUXyN-pA
https://www.wrschool.net/cms/lib/AZ02214740/Centricity/Domain/1624/EffectsofGravityStations%20PDF%20FIllable.pdf
Lesson: Comparing the speeds of different parachutes | KS3 Science | Oak National Academy (thenational.academy)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KDp1tiUsZw8 (1:22 mins)
The Physics Classroom Website - The elephant and feather- air resistant experiment.
What Goes Up, Must Come Down: Conduct Galileo's Famous Falling Objects Experiment | Science Project (sciencebuddies.org) - what goes up must
come down experiment.
Do Heavy Objects Actually Fall Faster Than Light Objects? DEBUNKED (youtube.com) (12:17 min)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
https://th.bing.com/th/id/OIP.uqUPZQKepkCDgedXoNd4WQAAAA?rs=1&pid=ImgDetMain
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KDp1tiUsZw8 (1:22 mins)
Why heavier objects fall faster than lighter objects? (explained) (youtube.com)(5: 01 min)
Invite learners to view a video on making parachutes https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=STDJ0l0cvFo
234
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Retrieved from:https://www.greatschools.org/gk/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/26357.gif
ttps://www.pexels.com/photo/parachuters-on-air-70361/
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Mathematics:
● Use simple bar graphs to answer questions on the effects of gravity on different objects of varying mass and size..
● Use a simple bar graph/line graphs to show the time at which various objects reach the ground.
● Use tables to record observations on activities conducted.
Language Arts:
● Vocabulary, Reading comprehension (poem/stories) on gravity.
● Write a composition on the importance of gravity
Social- Science
● The importance of gravity in our daily life.
● Tidal fluctuations and damage to coastline habitats
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated
Useful video describing forces in Freefall: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0ewWkfBA3vw (5:22 mins)
235
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 2: Support an argument that differences in the apparent brightness of the sun compared to other stars is
due to their relative distances from Earth.
Assessment Boundary: Assessment is limited to relative distances, not sizes, of stars. Assessment does not include other factors that affect apparent brightness
(such as stellar masses, age, stage).
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge Integration With Mathematics What Are the Characteristics of Stars?
How many times further away from the earth is the Accessing Prior Knowledge
Define the terms: star Alpha Centauri by comparison to our sun? Learners, you have probably heard of the word star before. What
• Star 40,208,000,000,000/152,000,000 = 264, 526 times do you know about stars? (teacher note: draw a graphic
• Sun further away. organizer- web to capture their ideas- see example below)
• Refraction
• Alpha Centauri Why do scientists use light years instead of kms for idea
• Light year measuring distances? (the distances are too large to work
• Brightness with)
idea Star idea
• Luminosity
Creative Writing
Demonstrate an understanding that In a one-page response paper, learners should idea
the sun is considered a star outline:
1) why the sun is an important star for the
Explain why we need the concept of a well-being of humans on earth? What are the characteristics of stars…the sun is a star we know
light year. 2) How does pollution impact the usefulness very well, what can you tell me about the sun? (it seems like a
of the sun?
sphere, it is bright, it seems to be burning, burning gases, very hot, gives us
3) How can the sun’s rays be dangerous?
Identify the nearest star to Earth heat on earth, the waves leaving the sun (radiation) can be dangerous for our
4) How can we use the suns energy more
effectively (e.g. solar power) skin)
236
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Explain how distance affects the Rubric:
apparent brightness of a star Coverage of questions 5 marks A definition of a star: A point of light seen primarily in the night
Quality of Explanation 5 marks sky that produces its own light from a mass of burning gases
Skills Punctuation and grammar 5 marks
Why do Stars Seem to Twinkle?
Infer that the brightness of a light is The Difference Between Luminosity and Have a look at the picture of stars below. It is still, but we know
affected by the distance the light must when we look into the sky the stars seem to twinkle. Do you
Apparent Brightness- Paired Explanations
travel remember the song Twinkle Twinkle Little Star? Let us sing it
1) Explain to a peer how the flashlight
experiment shows the difference between from memory of we can!
Recognize the importance of luminosity and apparent brightness.
teamwork to prove that light intensity (luminosity is energy actually given off the surface of
is affected by distance the star. Apparent brightness is what we perceive as
that energy passes through space and our
Communicate that the light year is a atmosphere)
measure of distance 2) Explain to a peer why stars twinkle. (light
travels at different speeds in different media, ; star
light passes through many different mediums as it
Compare the distance of the nearest
traves from its origin to our eyes)
stars to that of the sun from Earth
Retrieved from: (https://www.funkidslive.com/learn/deep-
Star Gazing Activity
Analyse data to determine how
space-high/space-explanation/why-do-some-stars-twinkle-and-
distance from the earth impacts light
some-dont/)
Instruction
intensity of the stars
Star gaze when there is little or no moonlight and
Twinkle, twinkle, little star
Create a model of a constellation the sky isn’t cloudy. Find an area away from
streetlamps, neon signs, and headlights. And give How I wonder what you are
Attitudes/Values your eyes a half hour to adjust to the darkness. Up above the world so high
Like a diamond in the sky
Inquire into the names and relative Keep a notebook with you to sketch what you see Twinkle, twinkle, little star
distances of the nearest stars to Earth in the sky and to keep a record of your sightings
How I wonder what you are
Written by: Jane Taylor
Be prepared to argue the importance
of the sun in our very day lives
237
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Appreciate the citizens can play a role Observe the brightest stars in the sky and look out Discussion Point:
in maximizing the impact of the sun for constellations! Why do we see stars twinkle at night?
on the earth by managing our energy
consumption and reducing pollution.
Identify one constellation and sketch it out on your Learners, let me help you think about this.
notebook When we place a pencil in a glass of water we see what appears to
When conducting practical and group
be a broken pencil. This observation we have talked about before
work, display sensitivity and help peers
Note: Not all points of light you see at night are is called refraction. We see the pencil two different ways because
who may have physical or learning
stars. Airplanes, satellites, and meteors (or the light travels through water and air at different speeds as the
challenges.
“shooting stars”) move fast, so they’re easy to tell image comes to our eyes. This is a clue about twinkling stars. I
Participate actively in classroom from stars. want you to think about how light must travel through different
discussions. types of space a very long way, and what the light might
Planets also look like stars but don't twinkle like encounter as it comes to our eyes.
them! (Answer: The light from stars travels light years to enter our eyes. As the
light travels it must go through space that has a range of densities which
Research causes the light to slow and speedup. This causes the stars to appear to
twinkle)
Research the name of your constellation and write
down the story of how it got its name in your Questions About Stars- An Informational Video
notebook. Present this story to your class! Pose the following questions to learners BEFORE they watch
the video to promote active listen/watching.
Model of constellation https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vcueS7w3q-Y (1:00min)
1. What is the closest star to earth? (the sun)
2. Why can't we see stars during the day? (due to the bright
light of the sun)
3. How are stars and planets different? (stars produce their own
light and are bigger than planets)
238
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: How Big is the Sun?
https://www.bellmuseum.umn.edu/statewide-
starparty/3d-constellation/
Materials:
● String
● Pieces of thin cardboard
● Cardboard paper towel tube
● Scissors
Retrieved from:
● Markers or crayons
https://education.nationalgeographic.org/resource/sun/
Rubric:
Teacher Demonstration:
Creativity: 5 marks
Accuracy: 5 marks
Ask learners: How much bigger is the sun than our earth? Get
Neatness: 5 marks
them to compare a ball bearing (as earth) to: a marble (sun) or a
Content: 5 marks
golf ball (sun) or a cricket ball(sun) or soccer ball (sun).
Total: 20 marks
After having them guess, show them an exercise ball and point
out how massive the sun is compared to earth. Because the sun
gives off a lot of energy, make the point that even small changes
in distance between earth and sun would make life on earth very
difficult (too cool or too hot!).
Discussion point: light from the sun makes it really easy to see
things here on Earth, can you imagine living in a world without
light?
(expected answer: it would be dark and we would not be able to see anything)
Discussion point: What do you think would happen if the sun
moved one inch closer to the Earth? (Even a small move closer to the
239
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Photo retrieved from: sun could have a huge impact. That's because warming would cause glaciers
https://www.space.com/18964-the-nearest-stars- to melt, raising sea levels and flooding most of the planet)
to-earth-infographic.html
If the teacher has a model, they can show learners the
Nearest stars activity distribution of the sun and planets. See also:
Learners will complete the following worksheet https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qd6nLM2QlWw (11:54
which outlines the nearest stars and their distance mins)
from our planet in light years.
Ask the learners what is the distance from the school to the
Retrieved from: NEAREST STARS - PROBLEM nearest store? (maybe 1, 2 or 3 kilometres?)
SOLVING
The sun is 152, 000, 000 (152 million km away)
We can’t even imagine how far that is. The distance all the way
around the earth at the equator is only 40,000 kms!
Distance to Stars
Scientists have used very special instruments to measure the
distance from the earth to the planets and stars. The nearest star
beyond the sun is called Alpha Centauri and it is
40,208,000,000,000 km (40 trillion kms) away from the earth. In
the night sky, you may best find Alpha Centauri by looking for
the southern cross constellation first.
Questions:
1. Write down the distance of each star from
our planet to the nearest light year on the
table.
2. Write down the order of stars from our
planet, from 1 to 8, with 1 being the closest
and 8 being the furthest away.
240
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3. How much further is Ross 154 away from Retrieved from: https://www.duluthnewstribune.com/astro-
us than Barnard’s star? (3.72 light years) bob-what-would-the-sun-look-like-from-alpha-centauri
4. How much closer is Proxima Centauri to us
than Wolf 359? (4.05 light years)
“The ancient astronomers believed the stars were attached to a
5. How much further is Procyon away from
gigantic crystal sphere surrounding Earth. In that scenario, all
us than Sirius A? (2.82 light years)
6. Tyger says the “The distance to Proxima
stars were located at the same distance from Earth, and so, to the
Centauri and back is less than the distance ancients, the brightness or dimness of stars depended only on the
to Sirius A” Is this true? (it is true) stars themselves.”
7. Tyger says “In the time it takes light to Retrieved from: https://earthsky.org/astronomy-
travel from Earth to Procyon, it could get
essentials/stellar-luminosity-the-true-brightness-of-stars/
to Barnard’s Star and back again” Is he
correct? (he is correct)
We know now that the distance of the stars must have some
impact on their brightness. Compare the brightness of the sun to
Comparing the brightness of the sun to other
the brightness of Alpha Centauri?
stars and objects
How to Better Measure Distances to Stars and Planets.
Instruction:
Using the apparent magnitude scale below, answer
Because distances are so large from earth to most objects in the
the following questions
sky, scientists have developed another measure of distance. They
know that light travels 300,000 kms/sec.
A light-year is a measurement of distance a beam of light travels
in a single Earth year, which equates to approximately 6 trillion
miles (9.7 trillion kilometres).
What We Once Thought About Star Brightness
Retrieved from:
The ancient astronomers believed the stars were attached to a
https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-
gigantic crystal sphere surrounding Earth. In that scenario, all
astronomy/chapter/the-brightness-of-stars/
stars were located at the same distance from Earth, and so, to the
241
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1. Which object is the brightest? (the sun) ancients, the brightness or dimness of stars depended only on the
2. Which star is the brightest in our night sky stars themselves.”
in accordance with this magnitude scale?
Quote retrieved from:
(Sirius)
https://earthsky.org/astronomy-essentials/stellar-luminosity-the-
3. What is the apparent magnitude of
true-brightness-of-stars/
Betelgeuse? (0.5)
4. What is the approximate difference in
apparent magnitude between Barnard's star What We Know Now Is that Brightness is Linked to
and the faintest object visible to the Distance
unaided eye? (3)
5. According to this Scale, what is the name
For stars beyond 400 light years, astronomers use brightness
of the dimmest star in our night sky?
measurements. They determine a star's colour spectrum, which
(Bernard’s star)
indicates its actual brightness. By comparing this with the
apparent brightness as seen from Earth, astronomers can
Model of Stars:
estimate the star's distance.
based on the worksheet above create a model to
Stars exist in a range of colours: red, orange, yellow, green,
represent the ten brightest stars closest to the Earth
white and blue with red being the coolest and blue being the
in order of their distance.
hottest. A star's colour indicates it's temperature, composition
and relative distance from earth. Quote retrieved from:
Labels should include:
https://lovethenightsky.com/what-color-are-stars/
a. the name of the star
b. the distance of the star from the Earth
Instruments like telescope are useful for such measurements (see
Materials: Hubble here: https://hubblesite.org/home)
● cardboard
● paint Video resource to support light year discussion:
● string
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r1sxsMr-AMo (2:32 mins)
● playdough
● markers
Stars can give of equivalent energy – that brightness is called their
● scissors
luminosity.
242
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Rubric Learner Activity (3 learners) 2 torch bearers (flashlights) and 1
Creativity: 5 marks observer.
Accuracy: 5 marks Two identical flashlights with fresh batteries (torches) are taken
Neatness: 5 marks out on a dark evening and turned on. W would say the flashlights
Content: 5 marks have the same luminosity as they have the potential to give off an
Total: 20 marks equivalent amount of light energy.
One torch-bearer stands at 100 meters distance from the
observer and the other torch-bearer stands at 500 meters distance
from the same observer. From the observer’s perspective, which
torch light seems brighter? (100 meter). So learners, even though
they give off the same light energy, the increased distance impacts
the apparent brightness of the torches. . Distance therefore has
an impact on brightness.
Why do you think some stars appear brighter to us than others?
(The more distant an object is, the dimmer it appears. Therefore, if two stars
have the same level of brightness, but one is farther away, the closer star will
appear brighter than the more distant star - even though they are equally
luminous!)
Video resource for review:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zo-sKzMWYFA (5:09
mins)
243
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
James Webb Space Telescope: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oLtFCUjAnuk (1:44 mins)
The Sun for Kids
A star’s distance from Earth affects its brightness | MightyOwl Science | 5th Grade
Refraction
Closest Stars: https://www.space.com/18964-the-nearest-stars-to-earth-infographic.html
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Overview of the Solar System:
● The Solar System consists of the Sun and all the celestial objects that orbit around it, including planets, moons, asteroids, comets, and meteoroids.
● The eight planets in our Solar System, in order of their distance from the Sun, are Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.
● The inner planets (Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars) are rocky planets, while the outer planets (Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune) are gas giants.
● The dwarf planet Pluto was reclassified as such in 2006 by the International Astronomical Union
Characteristics of Stars:
○ Stars are massive, luminous spheres of plasma held together by gravity that emit light and heat.
○ Stars vary in size, temperature, colour, and brightness. The colour of a star is an indicator of its temperature; for example, blue stars are hotter
than red stars.
○ The Sun is a star located at the centre of our Solar System. It is classified as a yellow dwarf star.
What are the brightest stars, and how to find them?
What is Magnitude in Astronomy? Should We Use Apparent or Absolute?
244
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Mathematics:
Statistics: Analyse data related to the size, temperature, and distance of celestial bodies.
Language Arts:
Writing: Write creative stories or poems inspired by the mysteries of space.
Reading: Explore science fiction novels about space exploration and extraterrestrial life from school libraries
Visual Arts:
Create artwork inspired by space, such as paintings of galaxies or sculptures of planets.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Calculation/data/statistics
Reading
Location
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
https://www.leidensciencemagazine.nl/en/articles/strand-en-sterren-astronomie-op-de-caribische-eilanden
https://www.storytellingresearchlois.com/2015/02/stoddard-where-sun-and-moon-came-from.html
chrome-extension: //efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj/https://solar-center.stanford.edu/folklore/Solar-Folklore.pdf
245
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 3: Represent data in graphical displays to reveal patterns of daily changes in length and direction of
shadows, day and night, and the seasonal appearance of some stars in the night sky.
Clarification Statement: Examples of patterns could include the position and motion of Earth with respect to the sun and selected stars that are visible only in
particular months.
Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include causes of seasons.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Knowledge Presenting Field Trip Findings What are Learners Prior Ideas About Shadows
Learners to present an illustration to describe the
Define the terms: length and direction of the shadow formed from an To connect with learners’ prior knowledge on the topic, tell
• Shadow object observed during the field trip. For example, learners that some ancient civilizations used shadows to tell the
• Rotation time.
• Axis Ask- What are shadows? How are they formed? Why do
• Day and night you think that this could be possible? Do you think that
• Star our shadows look different at different times of the day?
• Orbit (shadows are dark areas created when an object blocks a light
source, preventing light from reaching the surface behind the object.
Demonstrate that they understand the There appearance of shadows may change if the position of the light
relationship between the position of source changes)
the sun relative to the earth and the
length of shadows created Perform an activity where learners are to investigate how
shadows are formed and the factors that affect their shape and
Explain how the position of the sun size.
relative to the earth influences day and
Retrieved from:
night.
https://images.app.goo.gl/Ev5sbFhWw9hv52uR9
246
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Account for apparent changes in the Instructions:
position of stars throughout the year
-Ask learners where they have seen shadows and what
Show how graphical displays can creates them (Shadows can be created anywhere, once there is a
represent data to reveal patterns of
light source and an opaque object which blocks its light)
daily changes in length and direction
of shadows, day and night and
Let Us Make Shadows
seasonal appearance of stars in the sky
-Divide learners into groups and give each group a set of
Skills
opaque objects, a flashlight, and a white sheet of paper
Classify bodies in the solar system as
-Learners are to place the paper on a wall or table, shine
stars, constellations, and planets
Retrieved from: the light on the paper, and take turns placing various
https://images.app.goo.gl/wX6SEpRFHgcbZykA8 objects and their hands between the paper and flashlight.
Observe the change in the length of
shadows at different times of the day
Rubric: Can you make these images?
Observe the change in the seasonal - Correct position of:
appearance of some stars in the sky Sun = 30%
Object = 30%
Infer the relationship between the Shadow/image = 30%
sun's position relative to the earth and - Neat and clear illustration = 10%
the length and direction of shadows
Construct a model to show how the Using Appropriate Vocabulary
earth’s rotation affects the occurrence
Place the following words in the proper blank to
of day and night
complete a logical paragraph.
Construct a model to show how the (Shadow, rotates, longer, shorter, bigger, east, west,
Retrieved from:
earth’s rotation affects the appearance rotation, sun, orbit)
https://www.reddit.com/r/coolguides/comments/f4thno/guide
of shadows
_for_hand_shadows/#lightbox
247
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Construct a graph to show the daily The sun is a star that provides the earth light and Distance & Direction of the Light Source Makes a
changes in the length and direction of heat. Over 24 hours, the earth ______ so that we Difference
shadows over a specified period are only seeing the sun a part of a 24-hour day. To -Have learners change the distance between the
start our daylight hours, the sun rises in the ______ flashlight and the object and observe the change in the
Analyse graphical data representing and at the end of the daylight hours it sets in the
shadow’s shape and size.
daily changes in length and direction ______. When the sun is low in the sky, we tend to
of shadows see _______ shadows of things like trees and power
-Learners should measure and record the lengths of the
poles. At the middle of the day , when the sun is
shadows and also the distances between the flashlight,
Analyse graphical data representing high in the sky and more directly overhead, we tend
object, and shadows.
seasonal changes of stars in the night’s to see _______ shadows. We know from our torch
sky experiments that the closer to the light source an
-Learners will then shine the light from above, the side,
object is, the ______ the shadow will be. This is
and at other angles and observe and record how the
Account for the change in the because the object blocks more of the light. We see
occurrence of constellations using a different stars and constellations in the night sky shadow’s shape and position changes
model of the earth’s orbit around the throughout the year because of the _______ of the
sun. earth as it ________ around the sun. -Learners will discuss their findings explaining their
observations of how distance and angle of light affect
Teacher copy
Track the change in constellations by shadows.
journaling your nightly observations The sun is a star that provides the earth light and
heat. Over 24 hours, the earth rotates so that we are When the light source is closer to the object the shadow is larger,
Explain how shadows and an only seeing the sun a part of a 24-hour day. To start when the light source is further from the object the shadow is
understanding of the sun’s behaviour our daylight hours, the sun rises in the east and at smaller.
can assist you in orienteering in the the end of the daylight hours it sets in the west. When the light source is directly above the object, the shadow is
forest. When the sun is low in the sky, we tend to see
short and directly below the object. When the light comes at an
longer shadows of things like trees and power poles.
angle, the shadow is longer and faces the direction opposite the light
Attitudes/Values At the middle of the day, when the sun is high in
source
the sky and more directly overhead, we tend to see
Develop an interest in the mechanisms shorter shadows. We know from our torch
Conduct a field trip in the school’s compound or surroundings to
responsible for changing positions and experiments that, the closer to the light source an
observe and discuss shadows of objects or themselves. Have
sizes of shadows, day and night, object is, the bigger the shadow will be. This is
learners work in small groups.
because the object blocks more of the light. We see
different stars and constellations in the night sky
248
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
seasons and changing the appearance throughout the year because of the rotation of the Guiding questions for discussion:
of stars earth as it orbits around the sun. - Look on the ground next to the object(s) you
identified, what do you observe
Orienteering
Develop respect for evidence-based (A shadow of the object)
reasoning by valuing the importance Two pieces of information can be very valuable if - How are shadows formed?
of evidence and data analysis in you get lost in the woods. Explain the significance (Shadows are formed when opaque objects block or prevent light
coming to conclusions about the of these types of information: from passing through them.)
effects of the earth’s rotation and orbit - What is the source of light that resulted in the
a) As you entered the wooded area in the early formation of the shadow(s) seen? (Sun)
morning, the sun was at your back. What
Work together to determine - In earlier grades, you would have learned cardinal
direction were you walking? (from east to
relationships between the rotation and points. Can you identify or locate your / the object’s
west) How will you know what direction to
orbit of the earth and their effects North, South, East and West?
return home at the end of the day? (the sun
- What is the direction of the sun?
will set in the west so you should walk in a
When conducting practical and group (West, East)
direction where the west -sun is at your back.)
work, display sensitivity and help peers - In which direction is the shadow formed? (West, East)
b) While you didn’t notice the time on your
who may have physical or learning watch, you paid particular attention to the - Describe the length of the shadow in relation to its
challenges. shadow of a tree as you entered a forest. object. (Taller, shorter, same size)
After a few hours of walking about, you - Look at two or more shadows; do they all have the
Participate actively in classroom noticed the shadow of the tree was much same length? Why?
discussions. smaller and then a few hours later it (No. they are different because the objects which formed them have
appeared to be larger again. What can you different heights.)
say about the period of time you witnessed
- Will the length or direction of the shadow change at
in the forest? (Before noon, the shadow would be
any time during the day? Give a reason for your answer.
relatively larger but as noon neared, the shadow
(Yes. The length and direction will change as time progresses during
would get smaller and then shortly after, gain in
the day due to the different positions of the sun.)
size again. You were probably spending time in the
- What movement of the earth may be responsible for
forest over the lunch-hour. At some point the sun
this? (Rotation of the earth on its axis from west to east)
would be very low in the sky, give a large shadow
and it should begin to approach sundown (we call
In small groups of 4-6 learners investigate to determine the
dusk))
relationship between the time of the day and the direction of the
shadows formed
249
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Working With Your Shadow Data Instructions
Present the completed Shadow Worksheet 1A - Have learners select an object or use themselves to
showing length and direction of shadow formed measure the height and note the direction of the shadow
five times during a day. formed at various times in the day.
Construct and present a bar graph (using the data
- Select a spot in the school’s compound/ yard and draw
collected during the investigation) showing the pattern of
the cardinal points on the ground. (Use this spot until the
the changes in the length of the shadow five times
investigation is completed)
during a day.
See Example below - Have a learner stand or place an object (large bottle,
upright stick, etc.) in the centre of the cardinal points
c) drawn on the ground.
- Instruct learners to complete a worksheet by measuring
the height of the shadow formed five times during the
day. (Ensure to tell learners to stand in the same position
and direction each time.) For example,
Retrieved from:
https://images.app.goo.gl/vjue34m8LJ2HsAnW6
250
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Rubric: Shadow Worksheet 1A
-Times of day correctly stated on the horizontal= 30%
- Length of shadow correctly stated on the vertical= 30%
- Bars drawn to height corresponding to length of shadow=
30%
- Neat and clear graph = 10%
Have learners share their findings with the rest of
the class.
Data Analysis Teacher’s Closure Discussion
- In which direction is the shadow when the sun is
in the east? (west)
- How does the sun move across the sky?(As the
earth rotates from west to east, the sun appears to move from
east to west)
-How does the length of the shadow change with
the movement of the sun across the sky? At sunrise,
the sun is low in the eastern sky and the rays of light strike
the earth at an angle that is almost parallel to it. The
shadows are long. As the sun rises higher in the sky the
shadow becomes shorter. At noon when the sun is the highest
point the shadow is its shortest. As the sun goes down
towards the western horizon the shadow become longer again
- When are shadows the longest/ shortest? (Shadows
are longest at sunrise and sunset and shortest at noon)
-What factors affect the length and direction of
shadows? (height of the object, angle and distance of light
source)
251
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Interpreting Data Expected Learner Findings to Review
Assign learners a group and have them work
together to answer the following questions about
the following graph:
Retrieved from: https://www.sciencebuddies.org/teacher-
resources/lesson-plans/shadow-play
Retrieved from:
https://images.app.goo.gl/yTVwzpxeTVEGrXLx6
Retrieved from: https://www.crestolympiads.com/topic/class-6-
What would be the length of the shadow at B am?
shadows
(22 cm)
What is the possible time of day at E pm? Give
Using a Globe Model
reason for your answer. (12pm, as the shadow it the
shortest)
To assist with understanding the directional aspects of the sun
making shadows…
-If you are walking into the woods in the morning
● Use a model of the earth (globe), light source (torch
and the sun is above and behind you, where will it
light), and objects to demonstrate patterns of daily
be in the late afternoon as you leave the forest on
252
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
the same path? (the sun should be behind you once again- changes in the length and direction of shadows due to
the sun rises in the east and sets in the west.) the rotational movement of the earth on its axis.
Even though time B & H have the approximately
Instructions:
the same length, how are the shadows different?
-Set up the globe on a flat surface
(the shadows would be pointed in the opposite
direction because the morning sun would be from
-Place the flashlight at a distance from the globe,
the east whereas the afternoon sun would be from
representing the sun. Position it so that it shines directly
the west)
onto the surface of the globe.
How Can We Use the Shadow to Tell Time?
-Turn on the flashlight.
● Have learners watch the video:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1SN1BOpL -Choose one object. Place it at a specific location on the
ZAs (4:52 mins) globe's surface.
-Ask learners how ancient civilizations were
-Observe and mark the initial position of the shadow
able to use shadows of the sun for telling
cast by the object on the surface. You can use markers or
the time. (direction and length of shadows change
tape to mark this position for reference.
at different times of the day)
-Rotate the globe slowly, representing the Earth's
● Tell learners that some ancient civilizations
rotation on its axis. As you rotate the globe, observe how
used an instrument called a sundial for
the position and length of the shadow changes.
telling time. This is an instrument that uses
the position of the sun to tell the time of
For example,
day.
● Have learners make a sundial for the
school:-See:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SeSex
M-wVzA (1:17 mins)
253
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://images.app.goo.gl/hQCdv19GcRx9EhR8A
Technology Resource
If technology is accessible, show the following video to reinforce
the ideas.
● Observe and discuss a video
Star Gazing Journal Shadows on earth - https://youtu.be/R8dLhdV6n00
(0:56 s)
Learners to create a star observation journal entry:
● Generate whole class discussion through questioning and
presentation of related information:
Instructions:
- How does the position of the sun in the sky result in
At night learners should go outside and changes in the length and direction of shadows?
observe the pattern of stars Explain to learners that as the earth rotates from west to east
on its axis, the sun appears to rise in the East. Opaque objects on
They should spend about 20 minutes Earth block the path of sunlight thereby forming shadows. As the
quietly observing and record the patterns earth rotates the sun appears to move at different positions and
and any changes that they observe into heights in the sky. This movement of the earth results in the
their journals using the following format: different lengths of shadows formed during the day with the shortest
shadow at midday and the longer shadows at mornings and
Date: afternoons.
While the position of the sun moves from East to west, the direction
Location of observation: of the shadow changes from west to east.
Time; (start and end) Why Do We Have Day and Night?
● To determine and activate prior knowledge and possible
Observations: Include sky conditions e.g. if it is
misconceptions on issues related to day and night, ask
clear or cloudy, take photos or video recordings of
learners to tell whether they believe that everyone on
the stars, draw the appearance of stars, describe any
earth experiences day and night at the same time.
changes over time, reflection on how this may have
254
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
affected your understanding of changing appearance ● The teacher performs a demonstration to show the
of stars in the night’s sky rotation of the earth on its axis and its influence on
causing day and night.
Rubric:
Instructions:
➢ Completed sections with detailed
observations and reflections -4
-Let learners know that you are going to use a
➢ Accurate observations- 4
globe/model of the earth to represent the earth and a
➢ Reflection demonstrating an
flashlight/lamp to represent the sun
understanding of the seasonal appearance
of stars in the night sky 2 -Place the globe or model of the earth on an uncluttered
➢ Neat, well organized entries - 2
table in good view of the class.
-Turn off the lights in the room and close windows (if
necessary) to create darkness.
-Hold the flashlight away from the globe, straight across
from its surface
-Ask participants to observe which parts of the earth are
illuminated by the "sun" (flashlight) and which parts are
in shadow.
-Rotate the globe slowly to simulate the earth's rotation
on its axis, while keeping the flashlight in the same
position relative to the globe.
-As you rotate the globe, ask learners to state which parts
are illuminated and which parts are in darkness. Ask
learners to explain what they believe that the persons
living in illuminated areas experience and what those
living in darkness experience. What does that tell us
about the rotation of the earth on its axis and day and
night? (As the earth spins on its axis different parts get
255
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
illuminated at different times. Illuminated areas experience daytime
and dark areas night time)
● Use the following picture to explain to learners how the
rotation of the earth on its axis causes day and night:
Retrieved from: https://encrypted-
tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcTwg_wMuZIoECpwC4_zYSPf
U0JyR8ZGnnaJv0cB_3pFMg&s
The earth is constantly spinning, like a top. This spinning of the earth on an
imaginary line called its axis is called the rotation of the earth. As the earth
spins, the part of the earth facing the sun gets illuminated and experiences
daytime. The part that faces away from the sun is in darkness and
experiences nighttime.
256
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Technology Resource: Animation of Day & Night
● Have learners watch the following animation and use it
to explain how the rotation of the earth on its axis causes
day and night
Retrieved from:
https://media2.giphy.com/media/3YHzWhog1v3HBk3oXm/gi
phy.gif?cid=6c09b952idkxfkj5l9vi9rtt8go0ycofqtj7665umqbbg05
1&ep=v1_internal_gif_by_id&rid=giphy.gif&ct=g
Stars & Constellations Change During the Year
● Ask learners ‘Have you ever looked up at stars in the
sky? What do the stars look like? Are they always the
same?
● Learners to use the simulation tool stellarium to observe
the appearance of stars at different times of the year
257
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Interactive Simulation Instructions:
Visit: https://stellarium-web.org
-Observe the appearance of patterns of stars in the night sky.
-On the stellarium app, change the time/date and observe how
the constellations change.
Ask: Why do you think the appearance of stars changes as time
changes?
Teacher to explain that constellations are groups of stars. They appear
different at different times of the year. This is because the earth is moving
(revolving) around the sun. As the earth revolves around the sun, we see
different parts of the night’s sky (similar to what happens when you are
moving around in a vehicle and staring out the window and the scenery
changes)
OR
Learners will observe the following picture:
Retrieved from:
https://orionbearastronomysite.files.wordpress.com/2019/01/summer-
winter.jpg?w=1230&h=768&crop=1
258
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Ask learners: Why do stars appear different with different
seasons? If observed through the year, the constellations shift gradually to
the west. This is caused by Earth's orbit around our Sun. In the
summer, viewers are looking in a different direction in space at night than
they are during the winter.
Retrieved from:
https://www.lpi.usra.edu/education/skytellers/constellations/
Technology Resource to Support Star Changes
● Teacher to use the following video to explain the
changing appearance of stars in the night’s sky:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U7yqx1hSqlw (4:19 mins)
259
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
https://htschool.hindustantimes.com/editorsdesk/knowledge-vine/from-sundials-to-modern-day-watches-how-clocks-evolved-through-ages
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N3EqcUNdIl8 (Video)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hXZPRocjXsU (Video)
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/501588477241446060/?lp=true (image)
https://betterlesson.com/lesson/resource/3210509/guiding-questions (Guiding research questions)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
The Big Dipper can be observed in the northern sky. It is useful because it helps you to locate the north polar star. Once you face the pole star (Polaris) you are
facing the direction north. The other direction can then be found. The Big Dipper can be seen high in the sky between 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. (and later)
between March and June. The stars of the Big Dipper which point to the north star are called the pointers.
Cassiopeia, shapes nearly like a W or an M, can usually be seen high in the northern sky early at night between October and February at a time when the Big
Dipper is too low (on the horizon) to be easily seen. It can also be used to find the north star.
Orion is very too easy to locate in the sky. It would usually be seen between November and March first in the eastern sky and progressively in the western sky
early at night.
The Pleiades (they are also called (Seven Sisters) appear as a small group of seven stars. They are easily seen high in the sky around Christmas or between
November and January.
Phases of the moon
Phases of the moon are the different ways the moon looks from the earth over about a month. As the moon orbits the earth, the half of the moon that faces the
sun will be lit up. The different shapes of the lit portion of the moon that can be seen from the earth are known as the phases of the moon.
Constellation
A group of stars which make up an imaginary outline or pattern in the night sky (the celestial sphere). Usually, they are said to represent an animal, mythological
person, or creature in shape.
260
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Language Arts:
Interpret texts containing descriptions of changes in the daily appearance of shadows, day and night cycles or changing appearance of stars in the night sky
Mathematics:
Measure length and direction of shadows and represent graphically, interpret these graphs
Social Studies:
Explore how different cultures interpreted the appearance of the constellations and their changing appearance
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated
Use of binoculars for observing the night’s sky
Use of the sundial for telling time
Evolution of modern-day clocks from the sundial
261
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Engineering
Introduction to the Subject
The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of caring not only for themselves, but as
responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic study of the structure and behaviour of the physical and
natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, learners benefit from leveraging and evaluating available technological tools to study and
therefore understand the world and their relationship to it.
Essential Learning Outcome 1: Plan and carry out fair tests in which variables are controlled and failure points are considered to identify
aspects of a model or prototype that can be improved.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Practising Vocabulary Human beings are very creative. They are constantly problem
Knowledge solving to make life better. Learners, I am sure you have heard
Learners should use the clues below to complete the the word technology before. Many people think technology is
Define the terms: crossword puzzle. just computers. Actually, technology has been given a simple
• Technology definition: “a way of adapting”.
• Volts
• Potential Learners, I want you to look at the following picture and see if you can
identify technology. In other words, ways that humans have adapted their
• Electrical Circuit
world to make life easier.
• Electric Current (electrons)
• Direct Current (DC)
• Alternating Current (AC)
• Electric Switch
• Conductor
262
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Insulator
• Simple Machine
• Lever
• Mechanical Advantage
• Effort Force
• Class of Lever
• Inclined Plane
Grade
• Wheel 5
• Spring Balance
• Ideal Mechanical Advantage
• Wedge
• Screw
• Hinge
• Slot/Philips/Roberson/Allen
• Stress
• Geodesic Dome
• Collar and Rafter Ties
• Struts
Demonstrate with a picture that they
understand the difference between first-, Teacher’s Copy Teacher Notes
second- and third-class levers.
Overhead light (Invention of Electricity)
Compare electrical circuits that will Hinges (Attached by Screws)
generate light and those that won’t.
Door latch (Example of a Lever)
Light Switch (Electrical Circuit)
Give examples of devices that operate by
Ramp (Example of an Inclined Plane)
alternating current.
Let us look at each of these technologies.
Give examples of devices that operate by
direct current.
263
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Account for how a switch controls Electricity
whether a device is able to operates by Retrieved from: https://crosswordlabs.com
dc/ac. Often to operate a flashlight or small radio we need a battery.
Electricity: One-page Response What do we see written on the battery? (some number of volts)
Explain with a diagram how a lever can
solve a problem.
Draw a picture of a complete circuit that includes a Volts are a measure of the potential for the battery to do work.
battery, a light and a switch. Explain how the switch If we take a copper wire and attached it to a battery and a light
Distinguish between insulator and
works to control the light. (preventing the flow of bulb, we can get the bulb to light but only if it is a closed loop.
conductor using examples.
electrons to the bulb eliminates the glowing the accompanies Below you can see that the first two arrangements would not
Give examples of common devices that electron flow in the filament) light a bulb. The closed cycle in the third picture is referred to as
make use of insulating materials. an electrical circuit.
Insulators vs. Conductors
Identify and describe simple mechanical 1. Use examples to explain the typical
devices (hinges, screws, screw drivers) (ST
characteristics of conductors and insulators.
2 PS FMS 4)
(conductors often metallic)
Realise the importance of safety in
2. Do internet research to investigate and
handling tools an making gadgets. (ST 2
report to your peers on at least three
TE NT 3)
examples of how humans have used
Formulate problems and do research in insulators as a technology to make life Retrieved from:
development of technological devices. e.g. better. (jumper cables, pan handles, screwdriver https://www.edu.xunta.gal/centros/iesfontexeria/aulavirtual
construct models and gadgets. (ST 3 TE handles)
TM 1) But what is happening in the wire? The wire and the tiny
Lever: Calculations of Effort (differentiated for filament (wire) in the bulb have something in them called
Identify and explain the ways in which
stronger learners) electrons. When we add a battery to a wire in a complete cycle,
strengthening mechanisms are used to
the battery makes the electrons move which we call electric
resist stress in structures under load. E.g.
current. When the electrons move through a thin wire (filament)
struts to resists compression, ties to resists
in a bulb it causes the wire to heat up and glow. This type of
tension. (ST 4 PS FMS 7)
current from a battery is called direct current (abbreviated DC).
Identify and describe how forces can alter The electricity in our homes is different. It doesn’t come from a
shapes of objects. E.g. bending, stretching, battery; it is generated elsewhere and brought into our houses
pulling, twisting. (ST 4 PS FMS 8) with large wires. It is called alternating current (abbreviated
AC). We can still put AC through a filament in a bulb and
generate light.
264
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Explain how ties can be used in roof Retrieved from: https://www.twinkl.es/teaching-
construction to mitigate the effects of wiki/first-class-lever Switches Interrupt Electricity Flow
strong winds. If you look at the diagram of a direct current circuit below, you
In this model, the following relationship can be see that we can break the cycle by putting in an electric switch.
Identify and name parts of a simple circuit
proven out by experimentation: If the switch is opened, the electrons cannot complete the cycle
and demonstrate by setting one up. (ST 5
by moving from one end of the battery to the other. Therefore,
PS EN 1)
Effort Distance x Effort Force =Load Distance the filament will not glow and provide light. In our picture of the
x Load Force door above, you can see a light and a switch; both are important
Distinguish giving examples, the
differences between conductors and technologies (inventions.)
insulators. (ST 5 PS EN 2) Have learners fill in the following table (and, if
equipment invites, demonstrate their intuition about the
Name the instrument used to measure numbers using a metre stick, fulcrum, masses and a force
force and the unit in which it is measured. spring scale)
(ST 5 PS FMS 1)
Effort Effort Load Load
Identify a number of common levers and
Force Distance Force Distance
describe how they operate to make work
(Newtons) (cm) (Newtons) (cm)
easier. (ST 5 PS FMS 3)
? (5) 20 10 10 Retrieved from: https://scienceshifu.com/what-are-series-and-
Name the points of a lever giving some 10 20 20 ? (10) parallel-circuits/
common examples. (ST 5 PS FMS 4) 10 ? (15) 10 15
15 30 ? (10) 45 Experiments
Identify the main parts of a wheel and an
axle giving examples and describing how Draw a Picture of the Three Classes of Levers. If the teacher has the materials (wire, battery, light and switch
the objects function. (ST 5 PS FMS 5)
Give an example of each type of lever. they should have learners build the circuit by hand.
If the teacher has access to the internet they should have learners
Define a simple machine, giving examples,
and explaining how they make work easier.
build the circuit below using the PHET simulation at:
(ST 5 PS FMS 6)
https://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulations/circuit-construction-
kit-dc
Infer that an incline plane decreases the
force required to lift an object. (ST 5 PS
FMS 8)
Calculating the Ideal Mechanical Advantage of
Account for how a wedge is simply an
a Wedge (differentiated calculation for stronger
example of an inclined plane and list
learners)
265
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
examples of its use, explaining how they Test 1: what happens to the brightness of the bulb if you double
work. (ST 5 PS FMS 9/ ST 6 PS FMS 11) the number of batteries in the circuit above? (the light gets brighter).
Explain why this happens? (with two batteries you have twice the
Skills potential to push electrons through the circuit)
Test 2
Observe a picture and identify human
What happens to the brightness if you pass the current through
inventions (door example)
two bulbs one after the other? (the bulbs will be dimmer) Why does
this happen? (some of the energy from the electron flow is spent in each of
Use pictures and classroom materials to
the bulbs so that over the light is dimmer)
build simple circuits and explain how they
operate to provide a lit bulb.
(IMA = 10/3 = 3.33) What Materials Invite Electrons to Flow?
Classify items which operate by direct Learners, what does this number mean? The teacher should set up a demonstration that resembles the
current or alternating current. (This means, that ideally, for an effort force of 1 directed diagram below
down on the wedge you get an output force of 3.33)
By experiment, distinguish conductors and
insulators.
Point A
Build a Wind-Powered Car
By experiment, distinguish the effort force
required for various configurations of the
Design retrieved from:
first-class lever.
Point B
MacKinnon, G. R. (2001). Mass production: Not at
Measure the force to pull and object up an all beyond elementary school curriculum, Technology
inclined plane using a spring balance. and Children 5(2), 3-8. Questions for learners:
Measure the force to lift an object using a Design Challenge If we place a copper wire between Points A & B, we know that
spring balance. the lightbulb will glow from electron flow. We would say that
The instructions below would invite a copper is a conductor of electricity.
Calculate the ideal mechanical advantage
teacher/learners to build a model car. It is only If we place a piece of wood (maybe a ruler) between Points A &
(IMA) of an incline plane.
meant as a possible starting design. Learners in B, the lightbulb will remain unlit. We would say that wood acts as
groups would be expected to create a prototype car an insulator because it does not invite electrons to flow.
Describe the process by which a hinge can
which a single learner would race down a hallway by Let us predict whether the following bridging items will be
be properly installed on a door.
blowing behind the sail. If the hallway is wide conductors or insulators and then test them to confirm our
Use drawings to explain how ties can be enough, several cars could be raced at once. If it is a predictions.
used in constructing a roof to resist high narrow hallway, the teacher could establish a
winds. starting line and a finish line and record the time of
266
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Perform calculations on effort force and travel. To be a true “controlled” experiment to test Material between A & B Conductor or Insulator?
load for a range of first-class lever. the speed of the prototypes, the same person should Aluminium foil
supply the wind power for the trials. String
Calculate ideal mechanical advantage for a
Plastic
wedge.
The variables that learners can test for speed by Rubber eraser
Evaluate, design and build a prototype design are: Iron nail
wind car. • The shape and size of the sail Pencil with exposed
• The size of the cans used for the wheel graphite ends
Use Fablab software to create three assembly. Glass
dimensional geometric figures that may
• The size of the rectangle frame Paper clip
assist with the design of stronger
structures.
Beginning design Note: If the teacher has the materials, they may also try water
and salt water. Conduction of the salt water can be explained by
Having measured force acting on an
object using a spring balance, design and Materials needed: the fact that NaCl (salt) breaks up into sodium and chloride parts
use a simple device used to measure force. called ions that invite for electrons to flow.
(ST 5 PS FMS 2) Car Frame: (8mm x 8mm x18 cm) 4 per car
(recommend precut for learners) Design Features That Rely on Conductors/Insulators
Predict the force that will balance a lever We use the property of conduction in our technology design if
with an off-centre fulcrum. (ST 6 PS FMS Cross Member Support for Mast (8 cm x 8cm x we want electricity to flow. A copper wire often has plastic or
4)
21 cm) drill hole for upright mast rubber coating. The copper wire we want to conduct the
electricity but we know it will come in contact with other
Research the use of a wheel in a variety of
Corner Triangles: (4 cm x 4cm x 5cm) 8 triangles objects (including our hands) so we put an insulator on the
situations, citing their impact. (ST 6 PS
per car frame (recommend heavy stock paper) outside so the electricity doesn’t flow beyond the copper wire
FMS 5)
and give us a shock!
Examine the use of simple machines in
simple devices in the home and Learners have you ever seen one of these?
community. E.g. openers, egg beaters, White or Hot Glue: to affix paper corners on
Retrieved from:
seesaws (ST 6 PS FMS 6) wooden frame.
https://www.electricaleasy.com/2
016/10/insulators-used-in-
Attitudes/Values Axle Dowels: (21cm x .64 cm) 2 per car
overhead-power-lines.html
Identify and appreciate that the gadgets, Mast Dowel: (22cm x 0.5 cm)
tools and structures used in their homes
Often on older electrical poles we see glass pieces holding the
and communities are made by humans.
Soda Can circles (5.5 cm diameter Bristol board) high voltage wire. The glass acts as an insulator so that the
(ST 3 TE UT 1)
267
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Demonstrate interest/curiosity to design a electricity only goes through the wire and doesn’t jump to other
better wind car. Rubber tubing (axle stops): (0.64 cm diameter) objects.
Demonstrate a spirit of inquiry as learners
Rubber bands: 1 cm width- 6 per car Door Handles as Levers
perform experiments.
In recent years, door handles have been redesigned to make
Sail: standard 8.5 x 11 inch, sheets with holes doors easier to open especially by occupants that may have
Demonstrate an appreciation for past
punched for mast physical challenges grabbing a traditional round doorknob.
cultures who exercised human
ingenuity/inventiveness to gain
mechanical advantage over enormous Learners, have you ever seen somebody move a rock with a
tasks. piece of wood and a pivot point (triangle in this picture).
It might look something like this picture.
Demonstrate a spirit of collaboration &
cooperation as learners worked together
on experiments.
Demonstrate an appreciation of the
importance of safety as we construct
Retrieved from: https://www.twinkl.es/teaching-wiki/first-
things in our classroom and in the greater
class-lever
world.
When conducting practical and group Why do you suppose they use this combination of objects when
work, display sensitivity and offer they could just lift the rock out of the way? (it might be easier to
assistance to peers who may have physical use this approach). It definitely takes less effort to lift the rock
or learning challenges. using this simple machine we call a lever. Have you ever
heard the word advantage? Can you use it in a sentence? What
Participate actively in classroom
does it mean in this sentence? Josephine crossed the finished
discussions.
line in the race because she had the advantage of longer legs.
(she was well-suited for running). When we use simple machines like
the lever, we do so because we are getting a mechanical
advantage; it is easier to complete the task with the machine.
For instance, humans invented the wheel for things like trolleys
and wheelbarrows because it took less effort to move heavy
items than simply carrying them by hand. Where else do see the
mechanical advantage of a wheel used? (bicycles, cars, prams,
pianos, medical stretchers)
268
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Problem With Levers
Which arrangement of a lever do you think would take the least
effort to lift the stone (load) by applying an effort force
downward at the red arrow? Why?
Our intuition is that the second lever arrangement would
require the least effort force downward. Try it with a ruler,
eraser and book!
As car prototypes are compared for speed, learners
should make note of the features that promote the
fastest designs.
Retrieved from: https://letstalkscience.ca/educational-
resources/backgrounders/simple-machines-levers
This is one type of lever called a first-class lever.
The learners should submit a report that responds In a first-class lever, the fulcrum is located between the load
to the following rubric: and the effort. When the fulcrum is closer to the load, then
➢ Statement of the design challenge: less effort is needed to move the load.
2 marks
269
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
➢ Sketch with dimensions: 5 marks Other types of levers help us solve practical problems.
➢ Materials list: 3 marks
➢ ‘Recorded data from trials in a neat
table (com paring group designs:5
marks
➢ Discussion of best designs and the
rationale for the features that
seemed to promote the fastest cars:
5 marks
NOTE: In assembly of prototype wind cars,
learners should exercise caution as they use
tools to cut wood and bore holes in wood and
metal
Retrieved from: https://worksheetzone.org/the-three-classes-of-
Extension Activity- levers-
1) Integration of Mathematics and
Strength of Objects More Simple Machines That Give us Mechanical Advantage
The teacher may download the following FABLAB
software and with the aid of a printer, learners can
construct geometric shapes that contribute to
strength in the design of gadgets.
See:
https://fablab-
modelmaker.software.informer.com/
2) Integration with Language Arts Retrieved from:
Design technology: https://steemit.com/technology/@ghostgtr/how-stuff-works-
See The Boy Who Harnessed the Wind machines-and-energy
270
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_YL9 The inclined plane is a simple machine that has helped humans
a-LOq- a very long time. A good example is the building of the
8&list=PL8VcP9QsZOJ42LQZHuyABBb pyramids in Egypt. These structures were made of large stones
01DOFQZL2L (2:32 mins) and it was near impossible for the workers to lift the stones
but…they had the necessary effort force to slide it on a ramp
that we call an inclined plane.
Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QuwUiaMag9Y (20.50
mins)
They also would place logs under the stone to help it roll up
the plane. This demonstrates human problem solving in that
the logs were an early version of the wheel, yet another simple
machine.
➢ What re the parts of a wheel? (axle, spokes, circumference)
➢ How is the mechanical advantage of wheels used for
devices in our world today? (wheelbarrow, carts, cars,
bicycles, pulleys, water wheels)
271
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://pixabay.com
A video resource to teach about the wheel and axle if the
teacher has access to technology.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FT_5lICNVtw (1:25
mins)
The teacher can pose the following questions to learners
before they watch the video:
a) what are 5 examples of the wheel and axle in the
video. (well wheel, steering wheel car and boat, hand
drill, rolling pin, bike pedal)
b) How does the wheel and axle apply mechanical
advantage? (larger wheel with less effort turns smaller wheel
many times)
Measuring Forces With A Spring Balance
Let us see the difference in effort force by using a force
meter (called a spring balance) to measure the force
necessary to:
a) Lift a mass (marbles in a bag) directly upward against
gravity. What is the force measure?
b) Pull the same bag of marbles up a ramp. What is the
force measure?
272
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
It should look like this:
Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gc4rY_n3n0Y
You may pull the marbles a longer distance than a direct lift
but, you will find that the effort force is less. The inclined
plane gives us a mechanical advantage.
Calculating the Ideal Mechanical Advantage.(IMA)
Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QuwUiaMag9Y (20.50
mins)
273
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
I M A = 15/4 = 3.75
This is saying that ideally using the ramp to lift this car is
almost 4 time easier than lifting the cart from the floor to the
top of the ramp.
But if you use a spring balance to actually measure the ratio
of the Force to lift the cart versus the Force to drag the cart
up the plane you will get a number for mechanical advantage
smaller than 3.75 (maybe 3.25) in other words, the Actual
Mechanical Advantage A M A). The AMA is always smaller
than the IMA!
Learners, why do you think we don’t get quite as much
mechanical advantage as we thought? (friction between the
load and the surface of the ramp)
In our picture at the beginning of class we see a ramp leading
up to the door. Particularly for a learner in a wheelchair, the
effort force to cruise up the ramp is less than lifting the chair
from the ground to the door sill, something that would not
be possible for a person confined to a wheelchair.
More Examples of Inclined Planes: Wedge& Screw
The shape of an inclined plane is special. If we turn it to face
the point down, it resembles another important simple
machine called a wedge. Learners, can you tell me some
examples of where we use a wedge? (door-stop, closing up cracks
in wood floors, splitting wood).
274
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://inventorsoftomorrow.com/2016/10/12/wedges-2/
If you look closely at a screw, you will see that it is really just
an inclined plane wrapped around a centre cylinder. The
example below is a paper inclined plane wrapped around a
pencil.
Retrieved from:
https://www.geocities.ws/jaywilliams.geo/simmach.html
Learners, what problem does the screw solve for us; how are
they used?
(fasteners for wood and metal).
Did you notice the hinge on the door in our first picture? It is
a very useful technology for inviting a door to swing open and
closed but…it needs to be fastened to the door and the casing
surrounding the door in order to operate. That is where a
screw is useful. Keep in mind, that as the screw is inserted into
wood, it exerts great force on the wood.
How do you suppose a screw is used to fasten a hinge on a
door? (we use a screwdriver as a tool to insert the screw).
Screws have different head impressions, so we have to choose
the correct screwdriver. Can you tell me the shape on the
screw heads you have observed?
275
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Slot Phillips Robertson Allen
In early days carpenters only had access to slot screws. Why
did humans invent more head designs? (the slot screwdriver would
slip out of the slot when great twisting motion (torque) was applied. The
new heads reduced the slippage.)
So, to place a hinge on the door, we would:
• select wood screws of a length that could hold our
heavy door.
• choose a good screw head design to reduce slippage.
• keep the wood from splitting, by marking the screw
holes in the hinge (while it was held to the door in the
right position) and drilling small holes where the
screws will be inserted.
• Turn the screw in a clockwise motion until it pressed
the hinge hard against the door.
Nuts and bolts are also useful fasteners that make use of a
spiral thread like the screw. We can fasten items together by
holding the bolt tightly with a wrench and turning the nut
clockwise to tighten, counterclockwise to loosen.
276
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://www.britannica.com/technology/bolt-fastener
Technological Designs That Enhance Structural Support
You will notice in our initial door picture that the inclined
plane has supporting structures that serve to strengthen the
ramp. If those supports were not in place, what might happen
to the ramp? (it could collapse under stress)
Humans have developed many supporting
structures/inventions to resist the stress that large forces put
on the object.
Learner investigation on the internet
Identify and describe how forces can alter shapes of objects.
E.g. bending, stretching, pulling, twisting
Human beings have done much work to create stronger
structures. A bridge for example or geodesic dome use
triangles to improve strength.
277
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://usbridge.com/bridges/
Geodesic Domes are particularly strong. They use to be used
for enclosing radar for tracking airplanes at airports.
Retrieved from:
https://www.britannica.com/technology/geodesic-dome
278
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Scaffolding for building construction is another example of
how stress forces can be reduced by structural ties.
Retrieved from:
https://superiorscaffoldingauckland.co.nz/metal-frame-
scaffolding/
Ties Are Used to Support Housing Structures
Depending on the force that is placed on a roof, collar ties
and rafter ties help to maintain the structure from collapsing.
279
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://www.finehomebuilding.com/project-
guides/framing/how-it-works-collar-and-rafter-ties
Struts to Reduce Compression
Struts are used in airplanes to strengthen the wheel assembly
against violet bumps as the airplane lands.
Retrieved from: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strut
Struts are used in automobiles to reduce abrupt bumps in the
road.
280
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://image.slidesharecdn.com/final-
191112194440/75/members-under-compression-concept-of-
columns-and-struts-concept-of-buckling-3-
2048.jpg?cb=1669134382
Ask learners where they have seen struts used? (motorcycles, jet
airplanes, bicycles, ATVs, minivan rear window supports)
Additional Resources and Materials
Conductors/Insulators: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pr0VC0o3uqQ (6:05 mins)
Inclined planes: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sTOWiDDgTIk (2:55 mins)
Levers:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fzljPiPy9nw (2:43 mins)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MWHRVnQ9O4I (3:24 mins)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A0y_2b8SSbs (6:16 mins)
Wheel and Axle: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FT_5lICNVtw (1:25 mins)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
More examples of Simple Machines :
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fvOmaf2GfCY (6:11 mins)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tk9iUjMEnaY (5:41 mins)
Mechanical Advantage Calculations:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wIaHQsxGj78 (8:02 mins)
https://www.teachengineering.org/lessons/view/cub_simple_lesson04
281
Grade 5 Science Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Extension Activities:
1) Integration of Mathematics and Strength of Objects
The teacher may download the following FABLAB software and with the aid of a printer, learners can construct geometric shapes that contribute to
strength in the design of gadgets.
See: https://fablab-modelmaker.software.informer.com/
2) Integration with Language Arts
Design technology:
See The Boy Who Harnessed the Wind
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_YL9a-LOq-8&list=PL8VcP9QsZOJ42LQZHuyABBb01DOFQZL2L (2:32 mins)
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated
➢ Understanding variables in science experiments helps us design problem solving tools (technologies) to improve the human condition.
➢ Use of tools and the design loop
➢ Island’s participation in FIRST Global Robotic Challenge.
Participants get to build prototype robots to execute a task/challenge. https://first.global/fgc/
The 2024 challenge https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VoT_eVi7vQ0&t=20s
Saint Lucia https://first.global/2023-nations/saint-lucia-2023/
https://first.global/2024-nations/saint-lucia-2024/
Grenada https://first.global/2023-nations/grenada-2023/
https://first.global/2024-nations/grenada-2024/
Saint Vincent https://www.stvincenttimes.com/svg-robotics-team-placed-67th-at-first-global-challenge-2023/
https://first.global/2024-nations/saint-vincent-and-the-grenadines-2024/
Dominica https://first.global/2024-nations/dominica-2024/
Items of Inspiration
This ELO purposely included practical everyday knowledge around the use of simple machines
282
