‘
OHPC GRADE 4 SOCIAL STUDIES
June 2024
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Historical and Cultural Thinking
Introduction to the Strand: This particular strand consists of two broad themes. The first explores the Indigenous peoples of the
Caribbean and European colonisation. Students will learn about the Taíno and Kalinago people, their way of life, contributions to
the region, and how European colonisation affected their societies. The second delves into the evolution of communication and
transportation technology over time. Students will explore how these advancements have transformed the way we communicate,
travel, and access information. It is anticipated that through these units, students will develop a deeper understanding of the
historical and cultural factors that have shaped the Caribbean region. Additionally, students will develop a greater appreciation for
the rich diversity of the Eastern Caribbean and the resilience of its people in the face of colonisation and technological change.
Essential Learning Outcome: To recognise that contact with Europeans brought significant changes for Indigenous peoples.
Grade Level Expectations: Students would be able to:
1. Identify the places in the Caribbean where the Indigenous people settled.
2. Describe the way of life of the Indigenous people before contact with Europeans.
3. Recognize that the Indigenous peoples had flourishing societies before the arrival of the Europeans.
Focus Question:
1. What was life like for Indigenous peoples before contact with Europeans?
2
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to: Pre-assessment - Observation: Are Introduction (Pre-assessment/Review) - Circle
students able to recall accurate Time Group Activity:
4-HCT-K-1 - Describe the basic
information about the origin and
economic and social life of the
culture of the Indigenous people • Students form a circle and take turns sharing
Indigenous people of the
before the coming of the Europeans? their thoughts and reflections on what they
Caribbean before contact with
have learned using “I remember/learnt”
Europeans
statements. For example: “I remember the
Taino people came to the Caribbean by
________________ I remember they
worshipped _______________. I remember
they planted ______________________ .
OR
Think –Pair-Share:
• In pairs, students select “I remember
statements” about aspects of Indigenous
people’s culture from a spinning wheel
(digital or hand-made) or basket and discuss
it with their peers.
• Students share with the class the main
Observation: Do students’ KWL
aspects of Indigenous peoples’ lifestyle that
Chart show at least one question,
they remembered.
constructed by students, on what they
• Students and teachers create a summary of
want to find out about the indigenous
the main ideas shared by students.
people?
• Teacher explains to the students that the
lesson will provide more information on the
Indigenous people. Then states the topic and
objectives of the lesson.
3
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product: KWL Chart Completion- KWL Chart:
Does the KWL ‘What I have learnt’ • Students fill the “ What I know” in the KWL
column reflect accurate content matrix by stating what one fact they recall
presented in the video? about the indigenous peoples before the
Europeans came to the Caribbean in the “K’-
What I know column.
• Students develop questions that they will like
Product - (Roleplay/Hands-on to find answers to about the Indigenous
Demonstration): Can students people.and write questions in the ‘W’-
demonstrate features of Indigenous “What I Want To Know” column. Example
culture before the Europeans came to of KWL chart:
the Caribbean?
What I want to find out.
Product - Can students describe at
least two basic artefacts used in
the economic and social life of the
Indigenous people before
the European arrival?
Artefacts - Indigenous People
+
Artefacts Uses Importance
Clay pot Cooking Provide meals
4
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Video Inferencing / Discussion & KWL
Completion:
• Students view a video on the economic and
social life of the indigenous peoples of the
Caribbean before the coming of the
Europeans. (See videos : Tainos: History and
Traditionsand The Kalinago/ Caribs, Caribbean
History)
• After the video, students and the teacher
identify and discuss additional facts about the
way of life of the Indigenous peoples of the
Caribbean before the coming of the
Europeans.
• Students record the new information by
completing the KWL table by filling in the
last column ‘L -What I Learnt’.
Roleplay/Hands-on Demonstration:
• Students engage in hands-on demonstrations
(or share pictures) of traditional practices and
customs. Teachers select ONE from the list
below or create a suitable option.
i. Prepare a dish (e.g. pepper-pot, cassava
bread, making corn flour)
ii. Identify ingredients or create a recipe of one
of the traditional dishes.
iii. Create traditional crafts (e.g. jewellery,
baskets, zemi, bow & arrow, hammocks)
iv. Roleplay bartering system
5
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
v. Face painting or creating designs for face
painting
vi. Learn phrases or song in the
Garifuna/Kalinago language
Journal Entry - Data Disk:
• Students complete a data disk reflecting the
basic social and economic life of the
Indigenous peoples of the Caribbean and
stick it into their journals. Example of Data
Disk:
• Students also share their reflections in a data
disk with their peers to promote further
discussion and learning.
Field Trip/Report:
• Students visit a local museum or cultural
centre that exhibits artefacts related to the
social and economic life of the Indigenous
peoples before the coming of the Europeans.
Students will participate in a virtual field trip
if a physical site is not accessible.Indigenous
Caribbean People - Read by Paul Campbell for
Island SPACE Magic at the Museum
• During the visit/viewing, students will use a
checklist to guide their exploration and take
notes on the artefacts and exhibits they view.
• Students create a report of their observations
using any of the following modes: written
6
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
report, oral presentation, artistic expression-
drawing/painting or slideshow. Guiding
questions could include:
1. What three facts did I learn?
2. What did I enjoy most about ?
3. Would you encourage others to visit?
Why?
• Students share their reflections and engage in
whole-class discussion.
• Teacher uploads student reflections to
Google Classroom, Microsoft Teams or
Smart Term for future access. Students'
reflections can also be displayed in
classrooms.
4-HCT-S-1 - Chart the location Product - Mapwork: Are students Mapwork:
where Indigenous people of the able to accurately identify the specific • Students conduct research using the textbook
Caribbean were living before islands and regions where Indigenous or any other suitable resource (hard copy or
contact with Europeans. peoples of the Caribbean resided digital) to find out the places inhabited by the
before the Europens arrived? indigenous peoples before the Europeans
came to the Caribbean.
• Students look at these places on a map, using
Atlas, Google Earth or other resources.
• On a blank map of the Caribbean region,
students in groups identify, label and colour
the areas where Indigenous people were
known to have inhabited before European
arrival in the Caribbean.
• Students will use Google maps or atlas to
research and accurately mark the locations.
7
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4-HCT-V-1- Appreciate that the Conversation - Critical thinking: Whole class discussion:
Indigenous people of the Fact Finding Corners Are students • Students share some elements of the
Caribbean had flourishing able to provide evidence of Indigenous Indigenous peoples that illustrate their
societies and economies before peoples’ flourishing societies and society was flourishing.
contact with Europeans. economies before the Europeans came • Students create a definition of ‘flourishing’
to the Caribbean? after discussion with the teacher.
• Students use a checklist provided by the
teacher to match the elements of a flourishing
society that were present in the societies and
economies of the indigenous people.
Example of checklist:
Statements Yes No
1. They planted their own food.
2. They created their own forms of
transportation
3. They had their own religion.
4. They lived in villages headed by a chief.
5. They engaged in bartering, fishing and
hunting.
6. They had their own entertainment (e.music,
dance, ball game).
7. They educate their children about their
culture
8
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
8. They educated their children about their way
of life (food preparation, basket weaving, hunting)
9. They made useful tools (e.g. weapons -
spears, bow and arrows)
10. They developed skills in making pottery,
baskets, hammocks, jewelry, carving etc.
• Students create a statement of affirmation
that the Indigenous peoples had flourishing
societies and economies before the
Europeans arrived in the Caribbean.
Fact Finding Corners:
• Teacher presents the following statement to
students: “The Indigenous societies and
economies of the Caribbean were flourishing
in many ways before the Europeans'
arrival.”
• Students are guided to move to a corner of
the room that represents elements of a
flourishing society. For example:
i. Corner 1-Food,
ii. Corner 2- Transportation,
iii. Corner 3- Religion,
iv. Corner 4- Leadership,
v. Corner 5- Economies (bartering, fishing,
hunting, farming)
vi. Corner 6- Defense (creating/using
weapons)
9
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Students present examples or evidence to
show where the Indigenous societies and
economies were flourishing before the arrival
of the Europeans.
Additional Resources and Materials:
Videos: (Display excerpts or snippets of videos, rather than the whole films where possible, to save time and engage
students visually.)
1. The Caribs
2. The People Who Came to the Caribbean | Ethic Groups, Place of Origin & Time of Arrival
3. Christopher Columbus and the Taino People
4. https://youtu.be/lxnDJybshOc?feature=shared
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
• The Indigenous people were the first inhabitants of the Caribbean:
o Tainos settled in the Greater Antilles, including present-day Cuba, Jamaica, Hispaniola (Haiti and the Dominican
Republic), and Puerto Rico.
o Kalinagos settled in the Lesser Antilles namely, St. Lucia, Grenada, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, and Dominica.
o Both groups shared the islands of Trinidad and Puerto Rico.
• Indigenous societies had their own social structures, and economic practices:
o Their communities were called Chiefdoms.
o Religion played an important role in their way of life.
o They were farmed, fished and bartered to meet their needs in their societies.
10
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
• Their societies practiced cultural traditions, including pottery-making and stone-carving.
• The arrival of Europeans brought significant changes to their way of life:
o Colonisation, the Europeans took control of them.
o Their land was stolen/taken away by the Europeans
o They were forced to work on the Europeans’ farm, and find gold for them
o Many died from new diseases such as influenza, smallpox, and yellow fever.
o They were punished for practicing their own culture and tradition.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
• Language Arts: Vocabulary building- Meaning of words (Indigenous, barter, ancestor, chiefdom, colonisation,
practices, beliefs, economy, population, tradition, culture, religion)
• Science: Types of materials used to create products e.g. pottery, hammocks, canoes, dye, stone carving etc.
• Arts and Crafts: Creating pottery etc
• Mathematics: Barter (ratio)
• HFLE - Respect for others
11
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: To recognise that the arrival of Europeans brought significant changes for Indigenous peoples.
Grade Level Expectations: Students would be able to:
1. Understand the impact that European arrival had on the Indigenous people and on the Europeans.
Focus Questions:
1. Why did the Europeans come to the Caribbean in the 15th and 16th centuries?
2. How did contact with the Indigenous people impact the Europeans?
3. How did contact with Europeans impact the Indigenous peoples?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to: Conversation- Are students aware Introduction: Guessing Game, Class
that the images presented originated Discussion and Mapwork:
4-HCT-K-2 - Identify the
European groups that came to in Europe? • Students play a guessing game in which they are
given different picture clues that represent
the Caribbean in the 15 - 16
th th
aspects of European culture. For example,
centuries and state reasons why
images of famous figures (Queen Elizabeth II)
they came.
and landmarks (Eiffel Tower Buckingham
Palace, Windsor Castle, London Bridge) or
Product –Map work - Are greetings (Hola, Bonjour), foods (croissants),
students able to locate Europe on a • Students then identify the countries they are
map of the world? associated with (Spain, France, Great Britain,
Holland).
• Students look at a political map of the world to
identify the countries named above. (Teachers
12
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
can use the Atlas, printed maps, interactive maps
or globe).
• The teacher points out that the general area in
which these countries are located is called
Europe, and names the nationality of the
Observation-Guided Research:
Europeans (Spanish, French, British, and Dutch)
Are students able to identify the
who came to the Caribbean.
early Europeans groups that came
to the Caribbean and state reasons
Guided Research – Reasons Early Europeans
why they came?
Came to the Caribbean in the 15 – 16
th th
Centuries:
• Students will watch a short video (See 3Gs of
Exploration (youtube.com) ) or read a short
passage that provides more detailed information
about the reasons that the different European
groups came to the Caribbean.
• Students will discuss the video or passage as a
whole class. .
Jigsaw Activity
• In small groups, students will select ONE
European group and identify their goals for
Product-: Are students able to
coming to the Caribbean and then share their
express through short stories why
findings with the whole class.
the Europeans came to the
Caribbean? • In whole class discussion, students will compare
and contrast the different reasons that the
different Europen groups came to the Caribbean
in the early years.
13
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Creative Expression Short Story/Comic
Strip/Social Media Post:
• Imagining that they were one of the early
European sailors/ merchants/priests/prisoners
who came to the Caribbean in the 15th - 16th
centuries, students write a short story or create a
comic strip to show reasons why they were
motivated to travel from Europe.
OR
• Imagining that they were one of the early
Europeans who came to the Caribbean in the
15th - 16th centuries, students create a social
media post (FB, Instagram, TikTok) to show
reasons why they were motivated to travel to the
Caribbean OR create an advertisement to recruit
persons to travel with you.
• Students then share their work with a partner.
Each partner gives feedback to the other.
4-HCT-S-2 - Categorise the Conversation: Are students able to Guided Discussion:
impact of Europeans’ present plausible responses to • Students share their thoughts about ways they
colonisation on the lifestyle of ‘ways in which they think think the arrival of Europeans affected the lives
Indigenous people and Europeans’ coming affected the of the Indigenous people in the Caribbean and
Europeans in the Caribbean. lives of the indigenous peoples in ways they think Europeans were affected when
the Caribbean and ways they think they settled in the Caribbean.
Europeans were affected when they • Students view a PowerPoint presentation or other
settled in the Caribbean? visual aid - chart, video, etc. on the impact of
14
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
colonisation on the indigenous peoples and on
the Europeans in the Caribbean. (See video:)
• During the PowerPoint presentation, students
participate in a guided discussion on the impact
of colonisation on the Christopher Columbus and
the Taino PeopleIndigenous people and
Product: Worksheet
Europeans. Students will examine:
(paper/virtual): Students complete
i. How the introduction of new
a table to show the impact of
goods, diseases and knowledge
European colonisation on
influenced the Indigenous
the indigenous peoples and on
people's cultural practices. (i.e.
theEuropeans themselves.
positive & negative impact).
ii.How Europeans had to adapt to
Impact Impact their new environment
on on • Students summarise what they have learnt using
Indigeno Indigeno
a chart of their choice (venn diagram, table).
us People us People
Observation- Market Scene: Are
students able to differentiate
between indigenous resources and
those introduced by Europeans?
OR
15
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Students group the impact of European
colonisation on the lifestyle of Indigenous people
Conversation/Observation: and Europeans in the Caribbean by taking part in
an online quiz using Kahoot or other online
Can students state at least two ways gaming/quiz platform.
in which colonisation affected the The impact of colonisation on the Europeans and
Indigenous people and the the Indigenous people
Europeans?
Product-Game: Can students Market Scene:
differentiate between the positive • Students research using the internet, books or
and negative impacts of other sources to gather information on plants,
colonisation on the Europeans and crops, animals and other products exchanged
Indigenous people? between Europe and the Caribbean region.
• They then create a market scene where they act
as vendors, showcasing and bartering these
items. (Teachers will ask students to bring the
items or props beforehand.)
• These products are displayed in two categories -
Indigenous stall and European stall
• Indigenous Stall - e.g. corn/maize,
tobacco, pineapple, cocoa, cassava,
iguana, armadillo/tattoo, manicou,
potatoes, cotton, pepper, gold, pearls
• European Stall - e.g. banana, sugar cane,
breadfruit, mango, sheep, cattle, donkey,
horse, mirror, knives, guns, metal bar
• Students can use props such as real or replicas of
fruits, vegetables, and other goods to create an
immersive market experience.
16
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Students complete an exit slip to identify a
product from each stall that they thought
benefited each group the most and give
one reason to support their viewpoint.
Discussion:
Students discuss whether they think each group
benefited equally and give reasons to support
their views.
4-HCT-V-2- Develop an Observation: Checklist: Are Court Trial:
awareness that colonisation had students able to argue for or against • Students read the poem 'Lament of an Arawak’
many lasting negative the negative impacts or as a class to gain insight into the experiences
consequences for the Indigenous consequences of colonisation on the and perspectives of the Indigenous people during
people of the Caribbean. Indigenous people? colonisation. Teachers can also provide audio
recordings of the poem to help students develop
Checklist
their understanding of its tone and emotions.(See
Group 1 - Lawyers for Indigenous ‘Lament of an Arawak Child’ by Pamela
People Mordecai – a poem about the genocide that
started when Columbus invaded the Caribbean. |
List of arguments
Mike Finn's Fiction)
1. Loss of culture • Students are then placed into the following
groups:
2. Mockery - they laughed at
Group 1- Lawyers for Indigenous people
them
Group 2- Lawyers for the Europeans.
3. Stolen lands
Group 3- Jurors
4. Reduction of population
(killings and diseases) • Student lawyers use the poem as evidence to
build arguments advocating for justice and
5. Made people into slaves
reparations for the Indigenous people.
17
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6. Torture • The teacher assumes the role of a Judge and
guides the debate, ensuring that students support
Group 2 - Lawyers for Europeans
their arguments using evidence from the poem or
1. Opportunities to previous knowledge.
create/expand businesses • After both sides have presented their arguments,
2. Their ideas were better than students will vote on the verdict.
the Indigenous • Students will also state why they voted the way
3. The Indigenous people they did.
resisted them
Additional Resources and Materials:
Videos: (Display excerpts or snippets of videos, rather than the whole films where possible, to save time and engage
students visually.)
1. The People Who Came to the Caribbean | Ethic Groups, Place of Origin & Time of Arrival
2. 3Gs of Exploration
3. Christopher Columbus and the Taino People
4. Indigenous Caribbean People - Read by Paul Campbell for Island SPACE Magic at the Museum
5. Christopher Columbus: What Really Happened (10 Year Anniversary)
Text:
‘Lament of an Arawak child’ by Pamela Mordecai – a poem about the genocide that started when Columbus invaded the
Caribbean. | Mike Finn's Fiction
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
• The early European groups that came to the Caribbean before 1800s include the:
18
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
i.Spanish
ii.French
iii.Dutch
iv.British
• They came to the Caribbean for various reasons:
i.To seek wealth through resources like gold.
ii.To spread their religious beliefs.
iii.To gain fame (glory)
• European colonisation brought about many changes in the social, economic, and political structures of Indigenous
societies.
o Positive:
i. New technology (E.g. building styles, transport).
ii. New crops and foods. (E.g. wheat, barley, breadfruit, oats, banana, sugar cane, mangoes)
iii. New animals (E.g. cattle, sheep, pigs, goats, dogs, horses, donkeys, cats, chicken)
o Negative:
i. The Indigenous people died from new diseases such as chicken pox, influenza and yellow fever
ii. They lost their traditions and customs - they were forced to adopt the way of life of the European colonists (
languages, religions, and cultural practices).
iii. The Europeans took away lands from the indigenous people.
iv. They lost their freedom.
v. The indigenous people were forced to work on European farms, dive for pearls, mine gold, etc.
• Europeans were also positively and negatively impacted by colonisation.
o Positive:
i. They found new lands to settle on.
ii. They became rich (wealthy).
iii. They learnt about new crops and new ways to grow them. This helped to improve food production and led to
economic growth in Europe. (E.g. potato, sugar, cocoa)
19
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
iv. They gained new knowledge in medicine (herbs that were used to cure illnesses) and technology (new methods and
materials used to build houses).
o Negative impact on Europeans include:
i. Spread of Indigenous diseases
ii. The European population in the Caribbean decreased because of diseases and war.
iii. The Europeans fought among themselves and with the indigenous people (conflict and war).
20
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: To recognize that contact with Europeans brought significant changes for Indigenous peoples
Grade Level Expectations: Students would be able to:
1. State a simple definition of the terms ‘colonisation’ and ‘resistance’.
2. Identify the various forms of resistance used by the Indigenous people against colonisation.
3. To recognize the impact of the active resistance of Indigenous people against the Europeans.
Focus Questions:
1. Why did the Indigenous people resist European colonisation?
2. How did they resist colonisation?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to: Introduction-Roleplay
4-HCT-K-3 - Identify ways in • Students listen/read/view a scenario in which two
students are interacting where one student is eating
which Indigenous people
a snack/playing with a toy / reading a book while
resisted European colonisation
the other student tries to take it away.
• Students will be questioned to generate a brief class
discussion. Guiding questions may include:
i.What do you think the child whose property
is being taken away will do?
ii.Give two (2) reasons for your answer.
iii.What would you have done if it were you
and why?
• Students will be told that the lesson that will follow
will be based on similar encounters/experiences
21
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
faced by the Indigenous peoples of the Caribbean
many years ago.
Conversation- Picture Picture Inferencing:
Inferencing - Are students able to • Students view various images (pictures or videos)
identify from the pictures ways depicting Indigenous resistance to European
the Indigenous people resisted colonisation. For example, a picture of Indigenous
European colonisation? warriors engaging in armed conflict with European
settlers or a picture of Indigenous leaders signing
agreements to protect their land rights.
• Students analyse images to identify the different
strategies and tactics used by Indigenous people to
resist European control. (See Additional Resources
for strategies and tactics used by the Indigenous
people)
• Students discuss which strategies were most
effective and give reasons to support their views.
4-HCT-S-3 - Explain the Think-Pair-Share:
reasons why Indigenous peoples • Students are asked to brainstorm/infer the reasons
resisted colonisation. why indigenous peoples resisted European
colonization.
• Students share and discuss their ideas with a
partner.
• Students then engage in a whole-class discussion to
further explore the reasons why Indigenous peoples
resisted colonisation.
Product- Do students’ comic
strips identify at least two reasons • The teacher presents a short video or reading
passage to summarise the main reasons.
22
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
why the Indigenous people • OR, the teacher and students create a passage with
resisted colonisation? illustrations on ‘Reasons Why Indigenous Peoples
Resisted Colonisation’.
• Students display passage on Notice Board or post
virtually.
Comic Strip:
• Students work in groups to create a comic strip
depicting the reasons why Indigenous peoples
resisted colonisation. Comic strips may be hand-
drawn or created using digital tools. (See
Storyboard Creator | Comic Strip Maker |
Storyboard Maker (storyboardthat.com))
Oral presentation
• Students then present their comic strips in class,
explaining the reasons why Indigenous peoples
resisted colonisation. Some examples of comic
strips are shown below.
23
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
24
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4-HCT-V-3- Appreciate that Conversation/Observation: Are Indigenous Day Poster or Slide show:
Indigenous people actively students able to explain the extent • Students collect images from the internet of
resisted colonisation. to which these weapons were indigenous weapons used by Taino and Kalinago
effectively used by the Indigenous peoples (bow and arrows, spears, nets, axes,
people to resist the Europeans? slingshots).
• Students discuss how these weapons were used by
the Indigenous people to resist colonisation by the
Europeans.
• Students discuss the meaning of resistance and its
importance.
• Students create a poster (paper or digital) using
images gathered or playdough replicas.
Additional Resources and Materials:
Videos: (Display excerpts or snippets of videos, rather than the whole films where possible, to save time and engage students
visually.)
1. Getting Started: Storyboard Creator Basics (Tutorial)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
• The Indigenous people actively resisted European colonisation in various ways. They:
i. Participated in armed conflicts/ wars.
ii. Had discussions with the Europeans about keeping their lands and peaceful solutions.
iii. Continued their cultural practices and traditions.
• They resisted colonisation to protect their:
i. Land
ii. Freedom
25
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
iii. Way of life (culture)
iv. Family
• The Europeans responded to Indigenous peoples' resistance with violence. However, the indigenous people continued to
fight for their rights and freedom.
• These acts of resistance show that Indigenous people were strong and determined (resilience).
• Strategies and tactics used by the Indigenous people are, they:
• fought back using bows and arrows
• killed their babies (infanticide)
• committed suicide
• ran away to the mountains
• planned attacks against the Europeans
• refused to take part in the European’s religious ceremonies/practices
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
• Language Arts: Vocabulary (colonisation, resistance, conflict, warfare, resilience, genocide, infanticide).
Creative writing (Comic Strips).
• Mathematics: Estimation, pictograph/bar graph to show the number of Tainos that were killed
26
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: To recognize that contact with Europeans brought significant changes for Indigenous peoples.
Grade Level Expectations:
Students would be able to:
1. Identify three aspects of Indigenous lifestyle still being practised in the Caribbean today.
2. Locate places in the Caribbean where Indigenous settlements can still be found today.
3. Respect the Indigenous people's unique and vibrant lifestyle.
Focus Questions:
1. Why are aspects of Indigenous people’s culture still practised today in Caribbean communities?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to: Observation - Establishing Prior Introduction: Game - Hot Seat
4-HCT-K-4 - Describe aspects of knowledge - Are students able to • Students are picked at random using a random
recall information about the name generator. (Visit Picker Wheel - Spin the
Indigenous people’s lifestyle
practised in the Caribbean today. lifestyle of Indigenous people? Wheel to Decide a Random Choice for more
information.)
• Students are guided by the teacher to share their
knowledge of Indigenous culture under a set time
limit (e.g. 10 seconds) while sitting in the "hot
seat" , a designated chair located in the front or
centre of the classroom.
• Students' responses should be noted under
respective columns in a table drawn or presented
on the board.
27
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• A mini Jeopardy or Tic Tac game can be created.
Food Language Music and Craft and cultural
dance celebration
• Students and teacher engage in a discussion on
what are some of the Indigenous Caribbean
traditions that still practised today based on the
table above.
Guided questions may include:
i.Have you ever seen anyone engaged in any
of these activities?
ii.Why do you think people still do these
after so many hundreds of years?
After listening to students reasons, teacher explains that
we do many things in society because we learnt in from
our fore parents; and that these things become our way of
life. This is call culture.
Visual Presentation - What is Culture:
Product- Visual Presentation:
• Students view a presentation
Do students’ work (slideshow,
(slideshow/pictures/video) of different aspects
poster, graphic image, etc) show
of culture from different groups - Indigenous
aspects of indigenous culture that
people, Africans, East Indians, Europeans - shared
are practised in the Caribbean
by the teacher. Example:.
today?
i.Dress - sari, dashiki, hijab, waist coat,
28
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
ii.Food - curry, spice, stew,
iii.Music - drum, piano, violin, etc
• Students, with teacher’s guidance,group the
different pictures by ethnicity
• Students and teacher discuss why different groups
of people wear different clothes, eat
different food, speak differently, enjoy different
music, etc
• Students, with teacher’s guidance, create a
definition of culture.
• Using some of the web links above, OR other
suitable text, students work in small groups to
research and create a visual presentation (e.g.
poster, scrapbook, slideshow) highlighting
different aspects of Indigenous Caribbean culture
(e.g. food, art, music, dance) that are still
practised today.
29
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The following categories can serve as guidance on
how to effectively present their findings.
Aspects of Culture:
Foods
Clothes
Dance, Music & Art
Language
Religious beliefs and Values
• Teachers could also record presentations for future
reference and reflection.
Discussion and Journal Writing
• Students will then discuss as a class:
i.What are some examples of indigenous culture that are
practised in our country?
ii. Where are you most likely to find them?Why do you
think this is so?
iii.Which example of Indigenous culture do
you find most interesting and why?
iv.Which aspect do you practise or
celebrate?
v.What can you or other adults do at school
or in your community to ensure these
indigenous practices continue?
vi.Why is it important to pass on traditions to
younger generations?
30
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4-HCT-S-4 - Locate where the Product-Map: Can students Mapwork:
Indigenous people of the Lesser locate on a map of the Caribbean, • Students look at video or read text to find out
Antilles are living today. the islands of the Lesser Antilles where the indigenous people of the Lesser Antilles
where the indigenous people can be found today.
settled? • Students then present their findings to the class for
feedback and discussion. Guiding questions could
include:
i.On which islands and in which
communities are Indigenous peoples still
residing?
ii.How can we travel to these places?
iii.What might we find?
• Students, with the teacher's guidance, find these
locations on an interactive or 2D or 3D map of
where Indigenous people can still be found living
in the Caribbean today.
Students may use coloured buttons, stickers, or
paper cut outs or crayons to mark the locations.
Students save maps digitally or in hardcopy
depending on the method used.
4-HCT-V-4- Appreciate that the Product : Do journal entry Community Collaboration Project/Journalling:
Indigenous people of the responses demonstrate an • Working together, students design a display wall
Caribbean continue to have understanding and appreciation of in their school or classroom that highlights the
unique and vibrant lifestyles Indigenous culture? unique cultures and customs of the Indigenous
people of the Caribbean. They use the ‘Visual
Presentation’ products (pictures, informational
31
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Observation: Do students posters, graphic images etc) created previously in
demonstrate willingness to the activity at 4-HCT-K-4.
continue learning about and
Journal Entry
supporting Indigenous culture
beyond the completion of the • Students then journal using a mode of their choice
project? (text, drawing, audio, video) about their
experiences working with Indigenous groups and
what they have learned about their cultures.
Guiding questions include:
i. What did you learn about the aspects
of indigenous cultures that are still
practised today?
ii. How will you continue to support and celebrate
the Indigenous culture in the future?
Additional Resources and Materials:
Videos: (Display excerpts or snippets of videos, rather than the whole films where possible, to save time and engage students
visually.)
1. Indigenous Caribbean People - Read by Paul Campbell for Island SPACE Magic at the Museum
2. The Kalinago Tribe | Caribs | Dominica The Nature Island
3. https://kalinagobeachresort.com/kalinago-culture/
4. https://divisionofculture.gov.dm/culture2/indigenous-people2
5. https://unfoundation.org/blog/post/the-caribbeans-last-indigenous-community-is-living-proof-that-sustainability-is-
survival/
32
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6. https://www.dominicahighcommission.co.uk/the-kalinago-people.html
7. https://www.fortyounghotel.com/look-inside-kalinago-territory/
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
1. Today, communities of Indigenous people can be found in various countries throughout the Caribbean, including:
i.Dominica,
ii.St. Vincent and the Grenadines,
iii.St. Lucia
Indigenous settlements located outside of the Lesser Antilles:
i. Belize
ii. Jamaica
iii. Puerto Rico
iv. Guyana
2. They have managed to preserve and revitalise aspects of their culture, such as:
i. Traditional arts and crafts like basket weaving, petroglyphs and pottery
ii. Music and dance performances
iii. Storytelling traditions passed down through generations
iv. Traditional medicinal practices using herbs to treat ailments.
v. Traditional agricultural practices (planting on ‘banks’ and terraces, slash and burn method to clear land) and
cuisine (food such as pepper pot, iguana, manicou, barbeque).
vi. Hunting techniques using plants (juice of the cassava), spears or nets to catch fish and hunt other wild animals.
3. They have achieved this through the establishment of community organisations, organising lively cultural events, and
educational initiatives that seek to celebrate, promote and preserve their cultural heritage.
33
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
• Language Arts: Journal writing, Oral presentations
• Mathematics: Classification
• Arts and Crafts: Visual creation
34
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Spatial Thinking
Introduction to the Strand: In this strand, students will explore the important geographic features that help them understand the unique
features of their island. This includes learning to locate their island, and determine its geographical divisions. There is a strong environmental
theme so that students can examine the impacts of weather and climate change, and see the importance of parklands and fresh water and the
ways that human activity shapes their natural environment.
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand that our island has important geographic features that make us unique
Grade Level Expectations:
K-Describe your island’s location in relation to the wider Caribbean region
S- Locate the island where you live on maps/globes using latitude and longitude
V-Appreciate the advantages of maps and technology such as Google Earth in locating and describing our island’s geography
Focus Questions:
1. How can we locate our island?
2. How are maps useful to us?
35
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to:
Treasure Hunt: Find the Maps Treasure Hunt: Find the Maps
4-ST-S-1 Locate the island where you
live on maps / globes using lines of Observation Students will work in teams to find one of three types of
latitude and longitude maps (a physical map of their island, a political map of their
Are students able to work collaboratively? island and a map of the Caribbean. Give each team
Use a checklist clues using relative locations to find a different type of map.
For each clue students will find a puzzle piece of the map
Product that they will have to piece together. When students have
found all their map pieces, have the students in their teams
Can students create accurate maps of their put the pieces together on a sheet of Bristol Board or large
island and the Caribbean Region. sheet of paper. to form the whole map. Verify that the map
is correct..
Conversation
Have the team leader of each group dip for a color. Have
Can students say what a diagram they have the team leader go to the treasure box that matches the color
created? Can students define what a map is that they selected. The first clue will lead to another treasure
and its possible uses? box (e.g. I am a place that is prohibited for students. ANS:
Principal’s office). In the treasure box found the team leader
will open the treasure box to find a piece of a map with the
clue for the location of the next treasure box.
Have students discuss what they have created together.
Have students discuss what is a map.
Are We The Same Are We The Same?
Conversation Have the team leaders with the physical and political map of
their island come to the front of the class and place it on
Can students state some of the differences the board. Have students observe a political and physical
between the maps? map of their country. Have students observe the similarities
and differences of the two maps. Have the students discuss
Product
36
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Can students create a table that shows the the maps uses. Establish that there are different types of
differences and similarities between physical maps.
and political maps?
Have students create a table comparing the physical and
political map.
Map Exploration: Name that Map Map Exploration: Name that Map Element
Element
Have the students in mixed ability groups view three
Conversation examples of maps (e.g. map of Caribbean region, various
Caribbean islands) . Have the students discuss the
Are students able to identify the common similarities that they notice in the three maps. Probing
elements of maps? questions such as
Observation • What is at the top of the map?
• How do we know what the colours of symbols on
Are students accurately labeling the the map represent?
elements of the map?
Have the students watch the video on the elements of a
map.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Bt1UgwEUIQ
Have students compare the elements that they identifies
with those in the video. How many were they able to
identify? What were they missing. Have students include the
elements of a map on the map that they have created from
the treasure hunt.
37
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Graphic Organizer Graphic Organizer
Observation Have students create a graphic organizer to highlight the
elements of a map.
Are students able to create a graphic
organizer highlighting the elements of a
map? Use a checklist.
Video viewing and Discussion Video viewing and Discussion
Conversation Have students watch a video on latitude and longitude,
twice.
Can students state what are lines/parallels
of latitude and lines of longitude? https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=psnYAM3YOKk&t=8
s
Can students distinguish between latitude
and longitude? Have students complete a worksheet based on the video
whilst watching the video the second
Can students state how the main lines of time (https://docs.google.com/document/d/1RleEUdkCL
latitude and longitude divide the Earth? vCJPAZWzXuI_JbU7zPpWcffwlOYKgSmjY8/edit) .
Have the students discuss their answers to the worksheet.
Let’s get Jiggy Let’s get Jiggy
Observation Have students stand and stretch their hands sideways to
indicate latitude and upward for longitude. Teacher will call
Are students doing the correct hand out either latitude or longitude and have the students use the
gestures for the words latitude and established hand gestures to demonstrate the word
longitude? called. Have students take turns calling out the words and
the rest of the students will demonstrate with hand gestures.
38
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Find Me Find Me
Observation Have students identify the main lines of latitude and
longitude (Prime Meridian and Equator) on a globe or using
Are students able to identify the main lines Google Earth
of latitude and longitude? Use a checklist.
Demonstrate Time Demonstration Time
Observation In groups of 3 or 4 have students create a model of the earth
and use string to illustrate the lines of latitude and longitude
Are students working cooperatively? Use a or have students blow a balloon and draw the lines of
group participation grading rubric. latitude and longitude with a marker. Have the
students label the Prime Meridian and Equator to indicate
Can students accurately illustrate lines of which line is latitude and which is longitude.
latitude and longitude?
Discuss how these lines help us locate places. Discuss which
Product types of workers may need to use lines of latitude and
longitude.
Are students able to create a model of the
Earth?
Can students accurately label the lines of
latitude and longitude?
Conversation
Are students able to indicate how latitude
and longitude lines aid in locating places?
39
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Are students able to determine which type
of workers may use lines of latitude and
longitude?
Find my Island Find my Island
Conversation Have the students locate their island on an atlas or a globe
and describe its location in relation to the Equator and
Are students able to identify their island on Prime Meridian. Is your island north or south of the
a map or globe? Equator? Is your island east or west of the Prime Meridian?
Are students able to describe their location
in relation to the Equator and the Prime
Meridian?
I Spy I Spy
Conversation Have students watch the video on locating places using
latitude and longitude.
Can students state that the combination of https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=phQ651aWjKU
the latitudinal line number and that of the
longitude is what is called the coordinate? Probe students to have them describe how coordinate
systems and latitude and longitude are related. Ask questions
Are students able to describe and such as:
demonstrate how to locate places using
latitude and longitude? 1. What are coordinates?
2. What numbers are used?
3. Which number comes first?
4. What comes after each number?
Using a map of the world or Google Earth have students
describe how locating places using longitude and latitude is
possible. Name a series of countries and have students come
40
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
up and demonstrate how to locate these countries on a map
using latitude and longitude.
In pairs have the students explore a map of the Caribbean
Region on an atlas, a globe or Google Earth. Have students
locate their island and give the coordinates of their island.
Island Hopping Bingo Island Hopping Bingo
Observation Teacher is to give the students a list of coordinates for
islands in the Lesser Antilles. Have the students locate the
Are students working cooperatively? Assess islands, on a map, globe or Google earth utilizing the
using a group participation grading rubric. coordinates given. They are to place a coloured peg or mark
on each island that they have located on the blank Caribbean
Can the students find the numbers for the map. The first person to locate all the islands using the
latitude and longitude lines? coordinates shouts bingo. The teacher is to verify that all the
islands have been found.
Are students capable of using the
coordinates to accurately locate
various Caribbean islands?
41
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4-ST-K-1 Describe our island’s Eight Point Compass Rose Eight Point Compass Rose
location in relation to the wider
Caribbean Observation Have students watch the following video
Are students working cooperatively? Have https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UeeLivQH7Ok
the students conduct peer assessment using
the cooperative work grading rubric. Have students in groups of 3 or 4 draw a four point
compass rose using precut squares of transparent paper (wax
Are students able to accurately construct a paper, vinyl paper, laminating paper).
four point and eight point compass rose?
Have students add four more points to their compass rose
Conversation mid way between the main cardinal points on their
transparent paper.
Can students state how the intermediate
cardinal directions get their names? Have students indicate why they have drawn another four
points on their compass rose. Establish that they have
Product created an eight point compass rose.
Are students able to accurately construct Have students determine how the names of the intermediate
and label an eight point compass rose? cardinal directions are derived.
Have students label the four intermediate cardinal directions
on the compass rose they created.
My Island in the Caribbean My Island in the Caribbean
Observation In their groups of 3 to 4 from the previous activity have
students sketch, color and cut out the islands of the
Are students working cooperatively? Use a Caribbean. Have the students create a floor map of the
group participation rubric. Caribbean by pasting their sketched island on poster board,
cardboard etc.
42
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Can students accurately place the islands of Have students locate their island on their map.
the Caribbean on their map?
Have students place their compass rose (created on the
Are students working cooperatively? Have precut squares of transparent paper prior to this activity) on
the students conduct peer assessment using their island then write a description of the location of their
the cooperative work grading rubric. island in relation to the wider Caribbean Region utilizing
words such as east, north-east, south-west.
Can students locate their island?
Can students describe their island in
relation to the wider Caribbean region using
words such as east, north-east, south-west.
Product
Are students able to create an accurate
representation of the islands of the
Caribbean?
Can students accurately place the islands to
form a map of the Caribbean?
4-ST-V-1 -Appreciate the Discussion and Dramatisation Discussion and Dramatisation
advantages of maps and technology
such as Google Earth in locating and Conversation Have students imagine that there were no maps and have
describing our island’s geography them state how they would locate and describe their island’s
Are students able to state why maps are geography without the use of atlases, globes and technology
useful to us? such as Google Earth.
Are students able to state how they have Have students discuss how maps and technology help them
used maps to locate and describe the locate and describe the geography of their island. Establish
geography of their island? that they have used cardinal directions and latitude and
longitude to give the location of their island.
43
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Have students in groups of 3 or 4 roleplay the value of maps
Observation and technology in aiding them in locating and describing the
geography of their island. Have students peer assess group
Are students working collaboratively? Use a members' participation using the group participation grading
group participation grading rubric. rubric.
Product
Are students able to produce a piece that
highlights the benefits of maps and
technology in locating and describing their
island’s geography?
Additional Resources and Materials
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JXjn8kJDxY0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pUrFYZmuFyo
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Maps are an essential tool that is essential for locating places. We can locate places using:
1. Cardinal directions (The main and intermediate cardinal direction)
2. Latitude and longitude
The intermediate cardinal directions are named by combining the names of the main cardinal direction which they fall midway between.
44
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Latitude and longitude are imaginary lines that are measured in degrees. Latitude lines are also called parallels of latitude. The main line of latitude
is the 0 degree line and it is called the Equator. The Equator divides the Earth in two halves or hemispheres. The northern hemisphere is north of
the Equator and the southern hemisphere is south of the Equator.
Lines of latitude are numbered for 0 degrees to 90 degrees north and south of the Equator. Lines or meridians of longitude are numbered from 0
degree to 180 degrees east and west of the Prime Meridian.
The lines of latitude and longitude can be followed to where they intersect to locate places. The numbers of the lines give us the coordinates e.g.
13͒ N 61͒ W. Using Google Earth can simplify determining the location of places.
45
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand that our island has important geographic features that make us unique
Grade Level Expectations:
4-ST-K-2 -Identify the geographic divisions of the country.
4-ST-S-2 -Label a map of the country to identify the geographic divisions
4-ST-V-4-Appreciate
Focus Questions:
1. Why are geographic divisions necessary?
2. How are geographic boundaries determined?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to: Let’s Create Let’s Create
Conversation: Have students view a blank map of their island. The map can be projected
Are students able to answer questions noting the onto the wall/ board, with a projector. Alternatively, students can be placed
4-ST-K-2 -Identify the geographic geographic divisions are missing? in groups of 4 to 5 members to view a blank map of their island.
divisions of the country Are students able to state how the geographic divisions
in their country are called?
After viewing the map, engage students in a discussion to allow them to
4-ST-S-2- Label a map of the country to Are students able to state how many geographic describe the physical divisions of the country.
identify the geographic divisions divisions there are in their country? Probing questions such as :
What is missing on the map?
Product What are the names of the geographic divisions in their country? (e.g.
Are students working cooperatively? Use a participation District, Parish)
rubric to assess student participation. How many geographic divisions are there in your country?
Are students able to create an accurate map of their
island? Use a creativity grading rubric to assess the
In groups of 4 and 5, have students create a map of their country that has
p roduct.
texture and dimension. Teachers may set stations with a variety of materials
such as paint, glue, sand, beans, paper (construction paper, bristol board,
foam board, tissue paper), styrofoam, air drying clay, marker/ crayons.
Using a participation rubric, have students observe group members'
p articipation.
46
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Dive deeper Dive Deeper
Observation
Are students able to accurately label the geographic
Have the students search google maps or an atlas to identify the geographic
d ivisions within their country?
divisions in their country.
Have the students, on the maps they created in groups, insert the geographic
d ivisions in their country and label the divisions (districts, parish etc.).
Where in the country? Where in the country?
Product Have the students in groups play a game called “where in the country?”.
Are students able to utilize the clues to accurately create Each group will search for puzzle piece cut outs of their island. On the back
a floor map of their island? of the puzzle pieces there will be clues such as I am found to the very north
of the island, `I am near the coast, I am in a nature preserve, I am a body of
Observation
fresh water. Students may be allowed to use an atlas or google maps to aid
Are students working cooperatively?
them with researching clues.
Have the students create the floor map of the island by collating the puzzle
Are students able to accurately label the geographic
l ocations?
pieces. The students will then label each geographic division in the island
u sing the clues to aid them.
What’s Your View
What’s Your View
Engage students in a discussion on the geographic of their country by
Conversation
asking the following questions:
Do you think geographic divisions are necessary in countries and why?
Are students able to state their opinion on geographic
divisions in their country?
Do you think the boundaries of your country are the same as it was forty
years ago?
If they have changed, why do you think some of the geographic divisions
have changed?
Do you know what marks the separation of one geographic division from
another in the country?
Are We The Same? Are WeThe Same?
Observation Have students view two maps (one older map and a current map). Have
Were students able to identify any differences in s tudents state what they observe about the two maps of their island.
t he two maps of their island?
Resource Person Resource Person
Conversation
Are students able to ask questions about the geographic
Have a resource person example from physical development,
divisions that enable them to have a deeper
planning., government surveyors or anyone knowledgeable on the
understanding of why there are geographic divisions
geographic divisions of the country speak about the importance
a nd why they may change?
of geographic divisions, if and how they have changed and why. Students
can use the question from the “What’s Your View” activity to use as a
g uide to ask the presenter questions.
47
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Field Trip Field Trip
Observation The teacher will take students on an island tour or a tour of part of the
Are students taking note of the different districts/ country near them (e.g. southern part, western part). Provide the students
parishes visited? with guiding questions for the field trip:
Can students observe some of the similarities and What districts/ parishes did you visit?
differences in the districts visited? How did you know when you moved from one district/ parish to
Are students able to identify when they have crossed another?
from one district to another? What demarcated the separation?
Are students working collaboratively in their groups Before the field trip form groups of 4 to 5 students.
(use a group participation checklist)? Have the students bring along a device to record their field trip.
Using their recordings from the field trip, the students in groups put
Product
together a powerpoint video presentation that highlights the districts/
parishes visited, what demarcated one geographic division from another as
Are students able to create a video, powerpoint
well as some of the similarities and differences between them.
presentation that highlights the districts/ parishes
Have students grade each other on group participation by using a group
visited, what demarcated one geographic division from
p articipation grading rubric.
another as well as some of the similarities and
d ifferences between them?
My Country My Country
Product Have students write a short story. Their short story should include a young
Are students able to write a short story that includes all person their age and use the following features to tell a story of a young
the elements of English writing? person getting in a taxi or bus and travelling throughout the island. Use
Are students able to include geographic divisions, some of the features to describe their journey:
reasons for it and what the demarcations are (physical Some of the geographic divisions
or built). Passing through geographic divisions
A re students able to be creative in their writing? What demarcates one geographic division from another in their country
A fter twenty years would the geographic divisions change and why
Additional Resources and Materials
Tips for effective group work in the classroom: https://youtu.be/pzr5x2cLljg?si=GpyzJs7Pf81IEM7X
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
All countries of the world are divided into smaller segments. In the Caribbean these geographic divisions were done mainly for the administrative control of settlers
and slaves. Most geographic divisions in the Caribbean are demarcated by physical features e.g. river, ravine etc. Countries may change their geographic boundaries
o ver time for a variety of reasons e.g. depopulation. The names of the geographic divisions may also change over time e.g. quarters to districts.
48
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand that our island has important geographic features that make us unique
Grade Level Expectations:
K-Define and classify the major physical features of our island
S-Observe the differences between various land and water features of our island
V-Appreciate that our island has natural geographic features that are environmentally vulnerable
Focus Questions:
1. What are the major physical natural features of our island and where are they located?
2. Why is it important to protect our physical natural features?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to: Conversation: Gallery Walk
-Are students able to classify features as Students visit a Walk in Gallery created by the class teacher which
4-ST-K-3-Define and
natural and man-made? showcases a variety of physical, natural and built (man-made) features
classify the
-Can students define the term ‘natural such as bridges, buildings, dams as well. Students walk around the
m
ou
aj
r
o
i
r
s l
p
a
h
n
y
d
s i cal features of
features’? gallery reading and gathering information presented. Students
will take note of their observations.
Observation:
After the gallery walk students will discuss their observations and
-Have students classified the features in the compare the various features, talking about similarities and
gallery correctly as natural and man-made? differences. If students do not introduce the terms natural and built
(man-made) features, the teacher will ask probing questions to
Product: introduce the terms. Class will differentiate between the two terms.
Is the information on the bulletin board
accurate? Students use the pictures from the gallery to create a bulletin
board space to classify the features.
49
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Conversation: Students will give examples of physical, natural features of their
-Can students identify and define each country. Students will create a table with the different natural
natural feature? features and their definition.
Product:
- Have students presented charts that are
informative?
Discussion
Generate discussion that allows them to share their experiences
and knowledge of different physical, natural features in their
island. Questions: Have they visited any of these places, what
physical, natural features are located in their communities?
What activities take place there? Are any of these protected?
Are any of these features unique to their countries?
.
Research/Presentation
4-ST-S-3Observe the differences betweenC o nservation: Have students conduct research to find pictures of various physical,
various land and water features of our -Ask questions to generate discussion: natural features in their country.
i sland Why is a river a water Students will classify the features as water features or land features.
feature? Students will discuss the terms ‘water features’ and ‘land features’.
Why is a valley a landform?
-Can students differentiate between water Students will use the pictures to create chartlets, PowerPoint
features and land features? presentations, or flipbooks of physical, natural features in their
country. This can be done electronically using a flipbook app
(https://www.flipbookpdf.net/) or template given.
Product:
-Are students able to produce informative
flipbooks?
50
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product: Map Work
-Are students able to create symbols to
represent each natural feature? Students will plot a map using symbols to show the location of the
-Are students able to plot a map of their major physical features in their island. They must include the key
island to show where various features are elements of a map.
located?
Musical Notes
Have students sing songs that highlight natural features of their island.
Students will then create their own poem or song about the natural
Conversation: features of their island..
-Can students name and describe land and
water features visited? Field Trip
Students go on an island trip to nearby locations to visit major water
-Can students explain the importance of and land features. Prior to the field trip, create observational
these land and water features to our island? checklists for students to use as a guide. In cases where a field trip is
not possible teachers can do a virtual tour using videos such as
https://www.facebook.com/SLU360/
-Are students able to explain what makes
certain features vulnerable to natural or
man-made threats?
Whilst on the field trip, students also take note of physical features
that are vulnerable to natural and manmade threats. Eg. What
happens if we continue to pollute the swamps and mangroves around
Product:
the island?
-Do the models represent natural features in
their country?
-How realistic
Exhibition
Allow students to creatively present a model of their favourite
-Give students a rubric to assess each
physical natural feature. These models will be presented as exhibits.
others’ models.
Students will justify why these are their favourite.
Discussion
4-ST-V-3-Appreciate that our island has Conversation:
natural geographic features that are -Do students understand the impact of Students will discuss the term ‘vulnerable’. Explain that natural
e nvironmentally vulnerable human or natural threats on our natural features are vulnerable to both human and natural activity. Students
physical features? will discuss their observations from the field trip- Did they observe
51
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
areas affected by pollution, natural disasters, deforestation,
Observation : construction etc? What could happen if we do not take action to
-Are students able to explain the effect of protect our natural features?
man-made and natural threats to the natural
physical features? To review the entire concept, create a game such as Jeopardy or
quizzes to assess students’ understanding.
Create a bumper stick to encourage persons Teacher notes questions which pose challenges with the intention of
to protect natural features — Create a task reteaching and providing clarity.
specific rubric to assess the bumper
sticker… https://www.playfactile.com/
Conversation: Are students able to explain https://quizizz.com/?lng=en
what would happen if we do not protect our
natural features? Exit Slip
Students will write down one thing they can do to protect natural
Conversation: features in their community.
- Can students answer questions posed?
52
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
E ssential Learning Outcome: To understand that our island has important geographic features that make us unique
Grade Level Expectations:
4-ST-K-4 -Describe the climate of our island(s)
4-ST-S-4 -Investigate the changes in climate
4-ST-V-4-Appreciate that our climate has risks for our population.
Focus Questions:
1. How has my island’s climate changed over time?
2. What are the risks associated with our climate?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to: Inquiry Thinking Inquiry Thinking
Conversation: Provide students with pictures of their island and that of other countries such
4-ST-K-4 -Describe the climate of our Are students able to answer questions noting the as the United States and Canada. Have students compare the weather patterns
island(s) differences between the weather patterns in their in their country as opposed to other countries. Ask students whether anyone
country and that of others? has travelled to countries other than the Caribbean islands to share their
experiences about the climate there compared to where they live. Make
provisions to have students view a video in the event there are no students who
Are students able to express their experiences of
have travelled. Probe students’ thinking by asking examples of
different weather patterns from travelling to
other countries?
the following questions:
What are the weather patterns in your country?
1. What are the differences between the weather patterns in your
country compared to other countries?
2. Why do you think the weather patterns in your island are different?
Video and Discussion
Have students view a video on the definition of climate and climatic zones.
https://youtu.be/iA23Sm-HI4I?si=3D1Na-_ri0CdVijX
https://youtu.be/hY3sa68hpM8?si=RJlmEe1V38ORAEdB
After viewing the videos, engage students in a discussion to allow them to
describe the climate of their island. Probe students with questions to guide their
thinking.
What type of climate does your country experience?
53
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
What weather patterns are associated with this climate?
Is it very hot or very cold?
What times of the year is very hot, dry, rainy, cold?
C
V
o
i
n
d
v
e
e
o
r s
a
a
n
t
d
io
D
n
iscussion
Have students draw a picture representing the climate in their country.
Are students able to identify the type of climate
experienced in their country?
Are students able to explain why their country
experiences this type of climate?
Map Skills
Are students able to describe the climate of their
Have students use a map, globe or Google Earth to explore the Tropic of
country using appropriate terms and phrases?
Cancer, Equator and Tropic of Capricorn. Using these lines of latitude, instruct
students to locate their island and the climatic zone within which it is located.
Product Based on the location question students as to why they believe their country
Are students able to draw a picture depicting experiences this type of climate?
their climate?
Have students view a video explaining why the region near the equator has a
tropical climate.
https://youtu.be/cqKZYAmcReQ?si=r922HADcA7fls25s
After viewing the video, have students explain their understanding on why their
country experiences a tropical climate.
Map Skills
Observation
Are students able to locate their island on a map,
globe or using Google Earth?
Are students able to locate the Tropic of Cancer,
Equator and Tropic of Capricorn?
Conversation
Are students able to explain why their country
e xperiences this type of climate?
4-ST-S-4 -Investigate the changes in 4-ST-S-4 4-ST-S-4
climate Inquiry Thinking Inquiry Thinking
Conversation: Engage students in a discussion on climate change by asking the following
Are students able to state their opinion on questions: Do you think the climate in your country is the same as it was
climate change in their country?
54
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
twenty years ago? If there is a change in climate, why do you think this is the
case?
From the eyes of an Elder (Data Collection)
Observation
From the eyes of an Elder (Data Collection)
Have students identify an elderly person in their community whom they will
Were students able to conduct an interview with
an elderly person in their community?
interview to gather information on how the climate has changed over the
years. With the teacher’s guidance, have students prepare interview questions
which will be asked. Examples:
Product 1. Is it hotter today than it was twenty years ago?
Were students able to correctly write a summary 2. Is it colder today than it was twenty years ago?
capturing the information from the interview 3. Is the dry and wet season the same as it was before?
conducted? 4. Are we experiencing more rain during the rainy season than it was
before?
Were students able to orally present their Based on the information obtained, students will write a summary (Language
summary to the class? Integration) on changes in the climate in their country over the years. Have
students orally present their summary to the class.
Representing and Interpreting Data (Math Integration)
Using the information obtained from the interview, students are going to
create a bar graph identifying the number of elders who answered ‘yes’ or ‘no’
to the questions.. Based on the bar graph, students are going to draw
conclusions on how the climate has changed in their country. Highlight
students’ work by placing it up in the classroom.
Representing and Interpreting Data Using data on the changes in climate retrieved from the meteorological office
Product by the teacher(if possible), have students make comparisons to the
Are students able to correctly represent the data information obtained from the elderly interviews in the previous
on a bar graph? activity. Have students draw conclusions as to whether the data matches the
perspectives of the elderly.
Observation
Are students able to correctly interpret the data
and draw conclusions on the changes in their
country’s climate?
Climate Prediction
Have students dress themselves as an elderly person in fifty years. Students
are going to role play and orally present their predictions on the climate in
55
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
their country fifty years from now. Students are to give reasons for their
predictions.
Field Trip
The teacher will identify a place in the country that has changed drastically
due to changes in climate, for example a river that has dried up severely,
erosion of seacoast etc. Show students pictures of the identified area years ago
and then take them on a field trip to the area. Allow students to use their
Climate Prediction technological devices to take photos of the areas. Provide students with
Conversation: guiding questions for the field trip:
Are students able to make predictions about the • What are the notable differences?
climate in their country with justification?
• What do you believe are the causes of these differences?
• Do you think the area can return to how it was years ago?
Using the pictures taken on the field trip, students will create a collage of
before and after pictures showing how climate change has affected the
physical landscape of their country.
Field Trip
Observation: If not applicable to your country, where a place cannot be identified, use
Are students able to observe the difference in the pictures of before and after which would allow students to make
identified area? comparisons.
Product
Are students able to create a picture collage
s
id
h
e
o
n
w
ti
i
f
n
ie
g
d
b
a
e
r
f
e
o
a
r
?
e and after pictures of the
Resource Person
Have a resource person example from meteorology, sustainable department,
environmental department, an elder person or anyone who is knowledgeable
or informed to speak to students about the changes in climate in their
country.. Have students prepare questions beforehand which will be used as a
guide to ask the presenter.
Resource Person
Observation:
Are students able to ask questions to deepen
their understanding of the changes in climate?
56
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4-ST-V-4-Appreciate that our climate 4-ST-V-4 4-ST-V-4-
has risks for our population. Group Work Group Work
Conversation: Place students in mixed ability groups. In the groups, students must
Are students able to share their ideas in a discuss and identify some of the risks they believe are associated with
group on the risk of climate change? a tropical climate. The teacher can probe students with guiding
questions?
• What are some risks the population can face during the dry
Product: season?
Are students able to create a concept map • How are you affected when the weather is very hot?
highlighting the risk of climate for our • What are some risks during the wet season?
population? • What are natural disasters which occur during the dry and
wet seasons?
Students will create a concept map highlighting these risks which will
be shared with the class.
(Remind students of the rules of group work)
Video and Discussion
Have students view an instructional video on the risks of climate on
our population.
Video and Discussion After viewing the video, have students discuss which risks have been
Conversation: experienced in their country because of changes in climate.
Are students able to identify some of the https://youtu.be/pkryz2wR2uk?si=IKOWdFAgp0di5Qr2
risks of changes in climate for the
population in their country?
Climate Awareness
Have student remain in the previous groups, and have them create a
Climate Awareness video advertisement, public service announcement, brochure or
Product: poster to create an awareness on the risks of changes in climate on
Are students able to create a product which our population. Students can also highlight safety measures which can
highlights the risks of climate change on our be taken to help reduce those risks. For example:
population? • Drinking lots of water to avoid dehydration during the dry
season?
Are students able to identify safety measures • Prepare a Hurricane Disaster Plan to keep safe during a
towards the risks associated with changes in hurricane?
climate? • Unclog drains to prevent flooding.
57
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Based on the medium students used, the information will be shared
accordingly. Example, video advertisements can be placed on the
school’s social media platforms, brochures can be distributed to the
school population and members of the community and posters can be
p inned up in the community.
Additional Resources and Materials
Tips for effective group work in the classroom: https://youtu.be/pzr5x2cLljg?si=GpyzJs7Pf81IEM7X
How to use Google Earth in the Classroom:https://youtu.be/rWq8nhocU5M?si=W1URGbN8fsNXVckC
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Climate refers to the typical or average weather conditions in a particular region over a long period of time. It includes factors such as temperature, precipitation
(rain, snow, sleet), humidity, wind speed, and atmospheric pressure. Climate helps us understand what kind of weather to expect in a certain place and helps us
plan for different seasons.
Climate change is a big, long-term change in the usual weather patterns that have been happening on Earth. It's like the Earth's regular weather is getting a bit
mixed up. This change is mostly caused by people doing things that release a lot of greenhouse gases into the air, like burning fossil fuels such as coal, oil, and gas.
Greenhouse gases act like a cozy blanket around the Earth, trapping some of the heat from the sun and keeping our planet warm. But when there are too many
of these gases in the air, they make the Earth too warm, like turning up the heat in a greenhouse. This can cause problems, such as melting ice, rising sea levels,
and changes in weather patterns.
58
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand that our island has important geographic features that make us unique
Grade Level Expectations:
K-Identify significant weather events that have impacted the natural environment
S-Investigate the consequences of recent weather events on the built environment of your country
V-Appreciate the need to prepare for climate emergencies and actions that can be taken to lessen the effects
of natural forces
Specific Curricu lum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to: Observation: Introduction:
Are students able to identify weather events? Review: weather elements, natural environment
4-ST-K-5
Conversation: Prior to the lesson, teacher explains the objectives of viewing the
Can students explain how weather events affect video /videos.
-Identify significant weather events the natural environment? This lesson begins with short video clips of significant weather
that have impacted the natural events:
e nvironment Can students provide support in clarifying -wind
misconceptions? -water (flooding, heavy rainfall)
-temperature (snowstorms, droughts, heat waves)
Product:
Class Discussion: Teacher goes back to specific parts of the
Have students completed the graphic correctly to
video. Students identify the weather event identified in the video.
show ways weather elements can impact the
Students brainstorm ways each weather event affects the natural
natural environment.
environment.
As the discussion progresses, teacher demonstrates how to web the
information.
59
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curricu lum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Students engage in a group activity to web the information on
bristol board. Each group presents the information orally.
Task: Each child receives a graphic (see below) to list ways each
weather event impacts the environment. Students add any others
that may not be presented in the video.
Observation:
4-ST-S-5 Are students able to describe the consequences of Begin the lesson by reviewing how weather events can impact the
-Investigate the consequences of weather events on the built environment. natural environment.
recent weather events on the built
e nvironment of your country Conversation: Introduction:
Are students able to share their knowledge and Show a variety of pictures that are taken after some severe weather
experiences of how recent weather events have events, (power lines damaged, roads impassable, bridges collapsed,
impacted their community and their country. houses with no roofs, destruction to dams)
Use guided questions to draw out the concept of consequences of
Can students describe the impact of weather weather events on the built environment.
events on the built environment?
Class discussion:
Product: Use the pictures above to generate discussion on the effects of
Are students able to present diverse ways to share weather on the built environment.
the information they have gathered? Afterwards, present a virtual field trip to show how weather events
have affected man-made features in your country.
Are students able to collaborate to present Invite community members to share witness stories of the effects
i nformation to their classmates which is accurate? of heavy rainfall, no rainfall, strong wind, extreme temperature etc.
eg. Ravine Poissson Disaster in Sain Lucia, Hurricane Maria in
Dominica….,
Task:
By working in pairs, present a simple project as creatively as
possible
-Identify a weather event.
- Describe how this weather event has affected the built
environment in your country.
(use pictures, models…)
60
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curricu lum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Students create a mini exhibition with their projects. Allow
students time to walk around before a plenary session. During the
plenary session, students answer questions on their presentation.
4-ST-V-5
-Appreciate the need to prepare for Observation: Introduction:
climate emergencies and actions that Present the following scenario:
can be taken to lessen the effects of Do students understand the need to prepare for Both parents are at work, siblings at school including you. The
n atural forces climate emergencies? weather changes suddenly just as your older sister tells you
Do students understand the implication of not goodbye at the school’s gate. It is raining heavily. As the day
being prepared for climate emergencies? progresses, the weather gets worse. The island is experiencing a
trough. At dismissal the everywhere is flooded. Landslides and
fallen trees have blocked your way home. You try to reach your
Conversation:
parents but there is no service. You are worried because you make
contact with your family. What should you do?
Can students list and explain what they can do to
lessen the impact/effect of climate emergencies
(a) while at school
First, discuss the current weather condition. Then discuss possible
things you can do to stay safe?
(b) at home
Questions:
Product:
Is there anything you and your family should consider doing prior
to an emergency?
Do students understand that each person must be
What can you do as a family to avoid stress during adverse weather
responsible and play their part for the good of
conditions?
everyone?
Why do you need to prepare of climate emergencies?
Are the emergency plans prepared by students
Class Discussion:
r ealistic/ practical?
Explain- Now that we have seen how important it is to prepare for
climate emergencies, let us discuss how we prepare:
Family/School Emergency Plans
Students discuss what is an emergency plan and the need for an
emergency plan. Students explain why the family emergency plan is
necessary.
61
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curricu lum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Create a communication Plan
Students study samples of communication plans and explain why
having the communication plan is necessary.
Have a Family Emergency Kit
Students discuss what a family emergency kit is and how they can
help their family put one together.
Question: What goes in the family emergency kit?
Property inspection
Students explain why the family/school should do an inspection of
the property/ plant.
Students also explain what should be done if you are at risk in your
property.
Discussion point:
-What do you think can happen if we are not prepared for a
climate emergency?
Task:
Students create a blueprint for a family emergency plan.
Take the blueprint home and discuss with family members.
S hare with class your family emergency plan.
62
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
63
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
E ssential Learning Outcome: To understand that our island has important geographic features that make us unique
Grade Level Expectations:
Learners will be expected to:
4-ST-K-6-Determine the scope and nature of the areas of your country that are parklands or natural reserves
4-ST-S-6- Locate and describe the features and characteristics of these parklands or reserves
4-ST-V-6- Appreciate the purpose of these areas and their significance for preserving flora, fauna, and human existence
Focus Questions:
1. What are natural reserves?
2. Why is it important for governments to establish natural reserves?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to: What’s Important to Me What’s Important to Me
Conversation: Begin the class by questioning students whether they own
Are students able to talk about things that anything that is so important to them that they want it
4-ST-K-6-Determine the scope and
are important to them and want it protected and prevent anyone from destroying it. Have
nature of the areas of your country
protected? students discuss and share with the class.
that are parklands or natural
r eserves
Defining Natural Reserves/ Parklands
Defining Natural Reserves/ Parklands Ask students the following questions to generate discussion
Conversation on what natural reserves are:
Are students able to identify places they 1. Just like you do have things that are important to
believe should be protected and why? you, do you think there are places in your country
Are students able to orally explain what that are important to its people?
natural reserves are? 2. Do you think there are places in your country that
are protected?
3. Why do you think these places are protected?
4. What kind of animals are found in natural reserves?
64
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5. Do you think everyone has access to natural
reserves?
Have students view an instructional video defining nature
reserves.
https://youtu.be/eJBIoclTmyc?si=hPqnSrrOAqBjpbRa
After viewing the video, question students to test their
understanding on what natural reserves are.
Mapping Natural Reserves/ Parklands
Have students conduct research to identify and locate the
natural reserves or parklands in their country. Based on
Mapping Natural Reserves/Parklands students’ research, have them create a key for natural
Observation: reserves/parklands. Using the map in their Social Studies
Are students able to carry out research on Portfolio, have students draw the key onto the map in the
natural reserves? areas in which these parklands/natural reserves can be
Are students able to create a key to found in their country. After having completed the map
represent natural reserves? work, question students:
Are students able to draw the key to show 1. In what areas are natural reserves/parklands found?
the location of natural reserves on a map? 2. How would you describe these areas?
3. Are they located in rural or urban areas?
Conversation:
Are students able to explain the areas in
which natural reserves or parklands are
found?
4-ST-S-6- Locate and describe the Exploring Natural Reserves Exploring Natural Reserves
features and characteristics of these
parklands or reserves Observation: Take students on a field trip to one or if possible, more than
Were students able to identify the features one natural reserve/ parkland in their country. Prior to the
of a natural reserve/ parkland. field trip, provide students with a blank template of a
concept map and explain to them the purpose of the field
Product: trip is to identify and describe the features and
Are students able to complete a concept characteristics of a natural reserve/parkland. Students will
map identifying the features and complete a concept map on the features of a natural
65
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
characteristics of natural reserves/ reserve/ parkland based on their observations on the field
parklands? trip..
Describing a Natural Reserve/ Describing a Natural Reserve/ Parkland (Language
Parkland Integration)
Have students write a descriptive essay or a found poem by
Product: picking out descriptive words, phrases and lines from their
Are students able to write an essay concept map and arranging and formating the excerpts to
describing a natural reserve/ parkland compose their own poems. on a natural reserve/
with all the characteristics and features? parkland. The essay or poem can be based on what they
(Use a rubric to assess student’s writing) observed on the field trip, or it can be an imaginative natural
reserve. Explain to students that in their description, they
must include the characteristics and features of a natural
reserve or parkland.
Example of Writing Prompts:
1. You are writing an article for your school/local
newspaper about a specific parkland in your
country. In your article, describe fully the features
of the natural reserve/ parkland.
2. Imagine you are a bird flying over a natural reserve
in your country. Describe what you see.
My Very Own Natural Reserve My Very Own Natural Reserve
Using a variety of materials (cardboard, foam boards,
Product: Styrofoam, play dough etc.) have students create a 3D
Are students able to create a model or model of their very own natural reserve. The model should
draw a natural reserve with all the include a name, characteristics and features such as flora and
characteristics and features? fauna, animal species etc. Students are to orally present
their models to the class explaining the features of their
Are students able to orally present their natural reserve and why it is a natural reserve. (If students
model of a natural reserve? are unable to create a 3D model, provide them with the
o ption to draw).
66
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4-ST-V-6- Appreciate the purpose Discussion Discussion
of these areas and their Conversation: Have students form groups. Provide students with the
significance for preserving flora, Are students able to discuss why it is statement: Why is it important for governments to establish
f auna, and human existence important for governments to establish natural reserves? Ask them to think about natural areas
natural reserves? around them that they would like to see preserved.
Students will discuss in their groups after which they will
share with the class.
Resource Person Resource Person
Observation: Have students from the agricultural division, National Trust
Are students able to listen attentively to or any informed person speak to students on the importance
information being given by the resource of protecting natural reserves and some of the dangers they
person? may face if they are not protected.
Are students able to answer questions
asked?
Are students able to ask questions based
on the new information they are being Nature Reserve Sign
told? Have students create a sign which can be placed at the site
of a nature reserve. The sign should highlight one or more
precautionary measures which should be taken when visiting
Nature Reserve Sign a nature reserve.
Product:
Are students able to create a sign that
identifies a precautionary measure when
visiting a natural reserve.
67
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
A natural reserve is like a special home for plants, animals, and other living things. It's a place where nature is protected and looked
after carefully. Natural reserves are important because they help to keep plants and animals safe, so they can live and grow happily.
People make sure not to harm the plants and animals in natural reserves so they can stay healthy and the environment can stay
balanced.
Reasons for protecting natural reserves:
1. Home for Animals: Natural reserves are like special homes for animals. Just like we have our houses to live in, animals need
places to live too. If we don't protect natural reserves, animals might not have a safe place to live, find food, or raise their babies.
2. Protecting Plants and Trees: Natural reserves are also home to lots of plants and trees. These plants make the air we breathe
clean and provide homes for animals. If we don't protect natural reserves, plants and trees could get cut down or damaged, and that
would make it hard for animals to survive.
3. Saving Endangered Species: Some animals and plants in natural reserves are endangered, which means there aren't many left in
the world. By protecting natural reserves, we can help save these special creatures from disappearing forever.
4. Keeping Nature Balanced: Everything in nature is connected, like a big puzzle. If one piece of the puzzle is missing, the whole
picture might not work right. Natural reserves help keep this balance in nature by making sure all the animals, plants, and other living
things have what they need to survive.
5. Clean Air and Water: Plants and trees in natural reserves help clean the air we breathe and the water we drink. If we don't
protect these places, pollution and other bad things might make the air and water dirty, which can make people and animals sick.
6. Learning About Nature: Natural reserves are like big outdoor classrooms where we can learn about animals, plants, and the
environment. By protecting them, we can keep learning new things and understanding how we can take care of our planet better.
7. Fun and Adventure: Natural reserves are great places to explore, play, and have fun! Whether it's hiking on trails, spotting
animals, or having a picnic, there are so many exciting things to do in natural reserves. By protecting them, we can make sure these
special places stay fun for us and future generations.
So, by protecting natural reserves, we're not just helping animals and plants - we're also making sure our planet stays healthy and
beautiful for everyone to enjoy!
68
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
E ssential Learning Outcome: To understand that our island has important geographic features that make us unique
Grade Level Expectations:
K- Identify the sources and status of our island’s fresh water
S- Determine the ways that you can help conserve and protect our local water sources
V- Appreciate the importance of protecting our fresh water sources
Focus Questions:
1. Where does your tap water come from?
2. Why is it important to protect our fresh water sources?
3. How do we source water in times of drought?
Specific Curricu lum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners will be expected to: Observation: Fresh Water Sources
Are students able to identify the different sources Introduction:
4-ST-K-7 of fresh water? Begin the lesson with an experiment.
Experiment:
Identify the sources and status of our Conversation: Each student will have two glasses of potable fresh water.
i sland’s fresh water. Can students identify and state the location of fresh Teacher will direct students to add salt to one of the glasses.
water sources in their country? Students will then taste the water from each glass. Teacher
Can students tell where tap water comes from? would ask: Would you drink salt water on a regular basis? Why?
Which of the water would you drink regularly? Would you clean
or wash dishes with this water? Where, in the natural
Product:
environment would you find salt water/ portable(drinkable)
Are students able to present well illustrated or video
water?
recorded information on the fresh water sources in
their country?
Following the experiment, the teacher will ask students if they
know where their tap water comes from. Ask them if they know
what the sources of freshwater are. (refer to Additional Content)
Show students pictures of different sources of freshwater and ask
them to identify each one. Alternatively, students can view a
video depicting sources of fresh water.
https://youtu.be/i8uRAglvHuU?si=FpZzC5rXU4G7302P
69
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curricu lum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Create a chart on the board or on chart paper that lists the
different sources of freshwater and their characteristics.
Distribute notebooks and pencils to students and have them
create their own charts of the different sources of fresh water.
Map work:
Indicating the location of fresh water sources on a map. (Utilise
the District map from your portfolio)
Whole class Discussion:
Discuss the characteristics of fresh water sources in your country,
such as size, flow rate, and location. ( Questions to consider:
Has the flow rate changed over the years? Has the size changed over the
years? Where is the water source located? Is there a native name for the water
source? Is it protected?)
Small Group:
Ask students to work in pairs or small groups to research one of
the freshwater sources in their country and create a presentation
for the class. Give students Guiding Checklist for the
Presentation:
1. Is the fresh water source identified?
2. Does it have a native name?
3. Is the location of the freshwater source identified?
4. What are the uses of this fresh water source?
5. Is this fresh water source protected?
6. Has there been any noticeable changes to that water
source over the last decade?
Students should be encouraged to utilize I.C.T to develop their
presentation.
Have students present their research to the class and discuss the
importance of each source of fresh water.
70
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curricu lum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Brochure:(Independent Work)
Students utilize the information gathered from the small group
presentations and create an information brochure. This
information brochure will be titled, “ Fresh water Sources in my
Country- Let’s Conserve It, Let’s Protect It”. This brochure
should include the map (District map from the portfolio) of their
country with the location of the Freshwater sources. Elements of
a map should apply.
Observation: Conserving and Protecting Our Island’s Fresh Water
4-ST-S-7 Are students able to identify ways they can Sources
personally take action to help protect water
Determine the ways that you can help sources? Introduction
conserve and protect our local water Ask students if they know what water conservation means.
s ources Conversation: Brainstorm with students what might happen if we don't take
Are students able to share their understanding of care of our water sources.
the importance of conserving and protecting local Explain why it is important to conserve and protect water.
water sources?
Reduce water waste: Discuss with the students how they can
Product: reduce water waste at home and at school. Explain that turning
Are students able to collaborate in small groups to off the tap when brushing teeth, taking shorter showers, and
produce a poster that promotes water conservation fixing leaky faucets can save a lot of water. Teacher can
and protection? demonstrate how to check for leaky faucets and explain how to
fix them.
Are students able to add pointers on conservation
and protection of fresh water sources in their Class demonstration. Students will be able to
country in their brochure? a. visualise how much water is collected when brushing
their teeth while the pipe is running.
b. Estimate how much water they think is used
Students should be encouraged to conduct and record
observations at home as it relates to the use/misuse of water for
about 3 days(or over a weekend) and share them with class. As a
class, students may visit a fresh water source near them.
Do not pollute water sources: Discuss how pollution can affect
our water sources. Explain how chemicals, trash, and oil can
harm the water and make it unsafe to drink or swim in. Discuss
with the students how they can help keep our water sources clean
by not littering and properly disposing of chemicals.
71
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curricu lum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Demonstration- teacher adds pollutants to water and asks will
engage the students in questions that encourage them to share
their understanding, analytical skills and problem-solving skills.
For demonstration purposes, teacher may use dye, cooking oil,
etc as pollutants. Teacher may ask for example, “Would you
drink this water? Why? Would you consider this water safe”?
Use water wisely: Discuss with the students how they can use
water wisely. Explain that washing a car can use a lot of water
and suggest using a bucket instead of a hose. Discuss how
watering plants in the early morning or late evening can reduce
water evaporation. Demonstrate how to check for a running
toilet and explain how to fix it.
Teacher will chart ideas in a mind map on the board.
Water Conservation Tips
Students share their knowledge based on their observations from
their home investigation (re: previous lesson) Alternatively, the
teacher will give each student a printed handout with water
conservation tips.
Ask students to read the tips silently, then share with a partner
what they learned.
As a class, discuss some of the tips and why they are important.
Encourage students to share any additional water conservation
tips they know.
Group Activity
Divide students into small groups.
Provide each group with a poster board and markers.
Ask each group to create a poster that promotes water
conservation and protection.
Encourage students to use their creativity and come up with their
own ideas for the poster.
Personal Action Plan
Ask each student to think about one thing they can do to help
conserve and protect water.
72
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curricu lum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Have each student add a section to their brochure which depicts
four annotated illustrations focusing on conservation and
p rotection of fresh water sources in their country.
4-ST-V-7-Appreciate the importance of Observation: TAKING ACTION-PROTECT OUR FRESH WATER
p rotecting our fresh water sources Are students showing a positive attitude / interest SOURCES
towards the idea that it is important to protect our
fresh water sources? Introduction:
Begin by asking students to share their understanding of the
Product: importance of protecting our fresh water sources.
Are students able to work collaboratively to Students should create a timetable/ schedule of organized
organize and execute a schedule of activities aimed activities that they will engage in to develop an appreciation for
at protecting fresh water sources in their area? and be active participants in protecting our fresh water sources.
(See Possible Activities)
Are students able to create and execute a
promotional campaign to encourage community In small groups (or as a whole class), students can create a
m embers to protect their local fresh water sources? promotional campaign in collaboration with a local media outlet
(if possible), to encourage community members to protect fresh
water sources. This can be in the form of a video, a jingle/ song,
etc. Upon completion, this should be posted on the school’s
social media pages, website and shared with the parent body.
POSSIBLE ACTIVITIES: These may serve as Work stations/
Learning Stations.
Water Filtration Experiment - This experiment will help
students understand how water filtration works. Students can use
materials like sand, gravel, and cotton to create their water
filtration system. They can pour dirty water into the system and
observe how clean water comes out of the other end.
Water Cycle Bracelet - This activity will help students
understand the water cycle and how it works. Students can create
a bracelet that represents the different stages of the water cycle,
such as evaporation, condensation, and precipitation.
Build a Rain Barrel - This activity will help students understand
the importance of collecting rainwater and how it can be used to
conserve water. Students can build a rain barrel using materials
like a plastic drum, spigot, and a screen.
73
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curricu lum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Water Scarcity Simulation - This activity will help students
understand the impact of water scarcity on communities.
Students can simulate a water scarcity situation in their classroom
by rationing water and observing the effects on their daily lives.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Freshwater sources are natural sources of water that have low levels of dissolved salts and other minerals. These sources of water can be found in various forms
such as rivers, lakes, and underground aquifers.
Additionally, in countries located in the temperate zone, they can also be found in the form of snow and ice, which can melt and provide freshwater.
Freshwater sources are essential for human life, as we need water to drink, cook, and bathe. They also provide water for agriculture, which is necessary for growing
crops and raising livestock.
However, it is important to note that freshwater sources can be affected by pollution and climate change, which can have negative impacts on both human and
animal life. It is therefore vital that we take steps to protect and conserve these valuable resources.
74
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand that our island has important geographic features that make us unique
Grade Level Expectations:
K- Explain the impact of human activity on the natural environment
S- Gather information from multiple sources to explain the impact of human activity on the natural environment
V- Appreciate that we can reduce the negative effects of human activity on our natural environment
Focus Questions:
1. How does human activity impact the natural environment?
2. How can we lessen the negative effects of human activity on our environment?
Specific Curricu lum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners will be expected to: Observation: IMPACT OF HUMAN ACTIVITY ON THE
Can students differentiate between human activities that NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
4-ST-K-8 have a positive impact on the natural environment versus Introduction: Begin the lesson by showing students
those that negatively impact the natural environment? pictures of different types of environments, and asking
Explain the impact of human activity on them to describe what they see. Ask them to think about
t he natural environment Conversation: what might happen to these environments if people were
Can students explain how different activities impact the to start littering, cutting down trees, or building roads.
natural environment? Main Activity: Next, provide examples of different types
of human activities that can impact the environment. For
Product: each example, ask the students to identify how it might
affect the environment and those that are beneficial to the
environment. For example, if the example is littering, the
Can students create a chart to group human activities as
students might say that it can harm animals who mistake
having a Positive or Negative impact on the natural
environment?
the litter for food, or that it can pollute the soil and water.
As a class, create a chart that lists the different types of
human activities and the ways in which they can impact
the environment. After each example, ask the students to
suggest ways in which they can help to reduce their own
i mpact on the environment.
75
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curricu lum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Observation: DATA COLLECTION- Impact of Human Activity
4-ST-S-8 Are students able to engage in note taking strategies to aid on the Natural Environment
developing a body of information relevant to the different
Gather information from multiple ways human activity impacts the environment? Introduction:
sources to explain the impact of human Begin by asking students if they have ever heard the term
a ctivity on the natural environment Conversation: "environment." Ask them what they think it means and
Are students able to discuss/ share with their peers why it is important to protect it. Encourage them to share
information they gathered that is relevant to the impact of their thoughts and ideas.
human activity on the natural environment? Gathering Information:
Provide students with access to books, articles, and
Product: websites on human impact on the environment. Ask them
Can students, as a group, produce a poster highlighting the to read and take notes on the information they find.
impact of human activity on the environment? Remind them to focus on the impact of human activity
on the environment. Provide worksheets for them to
organize their notes.
Discussion: After students have gathered their
information, facilitate a class discussion on what they have
learned. Ask students to share their notes and discuss the
different ways human activity impacts the environment.
Poster Creation: Divide students into small groups and
ask them to create a poster that illustrates the impact of
human activity on the environment. Encourage them to
be creative and use the information they gathered to make
their posters informative and engaging.
Presentation: Have each group present their poster to
the class. Encourage them to explain their poster and the
information they gathered.
Research project:
Divide students into groups and assign each group a
specific human activity that impacts the environment,
such as deforestation or pollution. Ask each group to
research their topic using a variety of sources, such as
books, websites, and videos. Then, have each group create
a presentation explaining their findings and the impact of
their assigned human activity on the natural environment.
76
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curricu lum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Environmental impact scavenger hunt:
Create a scavenger hunt where students search for
examples of human activity impacting the environment.
For example, students can look for litter in their
schoolyard or notice how cars contribute to air pollution.
After the scavenger hunt, have students share what they
found and discuss the impact of human activity on the
environment.
Eco-friendly invention challenge:
Challenge students to create an eco-friendly invention that
can help reduce the impact of human activity on the
environment. For example, they can design a solar-
powered car or a recycling robot. Students can research
existing eco-friendly inventions for inspiration and then
p resent their invention to the class.
4-ST-V-8 Observation: TAKING ACTION
Appreciate that we can reduce the Are students able to make connections with what they Introduction:
negative effects of human activity on have learned through discussions and research with what Begin by asking students what they know about the
o ur natural environment exists in their local environment? natural environment and what they have observed to be
: as negative impacts of human activity on the
environment.
Have students review the negative impacts humans can
Product:
have on the environment and the solutions students
identified to reduce these impacts. Students should create
Are students able to ‘act’ on their learning and to develop a
a timetable/ schedule of organized activities that they will
schedule, organise and execute activities that help reduce
engage in to show appreciation and be active participants
negative effects of human activity on our natural
environment?
in reducing negative effects of human activity on the
natural environment of their country.
POSSIBLE ACTIVITIES:
Trash Collection: Organize a trash collection activity in
your school or community. This activity can help students
understand the impact of littering on the environment
and how proper waste disposal can reduce the negative
effects of human activity on the natural environment.
Planting Trees: Arrange a tree-planting activity in your
school or community. This activity can help students
77
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curricu lum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
understand the importance of trees in the environment,
how they help reduce greenhouse gases, and how they
contribute to the overall health of the planet.
Nature Walk: Take students on a nature walk and
encourage them to observe the natural environment
around them. This activity can help students understand
the beauty and complexity of the environment, and how
human activity can have negative effects on it.
Recycling: Educate students about the importance of
recycling and how it can reduce the negative effects of
human activity on the environment. You can ask them to
create a recycling campaign or organize a recycling drive
in your school or community.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Human activity has a significant impact on the natural environment. This means that the things that people do every day can cause changes to the world around us.
Some of these changes can be good, but others can be harmful.
Positive Impact of Human Activity on the Natural Environment
1. People can plant trees and flowers, which can help to create habitats for animals and insects.
2. We can also recycle and reduce the amount of waste we produce, which can help to keep our planet clean and healthy.
Negative Impact of Human Activity on the Environment
Some of the things people do can be harmful to the environment. For example,
1. When we cut down trees, it can destroy habitats for animals and insects.
2. When we pollute the air and water with chemicals, it can make it difficult for plants and animals to survive.
It's important to remember that we all have a responsibility to take care of the environment. By making small changes in our daily lives, we can help to keep our
p lanet healthy for generations to come.
78
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Civic Participation
Introduction to Strand: This strand includes communication technology and how they impact our role in society. It also explores some of the
factors that led to the development of their nation. This includes major political events that shaped the nation and helped develop the political
system they enjoy today. Students learn the elements of their government system, including responsibilities and purposes and how thus relates to
the roles of local constituency representatives. The unit ends with an examination of what role they each can play in being responsible citizens.
Essential Learning Outcome: To determine that how we communicate with one another shapes our health, safety, and
progress
Grade Level Expectations:
Students would be able to:
1. Identify examples of communication technology in the past and their uses (and uses of communication technology utilized in
the past).
2. Describe how communication technology has evolved over time.
3. Appreciate that improvements in technology have significantly impacted how people communicate with each other.
Focus Questions:
1. What changes in communication technologies have influenced our way of life the most.
79
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curricu lum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to: Conversation: Are students able to Introduction: Concept Building: (Communication
demonstrate that communication technology)
4-CP-K- 1 Identify ways in
technology serves as efficient and What does communication technology mean?
which communication
technology has evolved over effective tools/devices to share • Students work in pairs to create paper cup
information? phones.
time.
Students then test their paper cup phones by
communicating with each other from different
distances in the classroom.
Product: Are students able to
• Students engage in a guided discussion on:
construct a clear definition of the
a. The use of paper cups phones
term ‘Communication Technology’
(telephone replica) as a means of
following discussion?
communication.
b. The meaning of the term
"communication technology".
• Guided questions may include:
Conversation
i.Why were we able to use this paper cup
• - Are students presenting a phone to communicate?
variety of communication ii.What do you think communication
technologies used nowadays? means?
• Are students listing different iii.Who sent the messages?
communication technologies iv.Who received the messages?
used long ago? v.What other means of communication
• Are students able to articulate can be used to send and receive
that communication messages?
technologies have changed
over the years?
Product: • Teacher guides students to the definition of
Communication Technology.
Students complete an Exit Slip of:
80
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curricu lum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Communication technology is any tool that
i. Three ways in which people use to share information
communication technology effectively in a simple way.
has evolved over time.
ii. Two
communication
technologies they find most
interesting, and why.
iii. One drawing of a
new communication technology they
imagine will be invented and explain
how it will work Concept Development / Guided Discussion
• Sam lives with his grandmother. His mommy
lives in Canada and his dad sails on a cruise
ship. He misses them a lot, but he is happy that
he can speak to them every day. Sometimes,
they would even show him clothes and toys in
the store in Canada and other countries and ask
if he likes them.
1. How is this possible for him to speak to
his parents every day and even see
things where they are even though they
are so far away?
2. Can you recall a time when you had to
use technology to communicate? What
was it?
81
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curricu lum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Demonstration/Video 3. When your grandparents were children,
Conferencing: Are students able to do you think it was possible for them to
make links between ways of communicate the way Sam is
communicating in the past and ways doing? Why?
of communication now? 4. Students recall another experience
where they communicate via distance
using modern technology.
• The teacher establishes that the lesson will
focus on ways in which communication
technology has changed over time.
• Students brainstorm on ways in which people
communicated in ancient times and new ways
people communicate nowadays?
• Students are guided to list communication
technologies of ancient times and
communication technologies of the present.
Communication Communication
Technologies of the Technologies of the
Past Present
82
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curricu lum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Teachers and students establish appropriate
situations for use of communication
technology.
Mini Research
• Students view video or graphic image, or read
text on ways in which people communicated in
ancient times and new ways people
communicate nowadays.
• Teacher and students create a list of the ways in
which communication technology has evolved
over time.
• Students and teacher discuss advantages and
disadvantages of some communication
technologies of the past and of the present.
Sequencing Communication Technologies by
invention/use:
• Teacher displays an array of real life examples
or pictures of communication technology used
in the past and in the present. For example, a
letter in an envelope, passing stories by word of
mouth by runners or boat, letters carried by
ship, flags raised at harbours, fax, email, video
conference, cell phone, cell phone video a
telegram, smoke signal, a fixed line phone, a
smartphone/tablet/computer that can send text
messages, emails among other features)
83
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curricu lum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Students will attempt to arrange them in order
of invention.
• Students then answer the following questions in
a written reflection to demonstrate their
understanding of the evolution of
communication technology:
i. Which of the communication technologies
discussed did you find most interesting, and
why?
ii. Why was this communication technology you
chose appropriate for the time it was used?
iii. What do you think communication technology
will look like in the future?
Those students who have difficulty reading and writing
may be given the opportunity to share orally or with
the use of assistive technology such as speech-to-text
software or voice recording devices.
Teachers and students discuss traditional and modern
careers associated with communication technology?
4-CP- S- 1 Create a timeline of Product- Timeline: Do students Timeline:
changes in communications accurately reflect the changes in • Using the information they learned in HCT-K-
technology. communication technology over time 6, students will work in groups to create a
on their timeline? timeline of key advancements in
communication technology, starting from the
earliest forms, such as smoke signals and
84
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curricu lum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
carrier pigeons, to more recent innovations like
smartphones and social media platforms, using
Bristol board and other materials.
• Students may use digital tools like online
timeline generators or presentation software to
build timelines. (E.g. Timeline | Read Write
Think ). Students should include images or
replicas.
• Teachers should facilitate the activity by
reviewing the information students listed on the
changes in communication technology. and
guiding students on how to organise their
timeline.
4-CP-V-1 Appreciate that Observation/Product - Dramatisation/Reflection:
improvements in technology Dramatisation: are students able to • The teacher or a student walks into the
have significantly impacted how demonstrate how improvements in classroom (dressed as a
people communicate with each communication technologies have postman/postmistress) and distributes
other. impacted how we communicate? some letters to the class. The letters
were sent by their family members, or
friends overseas. The students will reply
to their senders/family members/friends
and mail them.
• After the writing process, the students
will answer to questions:
• What do you enjoy the most about
receiving and sending the letter?
• What do you least enjoy about receiving
and sending the letter?
85
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curricu lum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• How do you receive and send messages
to your friends and family members
currently?
• What is different about the way you send and
receive messages nowadays than the ways they
were sent long ago?
• Students send a message to a loved one using
any mode of communication technology of
their choice (letter, email, sms, voice note,
video conferencing). They then give reasons
for their choices.
OR
• Students work in groups to create a skit
showcasing specific technological advances
and their impact on society. For example:
i. One group act out a scene where they
demonstrate the use of smoke signals to send
messages during ancient times, followed by a
scene showing the use of smartphones in
modern times.
ii. One group may act out a scene where
they demonstrate the use of letters to send
messages, followed by a scene showing the use
of email in modern times.
iii. One group may act out a scene where
they demonstrated the use of radio to send
messages, followed by a scene showing the use
of podcasts in modern times.
86
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curricu lum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Each group must identify at least two ways in
which the communication technology they are
showcasing has changed how
people communicate.
• Students then reflect on each other’s
presentation. Guided questions could include:
1. Which presentation do you think is best
and why?
2. Which of the older communication
technologies did you find interesting or
surprising?
3. Which communication technology do
you prefer, and why?
• To further demonstrate how communication
technology has transformed the way we engage
and disseminate information, students should
be able to invite their parents to view skits via a
virtual platform if feasible.
Additional Resources and Materials:
• Timeline | Read Write Think
• Means of Communication video for kids | Communication video for kids
• Communication
• The Evolution of Communication
• Evolution Of Communication
• Past and Present | Technology Then and Now
87
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
• Communication technology refers to the tools and symbols that are used to send and receive messages or information. This
includes:
i. Telephones
ii. Letters
iii. Radios
iv. Computers
v. The internet
vi. Speech
vii. Signs
viii. Sign language
Traditional communication has evolved to include more advanced methods such as telegraphs, telephones, the internet,
smartphones and social media platforms.
• Communication technology can be traced back to ancient times, with the use of smoke signals and carrier pigeons. Over
time, communication technology has changed.
• Ways in which communication technology has changed.
New devices were invented - for example, the internet, smart phones, learning platforms such as google classroom and
MS Teams, FaceBook, Instagram. It is now faster, cheaper and easier to communicate.
• These advancements have greatly improved the speed and efficiency of communication, allowing for instant messaging,
video calls, and global connectivity.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
• Language Arts: Journal writing
• Science and Technology: Technological devices
• Arts and Crafts: Dramatisation
88
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: To determine that how we communicate with one another shapes our health, safety, and
progress
Grade Level Expectations:
Students would be able to:
1. Identify the various forms of transportation past and present.
2. Discuss the challenges faced in local transportation and predict solutions to these issues.
3. Recognise the positive and negative impact of transportation on our economy, environment and health.
Focus Questions:
1. How has transportation technology evolved overtime?
2. What are the reasons for the changes in transportation technology?
3. How has transportation technology affected our way of life?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to: Introduction: Jigsaw Puzzle/Conversation:
4-CP-K-2 Compare current forms • Students work in pairs to complete a jigsaw
puzzle depicting different forms of
of transportation used in our
transportation in a given time period. (E.g.My
country to those used in the past.
Puzzles - Transportation - 84519958-vector-
illustration-of-cartoon-transportation-
vocabulary (jigsawplanet.com))
• Students participate in a class discussion.
Guided questions may include:
i.What are the different forms of transportation shown
in the puzzle?
ii.Which forms are used in our country today?
89
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
iii.Which would you like to drive when you get older?
iv.Do you think this vehicle will still exist in the future
when you become old enough to buy one? Why?
v.What about the forms that are used now in our
country? Did they always exist?
• Students then predict what they think are the
topic and big/main idea of the lesson.
• Teacher pulls from students' responses to
introduce the lesson's topic and objectives.
Observation/Conversation -
Think/Pair/Share: Are students able
to identify different forms of
transportation from given clues?
Think/Pair/Share: (All things transportation)
• Students work in groups/pairs or as
individuals to provide answers to the clues
about transportation.
1. It travels quickly through the
clouds_____ (Suggested answers:
aeroplane, jet, helicopter, drones,
spaceships and rockets)
2. I use this type of transport to travel to
school everyday_____ (Suggested
answers: car, jeep, minivan/bus,
school bus, motorcycle/scooter,
etc…)
3. The song says “the wheels on the
_____ go round and round.”
(Suggested answers: bus)
Product - Interactive Presentation:
Can students create an effective and
90
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
visually appealing representation of 4. It travels on water _____ (Suggested
the evolution of transportation in answers: boat, ship, yacht, jetski,
their country using traditional paper- catamaran, canoes)
based methods or interactive digital 5. Using this type of transport is a way of
tools? exercising the body. _____ (Suggested
answers: walking, running, cycling)
• Students view a video on the forms of
transportation.
(Eg.https://youtu.be/d0ySC2tzlZI?si=cxlqI0n
8g3wUIxq6)
• Students then take turns sharing their ideas
about the different forms of transportation
based on the video.
Story-telling/Interactive Presentation:
• Students listen to or read a story/exposition
(existing or teacher-created) on the different
forms of transportation .The story should be
accompanied by a slideshow depicting past
and present forms of transportation.
• Students create a visual representation of the
evolution of transportation in their country.
See examples below:
91
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Source: Past (Then), Present (Now)
Source: Transportation: Past and Present
92
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Source: Transportation Now (Worksheet)
4-CP-S-2 Investigate challenges Product: Can students collect data Guided Research:
in local transportation and predict on the challenges in local 1. Students work in small groups to design a
possible future solutions to the transportation through interviews? simple data collection tool to gather
transportation issues. information on transportation challenges
Conversation: Can students predict
faced by their classmates. This will entail:
solutions to challenges in local
a. Conducting interviews with their classmates
transportation based on data collected
and recording their responses using paper or a digital
and discussion of findings?
device. Teacher should provide students with the
questions to ask:
i.How do you travel to school?
ii.What are some of the challenges you face as you
travel to school?
iii.What do you think can be done to make travelling
easier for you?
93
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
b. Presenting their findings: challenges (2-3) and
possible solutions (2-3).
2. Students then engage in whole class
discussion. Guided questions may include:
i. What are some of the challenges that were
identified by the different groups?
ii. Which challenges do you experience?
iii. What were some of the proposed solutions?
iv. Which solution do you like best? Why?
v. How do you see the future of transportation in
your country?
3. Students and teacher summarise the main
challenges and solutions discussed.
4. Teacher also notes other challenges that were
not addressed by the groups and encourages students
to think about how those could be overcome in the
future.
5. Video recordings of group presentations may
be uploaded to online classrooms for future reference.
4-CP-V-2 Appreciate that • Product-Journal Reflection: Guest Speaker/Journal Reflection:
efficient transportation has both Can students represent the • Many of the students will know someone that
positive and negative implications information learnt about the is involved in the transportation of people or
for our economy, environment, positive and negative goods.
and health. implications of transportation invite students to share this and then invite
for our economy, one or more of these individuals such as a
environment and health? local taxi driver, bus driver, truck driver,
water ferry or catamaran tour operator or
airline pilot, on the challenges and benefits of
their mode of transportation.
94
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• The speaker will be required to keep his/her
presentation under 5 minutes and to include
practical examples as well as visual and/or
audio aids to keep students engaged. Ask
them to comment on the economy and
environmental nature of their form of
transportation and to share the challenges they
may have with transporting with their mode
of transportation?
• Students will then ask questions or share their
own thoughts on the topic. Teacher works
with students beforehand to develop possible
questions to ask.
• Students will then create a brief journal entry
using any mode of their choice (e.g. narrative,
poem, video, audio recording, or song) to
reflect on the information learnt from the
discussion. Guided questions may include:
i. What did you like most about the talk?
ii. What was one thing you learnt that you didn't
know before?
iii. What is one question you still have?
iv. What are two positive/negative impacts of any
form of transportation discussed?
v. What can you or society do to help reduce the
negative effects of transportation?
• Students then share their reflections with the
whole class to foster further discussion on the
topic. The teacher should also use this time to
clarify any misconceptions that may arise.
95
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Students' reflections will be placed on the
online classroom portal for future reference
by students.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
• Transportation refers to the movement of people, goods, or animals from one place to another.
• There are many different forms of transportation including automobiles, trains, aircraft and ships.
• In the Caribbean transportation has evolved from traditional forms such as canoes, animals to modern forms like cars,
aeroplanes, cruiseship and drones.
• This evolution has brought about positive impacts.
• However, this progress has also led to negative impacts. For example:
i. Higher levels of air pollution
ii. Climate change - change in weather patterns (e.g. regular hurricanes)
iii. Health risks (respiratory/breathing problems, allergies)
iv. Increased transportation cost (tickets to travel (by bus, plane, or boat) tend to be expensive)
v. Deforestation - cutting down trees.
vi. Habitat destruction - destruction of homes.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
• Language Arts: Story telling, reading comprehension, oral expression
• S cience: Movement (transportation)
96
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: To appreciate how our island(s) followed a unique path to nationhood
Grade Level Expectations:
K-List some of the major events in the political evolution of your country-territory
S-Show the sequence of political milestones on a timeline from colony to independence/semi-independence
V-Appreciate the importance of patriotism and the role of national leaders in achieving political change
Focus Questions:
1. What are the main political events that have help to shape a country/territory?
2 . What is the role of national leaders in achieving political change?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners will be expected to: Observe Introduction - Class Discussion:
4CP-K1 -List some of the major
Are students able to look at a Have students look at a slideshow/video with various
events in the political evolution of
teacher-created slideshow or video to political events for example: colonisation,
your country-territory
identify the major political events in emancipation, statehood, independence, revolution
the country.
Discussion on the various events that were shown in
the slideshow/video.
Suggested questions
What were some of the events shown?
How did you feel when you viewed the video?
97
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
What brought about the political events of the
country?
How have they changed the way we live?
Conversation
Do you think that these changes were necessary?
Are students able to list the major
Why?
events in the political evolution in the
country? Timeline
Record some of the political events on a timeline that
were most important for the development of the
Product
country.
Are students able to research and
present information on major events
in politics in their country?
Group Work and Oral Presentation
Arrange students in small groups and give each group
one of the major events in the politics of the country.
Each group will do additional research using the
internet and teacher supplied material. Each group will
create a timeline entry that includes the date conflict or
problem issue, persons involved from one or more
sides or points of view, milestones reached.
98
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Each group will post their timeline entry on the
timelines and share it with the class and allow the other
groups to ask questions after the presentation.
Role Play or T-Chart
Based on their timeline entry, guide students to create a
T chart on the importance and benefits of their major
political event. Students will present as though they are
in parliament or before a student body.
OR
Artwork
Provide a variety of art products such as markers,
crayons, construction paper, playdough, water paint,
scissors, glue, etc
Have students design a scroll to document their major
events.
Display
Display students artwork or T-chart
Invite other classes to view the scrolls or T-charts.
99
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Poetry/Music
Have students identify if any musicians have created a
benna, calypso soca or social commentary of their
event? If so share it.
4CP-S1 - Show the sequence of Observation Introduction: Class Discussion
political milestones on a timeline
Are students able to arrange a set of After placing the pictures across the timeline, students
from colony to
pictures from colony to independence will discuss what the order of arrangement shows them
independence/semi-independence
or semi-independence? about the changes that have occurred. What has
changed? How is the country better off? Why?
Question and Answer
Who were the colonies?
What happened during the slavery period?
Conversation :
How did the slaves got their freedom?
Are students able to explain the
reason for their arrangement?
Game: Given duplicate pictures students will create the
timeline from colony to independence/semi-
Observation
independence in 2 minutes.
Are students able to appreciate a
Art and Craft
resource person of political figure in
the community explain the Given pictures, bristol board, markers, yarn and glue
importance of patriotism and how students will be grouped to create time lime showing
the sequence from colony to independence. Work will
100
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
he/she made a change in the be displayed in the school’s library after short
community and society presentation at general assembly.
4CP-V1 Conversation Introduction Class Discussion
Appreciate the importance of Are the students able to explain what Brainstorming information (KWL)
patriotism and the role of national it means to be patriotic and the roles
After their presentation students will relate what they
leaders in achieving political of national leaders.
know about patriotism and the role of national leaders
change
Product
Journal Writing: instead, what about a biography poster
Are students able to identify their that represents an individual who showed patriotism?
national leaders?
Cut your poster into a shape that relates to your person;
Are students able write include their full name and copy or draw their picture
constructively on patriotism and the from sources; place 1-4 other pictures that help
roles of national leaders? describe their acts of patriotism; locate 1-3 quotation
that describes their character, eg brave, courageous, etc;
put some of the following statements and answer them
as if from the first person “I am proud of the following
accomplishments I made; when I look back on this
event I am sad that…; when people remember me, I
want them to say….; if I could have change anything
else in my life it would have been…”
Create an expository piece on either
The Importance of Patriotism
101
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
The Role of National Leaders in Achieving Political
Change
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Political events shaped the future of our countries. These events socialize and educate citizens. A political event involves creation
of political parties, accomplishments of political parties that shaped the country’s future, election processes of the country that
caused significant changes to the development, famous speeches and contributions made by candidates during before and after the
election process.
Some major political events include: Independence Day, Emancipation Day, Election Day, Naming/Renaming to mark significant
a ccomplishments of politicians, Labour Day, Conflicts that have risen as a result of political influence, creation of political parties.
102
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: To appreciate how our island(s) followed a unique path to nationhood
Grade Level Expectations:
K-Describe the type of government system in your country
S-Investigate and outline the various purposes and responsibilities of your government
V-Appreciate that the government system and structure in the country is influenced by the history of colonization.
Focus questions:
1. What is the type of system used to govern one’s country?
2. What is the main purpose and responsibilities of the government?
3. How has colonization impacted the country’s government system and structure?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to: Product Introduction - Jigsaw:
4CP-K-2 -Describe the type of Are students able to identify their Types of decision making
government system in your country government system after a research?
Ask the class to come up with a practical idea which might
improve your school in some way, but which might not be
popular with all students, for example:
No unhealthy food is allowed to be sold by vendors
First fifteen minutes of every school day is for reciting
homework that they had to memorize
Students should have to stop wearing school uniforms.
Tell the students that this is an important decision and that
there are a number of ways that they could make this
103
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
decision. Use the Decision-making table to tell the class
about the 4 different decision-making methods they will
undertake.
Conversation Decision-making table
Are students able to share Use this decision making table to help your students
information gathered about the complete the Explore decision making classroom activity.
country’s government system?
DECISION INSTRUCTION RESULT
METHOD
Autocratic Randomly select
Observation
decision an autocrat to
Are students able to present decide.
information on their government
system?
Executive Determine a
decision small executive –
2 or 3 people –
to decide.
Conversation
Majority Consensus Negotiate
Are students able to discuss the
decision decision until
purposes and responsibilities of the
government?
104
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
the class
agrees.
Ask students to use each of the 4 decision-making
methods to decide the outcome. Record the decision made
using each method.
Tell the class that as a teacher you have a right to veto any
decisions that were made. Decide whether you would have
vetoed any of these decisions and give your reasons for
doing so.
Discuss the following questions with your class:
Which form of decision-making was most efficient?
Was it difficult to reach a consensus? Why? What
difference would 60 students or 120 students make to this
method?
Which form of decision-making was most fair? Least fair?
What justification might the vetoer or autocrat have for
their roles?
Tell the students that their national parliament uses
majority rule rather than consensus for making decisions.
Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of this method.
105
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The teach can then proceed to share some elements of the
structure of the government, being careful not to
overwhelm the students with detail or to share information
that is not relevant for them.
Key questions :
1. Describe how the government system is set up?
2. Who holds the power in the government?
3. How did our country come to use this type of
government system?
Poster
Students will be given materials to create a poster.
Students will design a poster showing the elements
researched on the government system used in the country.
Introduction: Class Debate
After learning about political decision making students will
identify the purpose and responsibilities of their
government.
Students will share their view on the best ways for
government to make decisions from those experienced.
106
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The saving of the environment is not the government's
responsibility.
Whole Class Discussion
as part of the classroom discussion, the teacher will give
feedback to each point of view to help them understand
why the government makes decisions as it does
.
Video
Students will make a video or poster using any platform or
app sharing that illustrates their government’s purpose and
responsibilities.
Students can create a slogan or hashtag so that others can
participate in this activity.
4 CP-V2 -Appreciate that the Introduction Class Discussion
government system and structure
Students will use a cause and effect chart to aid them in
in the country is influenced by the
developing an understanding of how colonization helped
history of colonization.
to form our present government system and structure.
Students will listen to the history of how colonization
played a part in our present government system through
readings, recordings, documentaries or videos.
107
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Students will discuss how colonization has influenced
our government system and structure.Then students will
complete KWL.
Poem: Create a poem that expresses the impact of
colonization on the type of government that we have
today.
4CP-S-2 - Investigate and outline Observation
the various purposes and
Are students able to make valid
responsibilities of your
points during the debate on the
government
purpose and responsibilities of the
government?
Product
Are students able to state the main
purpose and responsibilities of their
government?
Conversation : Are students able to
express understanding of how
colonization impacted our structure
and government system?
Observation
108
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Are students able to appreciate the
information gathered about the
influence of colonization on the
country’s government system?
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Government systems: Parliamentary System, Constitutional Monarchy, Republic, Dependent Territory
Structure of government: executive, legislative and judiciary
Purpose and responsibility of government: making and maintain law and order; protecting citizens; providing public services e.g health, education,
infrastructure
H ow government systems affect students lives: school rules, traffic laws, prices, health care
109
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: To appreciate how our island(s) followed a unique path to nationhood
Grade Level Expectations:
K-Explain what democracy is and share some examples
S-Demonstrate ways in which we can actively participate in our democracy
V-Appreciate the value of democracy for protecting our individual rights and freedom
Focus questions:
1. What is democracy?
2. How can we demonstrate our democracy?
3. What can be done to protect our individual rights and freedom?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to:
Conversation Decision Making Role-Play and Discussion
4CP-K-3- Explain what democracy
Ask students to recall the outcomes of the decision
is and share some examples Are students able to articulate a
making table and compare majority and consensus to
definition for the term democracy?
executive and autocratic decisions. What is the
difference? Help students see that democracy means
that the people have their say in how the government
is run and they do this by voting. The two decision
making types (majority and consensus) are examples
of democracy because the people get to decide. In the
other two decision making types (autocratic and
executive) the people do not get to decide.
Present a scenario to the class: The government is in
the process of making a law to ban cycling in all
110
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
communities. Each person in the group shares an
example of a democratic action that they might take to
ensure they have a voice in influencing the vote on
Product this decision: (Ex. Call in to a radio program, protest
in front of the legislature, pen a letter to the
Are students able to read articles from
parliamentary representative).
reputable sources on democracy to
arrive at a deeper understanding of Now invite students to share what it would look like if
democracy and what it entails? they had no say in this matter. What sort of actions
by the government would make this undemocratic in
which they do not get a voice?
Conversation
Discussion
Are students able to discuss examples
of democracy at home and school? Use guided questions based on these scenarios to help
students share other examples of democracy on their
own.
Record their responses on chart paper.
Place students into small groups. Give each group a
handout such as what follows to read and discuss
among themselves their understanding of what was
written about democracy. Use a Plus-Minus-
4CP- S-3- Demonstrate ways in
Conversation Interesting graphic organizer that compares pluses
which we can actively participate in
and minuses and what is interesting to them about
our democracy
Are students able to explain how democracy.
individuals can demonstrate active
participation in the decision making of
their country?
111
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Handout
Democracy means that governments are accountable
to the people. They can be voted out of power if their
decisions are not favored by the people. In
democracies, people have rights. Democracies make
rules and laws that protect rights and freedoms such
as freedom to speech out and the right to worship.
People can also protest if they disagree with things the
Product
government does as long as they do so without using
violence.
Are students able to demonstrate ways
in which they can actively participate
Democracies can also have disadvantages In many
in democracy?
democracies there are lots of people who may not
bother to vote or to take actions to question their
government’s decisions. Also, because governments
know they can be voted out they might make
promises they can’t or don’t keep.
Using the graphic organizer, have each group record
points that show the pluses, minuses of democracy.
Then get them to also share what they find interesting
about democracy.
Conversation
112
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Are students able to explain the Group work/Discussion/Oral Presentation
importance of democracy in protecting
their rights and freedom?
Discussion
Students are questioned on how democracy can be
exhibited at home and school.
Suggested questions
How can one demonstrate democracy at home or
school?
4CP-V-3-Appreciate the value of Product
democracy for protecting our
Do you think when you are given the opportunity to
individual rights and freedom Are students able to differentiate
select a class prefect that you are participating in a
between individual rights or freedom?
democratic system?
How does your participation in the democratic system
Product
make you feel as a citizen?
Are students able to collaboratively
Journal Writing
demonstrate how individual’s right
and freedom can be protected through
Have students write their thoughts about the
democracy?
discussion in their journals
Video Presentation/Questioning
Have students view a short video on the voting
process in their country where individuals go out to
vote for the leaders of the country.
113
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Here is a good little video about voting and freedoms
that is very child friendly.
https://www.tvokids.com/school-age/tvok-news-big-
picture/videos/tvok-news-what-democracy
Question students on the video they viewed.
Suggested questions
What did they learn about voting?
What did they learn about their individual rights and
freedoms and the dangers of not having these
freedoms?
Discussion
Students discuss the video and state the observations
they have made.
Students also can be asked to share how this shows
how to be active participants in a democratic system.
Engage students in discussion about why democracy
is important for protecting, individual’s rights and
freedom .Encourage the students to think and explain
114
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
about times when they have had the opportunity to
make choices or express their opinions.
Also, encourage the students to think about other
countries that do not have similar democracy and
individuals are not able to demonstrate any level of
rights and freedom.
Role Play/Group Work
Put students into two groups where they form two
political parties.
Invite each party to identify several issues that they
will work to solve for the class if they are elected.
Each group will select a leader for the political party.
Students will run a mock campaign.
Students will then role play an election day scene
where students will vote for a political party of their
choice.
The votes will be counted.
The winner of the election will then be announced.
115
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Blog, Tweet or Journal writing
Have students write their thoughts about the election
process and how they felt each party performed in
presenting their campaigns. How did they feel about
their ability to actively participate in this democratic
system to select the government of their choice to rule
their class?
Poster or Drawing
Provide a variety of art materials such as Bristol
board, crayons, markers, construction paper,
playdough, water paint, scissors, glue, etc. Have each
group create a poster or drawing that illustrates a
selected right or freedom and how democracy helps it.
Presentation: Gallery Walk
Display posters on a wall. Have groups of students
view and leave comments, compliments and questions
o n sticky notes next to each poster.
116
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
E ssential Learning Outcome: To appreciate how our island(s) followed a unique path to nationhood
Grade Level Expectations:
K- Identify that there are political constituencies in our country.
S- Locate the boundaries of the political constituency to which you belong.
V- Appreciate the importance of these constituencies for ensuring local representation.
Focus questions:
1. What are political constituencies?
2. To which constituency do you belong?
3. Why do we have constituencies?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to: Conversation: Are students able to Class Discussion
name and identify the number of
4CP-K-4--Identify that there are
constituencies? Invite the political representative from the constituency the school
political constituencies in our
is in to meet the class. (If the politician is unavailable, work with
country.
the class to email him and ask the following)
In preparation for this meeting, invite the students to review some
potential questions to ask the politician such as the following:
1. What does your job involve?
2. What do you like most about your job?
3. What are the hardest things about your job?
4. What are some of the things you are most
concerned about for your constituents?
5. Why did you want to be a politician?
6. What are some of the things you are most proud
of accomplishing?
7. When you look back on your job ten years from
now, what do you hope to be best remembered
for by your constituents?
117
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
8. Ask the students to also share any concerns they
have about things they are worried about in their
Conversation: Are students able to
school or home neighbourhood that they would
discuss the importance of local like to ask the politician to address.
4CP- V-4 Appreciate the
representation ?
importance of these constituencies
for ensuring local representation. Students can also be provided with and discuss posters from
Conversation: Are students able to the last general election in their country. Eg. (Grenada 2022
effectively share on the importance National election.
of the representative to the
constituency?
https://ndcgrenada.org/candidates/
https://www.facebook.com/photo?fbid=322545456729599&se
t=a.188024453515034
Students are then informed about the political parties and
who represented the parties during the elections. Students
are thus informed about what a constituency is and the
teacher can share a map to show them where all the
constituencies are in their country. Students are given a map
outline of their country divided into the constituencies with
labels to be added.
Product: Are students able to label Map work: Students are given a regular map of the
4CP- S-4 – Locate the boundaries constituencies constituency they belong to. Students also identify and name
of the political constituency to the villages that boundary their constituency. Pupils list villages
which you belong. bordering their constituency.
Map Work: Are students able to
identify the outline of their
constituency and locate places Discuss the results and the importance of local representation
surrounding it. in the decision-making process.
118
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: To appreciate how our island(s) followed a unique path to nationhood.
Grade Level Expectations:
K-Identify key figures who have made significant contributions to our national development
S-Develop criteria to justify determining who is a national hero/heroine
V-Appreciate the contribution of key figures to our national development
Focus questions:
1. Who do you think is a key figure or a national hero/heroine?
2. How can a person be considered a national hero/heroine or a key figure?
3. Should a country recognise people as national heroes/heroines or key figures?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to:
Conversation Introduction
4CP-K-5 -Identify key figures who have made
Are students able to identify and share
significant contributions to our national
members of their community whom they
development. Begin the lesson by asking students to think
admire?
about someone they admire who has made a
difference in our country. Allow a few
Observation volunteers to share their thoughts.
Are students able to listen attentively as the Introduce the topic by explaining that
teacher explains who is a key figure? throughout history, there have been many
individuals who have made significant
contributions to our national development.
Conversation
These individuals are known as key figures.
119
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Can students identify and list some Introduction to Key Figures
individuals from the country whom they
think are key figures?
Ask students to suggest some individuals in
the country whom they believe are key
Observation and Conversation figures. Then, present a slideshow and hold
a discussion on key figures in national
4CP-S-5-Develop criteria to justify
development, highlighting examples such as
determining who is a national Are students able to observe a slideshow
political leaders, social activists, educators,
hero/heroine. and subsequently participate in a discussion
cultural icons and sports personalities.
on the key figures presented?
Emphasise their roles and the importance of
their contributions. (Anticipate that students
Conversation may have the misconception that key figures
are only political leaders or well-known
personalities. Explain that key figures can
Can students formulate a definition for the
come from various fields and backgrounds.)
term National Hero/Heroine?
Definition of National Hero/Heroine
Observation
Explain to students that some of these key
Are students able to study the material
4CP- V-5-Appreciate the contribution of figures can be recognised by their countries
provided to gain an understanding of the
key figures to our national development as national heroes or heroines.
qualities of the national heroes?
Allow students to explain in their own
Product
words who they think is a national hero.
Write their suggestions on the board and
Can students work together to compile a list assist them in refining the definition, which
of criteria for identifying national should resemble the following: A National
heroes/heroines? Hero/Heroine is “a person who is admired
and acknowledged for their courage,
outstanding achievements, and noble
Conversation
qualities; and is someone who has made
significant, positive contributions to the
growth and development of society.”
120
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Are students able to give reasons why it is ( https://culture.bm/events/national-
important to have criteria for selecting a heroes-day/)
country’s national heroes/heroines?
Observation Investigation and Brainstorming
Are students able to distinguish among Ask students to explain what makes
people who qualify as national Superman, Spiderman, or Batman a
heroes/heroines or who don’t, after superhero. Make a list of all the
listening to some individual profiles? characteristics on chart paper or on the
board. Explain to the students that just as
these superheroes have some qualities (super
Product
powers) which help them to do their jobs,
so too a country’s national heroes must have
Are students able to select and make a some qualities or traits or must have done
presentation on a person whom they believe something very significant to enable him or
fit the criteria for national hero/heroine? her to be called a national hero/heroine.
Product Identify the country’s national heroes then
place students in small groups. Provide each
group with biographies, articles, and videos
Can students write a reflection on what they
of a national hero. Guide students in
have learned about national
studying the material and encourage them to
heroes/heroines, and how their thoughts
brainstorm and list attributes or qualities
have changed, now that they know more
that they believe the individual had that
about the topic?
made him or her a national hero or heroine.
Observation
Allow groups to present the qualities they
identified.
Are students able to show appreciation for
the contribution of key figures by listening
attentively to presentations, carefully
121
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
observing during visits to various sites, and Compiling National Hero Criteria
paying their respect to deceased key figures?
Based on the group discussions and
Product presentations, compile a master list of
criteria that students believe are appropriate
for identifying national heroes and heroines.
Are students able to produce creative works
(Can be written in a scroll-like shape to add
in groups that highlight and show
flair and interest.)
appreciation for the key figure selected?
If the country has a document that lists the
criteria for determining who a national
hero/heroines should be, students can
compare this with the master list created.
Class Discussion
Discuss the importance of having clear and
justifiable criteria for honouring individuals
as national heroes/heroines. (Is it necessary
for the country to have criteria for selecting
national heroes/heroines? Why or why not?)
Who Wants to be a National Hero?
Using a game-like format, where they raise
hands quickly to answer or buzz in,
encourage students to determine who
qualifies as a national hero/heroine, after
various profiles of individuals who may or
may not meet the criteria for national
hero/heroine status, are read.
122
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Oral presentations
Encourage students to select a person from
their community who they believe meets the
criteria for becoming a national
hero/heroine. Allow them to make oral
presentations, justifying why the individual
should become a national hero/heroine.
Reflection
Ask students to write a reflection on what
they have learned about national
heroes/heroines and the criteria used to
justify their status. Encourage them to
discuss any changes in their own perceptions
of what makes someone a national
hero/heroine.
(I used to think that a national hero/
heroine was… but now I’ve learned
that….)
Guest Speakers and Field Trips
Arrange for guest speakers, such as local
historians, community leaders, descendants
of key figures, or key figures themselves to
visit the class to share their insights and
experiences.
123
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Then, arrange visits to museums or
historical sites related to key figures and
their contributions.
Alternatively, or in addition, a wreath laying
ceremony can be organised at the gravesites
of deceased key figures of national
development.
Creative Projects and Presentations
Place students in small groups and
encourage them to express their
appreciation for key figures through creative
projects such as artwork, poems, songs, or
short stories. Then allow them to present
their creations during a school assembly and
then at a special gathering, such as during
Black History Month, or on National
Heroes’ Day, Independence Day
celebrations etc.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Definition of National Hero - “a person who is admired and acknowledged for their courage, outstanding achievements, and noble qualities; and is
someone who has made significant, positive contributions to the growth and development of society.”
https://culture.bm/events/national-heroes-day/
124
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Inclusive Resources and Materials:
· St. Vincent and the Grenadines’ First National Hero - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MA-7mzq17D4
· Grenada’s National Hero - https://radiojamaicanewsonline.com/regional/first-national-hero-in-grenada
· Grenada’s Transformative figures - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=crDTk83kbQQ
· St. Lucia’s National Hero - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O4fsUX3haUA
· Antigua and Barbuda’s National Heroes - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QOQDD6ZTuKI
· Dominica’s First National Hero - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W9QjmYRc3TI
· St. Kitt’s and Nevis’ National Heroes - https://www.gov.kn/national-heroes/#:~:text=The%20National%20Heroes,Excellent%20Simeon%20Daniel%20and%20Dr.
125
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: To appreciate how our island(s) followed a unique path to nationhood
Grade Level Expectations:
K - Explain our responsibilities to contribute to the development of the country
S - Display proper respectful behaviour towards others in the country
V - Appreciate that everyone has a responsibility to help develop the country
Focus questions:
1. What is meant by developing the country?
2. Who is responsible for developing the country?
3. In what ways can you contribute to developing the country?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to:
Observation Share the following ten actions that children could do to help
4CP – K-6- Explain our others and make their community a better place:
responsibilities to contribute to the Do the students show interest in 1. Bake sweets for a fire fighter, police or ambulance
development of the country these actions? worker.
2. Help someone with their homework.
3. Clean up garbage at a nature preserve or in your
neighbourhood.
4. Make a drawing and take it to a neighbors’ house.
126
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5. Make a poster promoting an issue or cause important to
you.
6. Visit an older relative in your neighbourhood.
7. Plant a tree or other plant at home or school.
8. Volunteer to help a neighbor with something.
9. Write a thank you note or say thank you to someone who
has done something kind.
Conversation 10. Make a friendly card or drawing for an elderly person.
Do the students see the way that Discuss these with the students and help them see he
these activities show responsibility possibilities of doing these and why each of them would lead
for helping and supporting others?
to good things. Help them see that these things all lead to
making their community a better place where people are
helped, supported and cared for. Use this to inspire the
students to choose an action to do this week and return to
this at the end of the week to discuss. Help them chose an
Observation
action.
Are students able to deduce the lesson
Music/Movement
topic based on a local calypso?
Play an excerpt of a local calypso highlighting nation-building to
get the students mentally prepared for the lesson. Invite students
to pay attention to the lyrics.
Let us build a nation together
We could make it if we try
Watch out my children
Conversation
Grenada belongs to we
127
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Are students able to explain how they
and others can contribute to the My Grenada
development of the country?
Whole class Discussion
Question students on the calypso.
“Do you know the name of the calypsonian? What was he or she
singing about?”
Invite students to do a spontaneous role-play to spark a
conversation on our responsibilities to contribute towards the
development of the country.
Prompt - Have 3 – 4 students in a conversation share their plans
after secondary school education - they are going away to study
and do not plan to return.
Use the role-play to initiate a discussion on responsibilities to
develop the country: “When someone says we need to develop
4CP – S6 the country what does that mean? What if more students like you
and other (insert nationality) were to leave and never return? What
Display proper respectful behaviour will happen to the country? Who is responsible for developing the
towards others in the country country?”
Product Record the responses on chart paper. Guide students to
categorize their responses according to education, healthcare, the
Are students able to work environment…
collaboratively to arrive at ways to
develop the country and share their Discussion After engaging in helping activities
ideas with the rest of the class?
128
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Group Work
Place students in groups to discuss the actions they have taken
and to share how these actions made them and those they helped
feel? Help themsee that these are examples of the sorts of things
they can do to contribute to developing the country.
Move from this discussion to the discussion of other things that
they might do to develop the country through their future careers.
Help them see how these careers serve others and help develop
Conversation the country.
Are students able to articulate ways
they can display respectful behaviour
towards others in the country? Discuss and emphasize the connection between their behavior in
and out of the classroom and their role in contributing to the
development of the country.
Observation:
Are students able to distinguish
between respectful and disrespectful
behaviour towards others in the Viewing of Stimuli
country?
Have students look at a video on respectful and disrespectful
behaviour
Conversation
Are students able to discuss examples Discussion
of respectful and disrespectful
behaviour towards others in the Question students on the video
country?
129
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Invite students to share experiences they have had where they
have shown respect or when they were disrespected.
Product:
Role-play or Puppet Show
Can students demonstrate an
understanding of respectful behaviour Have students dramatize (with appropriate props) or present a
towards others in and out of the puppet show (finger or string puppets) for different scenarios to
classroom? display proper respectful behaviour towards others in and out of
the classroom. For example, offering a seat to an elderly/pregnant
woman, the use of social graces, works of charity in the
community, customer service at a restaurant or office)
4CP – V6 Next Steps in Supporting Others Project
Appreciate that everyone has a Prepare and guide students to work in groups to plan and execute
responsibility to help develop the public awareness on nation-building/respectful behaviour towards
country. others in the country:
Radio/TV Advertisement or Interview to showcase a community or
school venture (erecting colour-coded bins, creative recycling
exhibition, volunteerism…)
Poster/ Slogan Competition – this can be a school competition. The
group of students can come up with the judging criteria, assist
with selecting judges and work out logistics for judging day
Billboard
Write/sing a calypso
Post a reel to the school’s Facebook page
130
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Individual Seatwork: Cloze Procedure Worksheet
Use keywords (responsibility, responsible, action, project,
resources...) to create a cloze procedure that emphasises that every
Product individual has an important responsibility to help develop the
country.
Are students able to show that they
have an important responsibility to
help develop the country? Class Collaborative Writing
Guide students to create a class pledge or a promise highlighting
their responsibility to help develop the country. “We the future
leaders of (insert name of country) promise to do our part
towards creating a brighter and better future for all”
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Development means making a country better in different ways, like improving how people live, learn, and work. It's about making positive
changes for everyone in the education, healthcare sectors and the environment. It also involves being a good citizen. That is, displaying
respectful and positive behaviour towards others in the country and using the resources wisely.
131
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Economic Decision Making
Introduction to the Strand: This strand helps students see the importance of the natural resources of their island(s) in shaping
their way of life. Students learn the types of natural resources and the basic economic activities. They then come to see the physical
and economic benefits of land use and move on to explore the blue economy and coastal environment influences on the economy,
and the way resources can be renewable and non-renewable.
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand how our natural resources play an important role in shaping our way of life
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
K-Identify how access to resources of our country have shaped country’s settlement location over time
S- Compare past and present settlements using charts and maps, focusing on how resource use, technology, and environmental
changes influence these patterns
V- Appreciate that our resources impact where we settle
Focus Question:
1. What are the essential resources that people need to survive?
2. How did natural resources determine where the indigenous people settled?
3. What is urbanization, and how does it impact both the growth of cities and the conservation of natural resources?
4. How have the rural and urban areas evolved over time?
5. To what extent has technology influenced settlement patterns in the Caribbean region?
6. How has technology influenced the way we do commerce today?
7. What factors should be considered when planning future land use?
8. What factors influence human settlement choices in response to environmental changes?
9. What strategies can individuals and communities adopt to address environmental changes?
132
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to: Observation: Are students able to define Booklet Making
and identify natural resources? Students create a visually engaging booklet
4 EDM- K-1- Identify how
showcasing everyday items made from different
access to resources of our
natural resources. Each page should feature
country have shaped the
Conversation:
images depicting products alongside their source
country’s settlement location
Are students able to differentiate between
materials.
over time
man-made and natural resources?
Students will then present their booklets to the
Conversation: Can students differentiate
class and explain which resources are natural or
between renewable and non-renewable
man-made.
resources?
Example:
Conversation: Can students differentiate
between the terms exhaustible and
i nexhaustible?
Picture Walk:
Students explore various natural resources through
pictures, distinguishing between renewable and
non-renewable resources and understanding the
concepts of exhaustible and inexhaustible. They
engage in group discussions to share observations
and conclusions, reinforcing their understanding
of the terms and concepts.
133
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Conversation: Are students able to list Art:
examples of resources found in their Build model settlements. Encourage students to
country that influence where and how identify and discuss the natural resources from the
p eople choose to live? environment used in their creations, fostering a
tactile understanding of settlement patterns.
Example -
Coastal Areas - Linear Pattern - Due to the
proximity to the sea, which facilitates fishing,
trade, and tourism.
River Valley - Clustered Pattern - These
settlements benefit from access to fresh water and
fertile soil, making them ideal for agriculture.
Mountainous Regions - Scattered and isolated
- Settlements in mountainous areas are often
spread out due to the rugged terrain
Conversation: Are students able to Storytelling:
explain how access to resources like Use a simple narrative to convey historical context
water, land, or minerals determined and the significance of natural resources in early
where early settlers established Caribbean settlements.
c ommunities? Discuss what led the early settlers to settle in
certain communities/areas.
Enrichment: Create an animation that will give a
visual representation of the different groups of
early settlers and the areas in which they settled.
134
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Example: How the indigenous people settled in
the Caribbean (use Social Studies Text: Our
Caribbean Community)
Product: Are students able to describe Creating settlement maps
environmental changes brought on by In small groups ask students to create maps (or use
settlement patterns? atlas maps) or use models previously used to
depict the distribution of resources and settlement
locations over time. Students will present their
maps to the class and discuss the link between the
resources and settlement locations.
Observation: Can students use an Atlas to
compare and contrast land patterns based
Teacher can use guided questions to curate
on different economic factors:
the discussion or prompt a simulation:
agriculture, industrial, residential?
• Can we differentiate between agriculture,
industry and residential purposes on a
map?
• What types of industry might be found in a
certain area?
• What would happen if there was an
increase in population?
Discussion/Conversation:
Divide students into groups and assign them
guided questions on environmental, economic,
cultural impacts to discuss how resource access
impacts settlement patterns.
135
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Field Trip:
Organise a field trip to a local historical site or
nearby village and assist students to observe
firsthand the influence of resources on settlement
locations. Before going on the trip, create
observation sheets to assist students to focus their
Observation: Are students able to observations. Further prepare them to be keen
describe how people use resources in observers by reminding them to observe where
d ifferent settlement locations? people live and to jot down things they observe
that help explain why they might choose to live
there.
Example: + Barana Auté- Dominica
136
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Fond Doux Estate - St. Lucia
Fort Charlotte- St Vincent;
137
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Nelson’s Dockyard- Antigua
Belmont Estate- Grenada;
In many sites, it will be possible for students to
participate in guided tours and interactive
discussions with tour guides to deepen their
understanding of local geography and history.
Encourage them to ask questions to build their
138
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
observation skills related to the link between
economic activity and settlement location.
4-EDM-S-1 Compare past and Art and Interpretation:
present settlements using charts
and maps, focusing on how Teachers can present students with before and
Product: Are students able to plot
resource use, technology, and after photos of a local community or towns, and
changes between the settlements depicted
environmental changes influence compare the images of how this place has changed
on older maps and the settlements shown
these patterns over time. Students can also create a venn diagram
on the map today?
to detail the changes which are still present and
those which are obsolete.
Provide interactive/digital maps (See Examples
here) and also use atlas maps or in some cases
topographical maps or air photos can be obtained
from the local natural resources
agencies featuring past and present settlements on
their Caribbean island. Allow students to explore
the maps digitally or in printed format. Invite
students to draw facsimiles of the maps and
incorporate colour-coding or symbols to represent
different types of resources, technological
advancements, and environmental changes over
time. Discuss changes between past and present
139
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
settlements on the maps. Allow students to
suggest possible reasons for the changes.
Conversation: Can students share stories Storytelling:
of their family’s experience with changes Encourage students to ask their parents or
i n settlements over time? grandparents to share their own stories or family
anecdotes about past and present settlements, and
to tell of some changes they remember. Encourage
them to bring pictures from home that might
illustrate these changes.
Invite students to sit in a circle and share these
family memories. Assist them to highlight the role
of resource use, technology, and environmental
changes in shaping settlement patterns.
Invite a cultural elder to speak to students about
the changes technology has caused as related to
settlement patterns. “Looking at life before to
Now”
Ask students to interview elders in their
community to find out how changes in technology
140
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
have changed the way people settle in their
c ountry.
Product: Are students able to interpret Divide students into small groups and provide
any patterns on a storyboard that shows them with a blank storyboard template.
how settlement locations have been Ask each group to create a storyboard illustrating
influenced by access to resources over the evolution of a settlement over time,
time? considering how access to resources has
influenced its development.
Students can draw pictures or use stickers to
represent different stages of settlement growth and
resource utilisation.
141
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4-EDM-V-1 Appreciate that Product: Can students represent natural Artistic Expression:
our resources impact where resources that were historically important Create visual artworks depicting Caribbean
we settle f or Caribbean settlers? landscapes, compose songs or poems inspired by
their exploration of the importance of resources.
Simulations:
Student are given simulation or strategy games to
assess how resources impact settlement patterns:
City-Building Simulation Games:- SimCity or
Cities: Skylines
Civilization Development Games:- Games like Sid
Meier's Civilization
Minecraft Education Edition: This version of the
popular game Minecraft includes features that
allow educators to set up environments where
students must use resources wisely to build and
sustain communities. Teachers can create
challenges that reflect the importance of strategic
r esource use in settlement decisions.
Product: Can students explain in writing Perspective Taking through Story Writing
how technology has changed the way Ask students to imagine they are living in the
people use resources in the Caribbean Caribbean during a specific time period in the past
c ompared to in the past? and write a short story describing how people used
resources at that time.
Encourage students to incorporate elements of
technology and how it may have impacted
resource use in their narratives.
142
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
After writing their stories, students can share them
with the class and discuss common themes and
differences in resource utilisation between the past
a nd present.
Product: Can students represent on a Poster Making
poster how the conservation of natural Provide students with art supplies, including
resources would benefit both people and paper, markers, and stickers.
w ildlife in the Caribbean? Ask students to design a poster illustrating the
importance of conservation for both people and
wildlife in the Caribbean.
Encourage students to include images of
threatened species, ecosystems, and conservation
actions such as recycling and habitat restoration.
Students can also add captions or short
explanations to describe how conservation
benefits both people and wildlife.
Display the posters around the classroom or
school to raise awareness about conservation
e fforts in the Caribbean.
143
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand how our natural resources play an important role in shaping our way of life
Grade Level Expectations:
K-Explain the major economic activities in your country and the importance of each to the economy
S-Chart the types of jobs associated with various industries and predict future needs for workers
V-Appreciate that our economic well-being is dependent on the sustainable use of our resources
Focus Questions:
1. What are the agents of the economy?
2. What are the four (4) main sectors of the economy?
3. What are the jobs associated with the various industries on my island?
4. How does mechanization and digital technology impact the production of goods and services?
5. What are private and public institutions and the roles they play in economic development?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to: Product: The teacher should develop a series of activities to
Are students able to retrieve prior help students review and recall prior concepts which
knowledge to apply within the objectives? will be the foundation for new concept building.
4-EDM
K-2 Explain the major economic
activities in your country and
Can students define these key concepts Show what you know
the importance of each to the
from grade three?
economy
K-W-L ( Traditional Or Online)
a. The teacher can present students with word
cards of the key terms they covered in grade 3 related
144
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
to economic decision making such as agriculture,
tourism, natural resources, environment, culture,
identity, immigration, emigration, migration,
infrastructure, population, services,
a. Students will categorise the key terms into a
K-W-L chart. They should move those they want
to review first.
a. A student who knows the answer can choose
to remove a word card from the W section and put
it in the K section, then share what they know
about it.
• The teacher circulates and reinforces student
understanding and/or clarifies
misconceptions.
This will also be used as a continuous activity where
students continuously add new information after each
l esson to the posted show what you know chart.
145
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4-EDM Product: Concept Attainment
K-2 Explain the major economic
activities in your country and Are students able to list and identify Invite students to list all the jobs in their
the importance of each to the major economic activities which take Caribbean country of people they know. Begin
economy place on the island? with jobs of their immediate family and
neighbours and then expand outward to take in all
Observation the jobs they have seen people doing.
Are students able to classify the jobs that Project:
people do into 3 groups of economic
activities: production, distribution and Complete these sentences:
consumption? 1. My mom works in the _________ industry
because________
2. My dad works in the ____________ because
____________
3. My ( another Family member) because
Conversation: ________________
Are students able to evaluate the 4. When I grow up I want to be a ___________.
correlation between these activities and
So I will be working in the
economic growth?
_________ because_________________
Learning Extension: Students will ask the adults in
their household to assist with this activity. Explain
each type of industry to your parent/ older sibling.
Ask them for the names and purposes of businesses
that you can use to complete this table.
Build this list on the board.
Place these jobs on cards or papers and get the
students in small groups to put them into categories.
Without at first naming the categories, invite the
146
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
students to think of similarities in jobs. Circulate and
assist students.
Once they have done the first level of categorizations,
assist them to see categories such as jobs that are
done out doors and indoors, jobs that use natural
resources, jobs that serve others, jobs that help
others.
With jobs categorized introduce the idea that these are
jobs that we do to produce goods and services,
consume goods and services and distribute goods
and services These are all examples of the concept of
economic activities.
Discuss the way that these jobs help us meet our
needs for survival (food, shelter, health care, security,
services)
Critical Thinking Discussion
Create discussion prompts: For example:
1. Money makes the world go round.
The teacher can use guide questions to direct the
discussion.
• What does the saying mean?
• Do you agree? Why? Why not?
• Is it true? Why? Why not?
• Can we live without money?
147
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1. Where does the clothing you wear come
from?
Teacher guides students to the understanding that the
things we use have to be produced using natural
resources through the skills and talents of others.
After modelling scenarios, the teacher asks students
to create scenarios for each classification:
Students can complete a worksheet by adding their
examples.
To Differentiate learning for students needing more
assistance, the teacher can fill in examples of one
from each category and gradually help students
complete the others with a suitable scenario that fits.
Production Distribution Consumption
A gamer He/ she You download
creates the advertises the it and regularly
R oblox game. game online and play the game
puts it online for
s ale/use
A factory in It is shipped to The washing
China creates a your island
washing The truck takes machine at
machine it from the home breaks
148
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
harbour to the down. Your
store mom goes to a
store to buy a
new one to
w ash clothes.
Mrs Martina She gets on a You purchase
makes sweet bus and comes an ice pop to
treats and ice to your school to eat
pops. sell at recess
time.
Viewing, discussion and integration of online
resources
Cash Course: What Is an Economy?
Can be used as an introduction or conclusion.
149
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4-EDM- S-2 Chart the types of Conversation See sample module in Additional Resources For
jobs associated with various Are students able to identify the three the Teacher
industries and predict future economic agents of family or household, Critical thinking: Categorizing concepts
n eeds for workers government and businesses private
Write the following key concept on the board: Our
sector?
needs and wants are met by our familes, and private
and public institutions.
Observation:
Are students able to differentiate between
Invite students to return to the jobs list from the
private and public institutions?
previous activity and categorize the jobs/economic
activities under these three headings of family, private
and public sectors.
Use the following three prompts:
1. How do your parents meet your
needs?
2. How do businesses provide the needs
and wants of households/ families?
3. How does our government provide
the needs and wants of households/
families?
Imagine if your parents had to pay for every
service they needed…
• We had to pay the firemen before the
firemen took out their hoses to put out the
fire.
150
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Your mom or dad had to swipe their bank
cards before the police came over to
investigate a matter.
The teacher draws distinctions between household,
business and government.
Drawing Conclusion
Help students draw conclusions on the importance of
having a healthy mixture of economic activities led
b y both government and private institutions.
Observation: Field Trip: Visiting My Island’s Institutions
Can students identify whether the jobs Set up a field trip to a nearby economic activity that
they see in rural or urban areas are more employs people producing, consuming or distributing
involved in producing, consuming or good or services.
distributing certain types of goods and
services? Virtual tour to compare rural and urban economic
activities:
Observation: A class field trip can also be done virtually using
Google Maps. The class can do a virtual tour of a
Are student able to see that
local town/city urban area and compare this with a
to produce our needs we interact with all
rural area. The teacher encourages students to identify
three resources: natural, human and
major businesses in each and share their findings
capital resources?
about production, consumption or distribution. What
is different about each area?
• Choose institutions that you are not so
familiar with. Choose public institutions and
151
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
private institutions. (The teacher can give a
minimum of two each or a maximum of four
each.)
• Have a family member take you to visit your
chosen institutions.
• Take a photo/video in front (inside if you are
allowed) of that institution.
• Be sure to speak about
• Business location: For example, give
the location using streets, landmarks,
and or neighbouring business places.
• Functions or the services provided by
that business place.
• Type of industry and sector the
business falls under
Sample worksheet with sample answers. See
R esources for the complete worksheet.
Observation Graphic Organiser example Flowchart
Can students interpret or create a
flowchart to show the linkages among
locally based industries?
Product:
Can Students create a flowchart to show
that their needs and wants are satisfied
when they interact with all three
resources: natural, human and capital
r esources?
152
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Conversation: Can students see that the Categorising:
new technology leads to the development
of new jobs? Which industry employs the most people?
The class will make use of the secondary information
Are students able to identify how in their student
automation, AI and the use of technology Atlas of the Caribbean. The students will be guided to
can potentially affect the workplace in find employment and industry information on islands
positive and negative ways? in the OECS inclusive of Trinidad and Tobago as
well as Barbados. This can be done as a group work
with students presenting their findings. (See Subject
integration; Maths # 1)
Picture walk and Discussion
153
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Display a variety of pictures which depict traditional
work practices and technological & automated work
practices.
Compare and contrast:
Have students compare and contrast work then and
now. Determine how the needs of workers have
changed.
Example: Then Now
Manually watering the fields Use of
irrigation system
154
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Post office Use of
email
155
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
A Cobbler Shoemaking
factory
156
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Students can find their own pictures which show
examples of technology in the workplace. These can
be uploaded in the virtual classroom or stuck in their
books
Categorising and classification (See Subject
linkages)
Conversation: Provide students with pictures and scenarios and have
Can students suggest ways the future students categorise these into
needs of workers can be met? traditional jobs and digital jobs/quaternary jobs
Provide students with premade brochures or
information booklets on what a few of the popular
digital jobs entail and the skill requirements for these
j obs. (See Subject linkages Language Art #5)
4 EDM- V2-Appreciate that our Conversation Values Clarification
economic well-being is Invite students to stand up if they agree with each of
dependent on the sustainable use Are students able to see the ways these statements or remain seated if they disagree.
of our resources economic activities can potentially 1. We should cut down more trees to have more
challenge and threaten our way of life ? space for building.
2. Money used to pay people to look after our
Can students understand how practice can garbage and waste could be better used
lead to the sustainable or unsustainable elsewhere
use of our renewable and non-renewable 3. To produce more food the farmers should use
r esources? pesticides, weedicides and synthetic fertilisers
in their gardens.
4. Having more roads is more important than
preserving nature.
5. It is more important to have jobs even if they
lead to pollution
157
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The teacher should ask key questions to generate
discussions.
As follow up, the teacher can share one or two film
clips that illustrate some the challenges with
protecting our resources and the impact on our
economy such as from these examples.
Indian River | Secret Bay Dominica
Philippines looks to tackle severe water pollution
World Recycling Day: Thailand drowning in foreign
plastic waste • FRANCE 24 English
Marine Pollution Threatens the Caribbean Sea
Oil spill in Trinidad & Tobago; 10 miles of coastline
affected due to oil spillage | WION
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
The teacher can clip parts of this video to fit parts of the unit or lesson.
What Is a Traditional Economy Pros and Cons
My Island Economy: Public and Private Institutions ( Module for purchase)
158
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Means of production also called means of labour are the materials, tools and other instruments used by workers to make products.
This includes machines, tools, materials, plant and equipment, land, raw materials, money, energy, and anything else labour needs
to make things.
Difference between Sector and Industry: ( This does not need to be specifically taught to the students, but the teacher should be
deliberate in the use of the words)
Though they are used interchangeably, there are differences:
Industry: this term refers to a specific group of companies that engage in similar business activities that are different from other
groups. For example, banks all perform similar activities and services and compete against each other for customers; So you have
the banking industry. Other examples are the agricultural industry, tourism industry and entertainment industry.
Sector: The term sector describes a specific area of the economy that brings together many similar industries. This means that
sectors are usually broader categories, such as retail or financial services.
Sectors are typically classified according to their main purpose or output. The most common way to break down sectors is by
dividing them into primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary sectors, which are the four major economic sectors.
Sectors of the Economy (Module for purchase)
The primary sector is sometimes known as the extraction sector – because it involves taking raw materials. These can be renewable
resources, such as fish, wool and wind power. Or it can be the use of non-renewable resources, such as oil extraction, and mining
for coal. Examples include:
The secondary sector of an economy is the group of industries that transform raw materials into finished products. This includes
manufacturing and construction.
The tertiary sector refers to businesses that provide services rather than goods. The most common services are those that cater to
people's needs, such as healthcare, education and tourism.
The quaternary sector refers to the intellectual aspect of the economy. This includes knowledge-based activities. This sector is often
seen as the engine of economic growth and it's responsible for creating new knowledge and ideas. The quaternary sector includes
159
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
various industries, such as information technology, research and development and higher education. This sector is vital for a
country's competitiveness in the global economy.
The main difference between the tertiary sector and the quaternary sector is that, although both provide services, the services of
quaternary activities are intellectual rather than repetitive activities.
This difference is difficult to establish in the real world but gives a notion of what the sector is about. In this way, jobs such as
cashier, hairdresser, taxi driver, or sweeper are easy to classify as labourers from the tertiary sector due to their repetitive actions.
Activities such as academic research, financial analysis, web development, movie directing, writing, or painting are classified easily
as jobs from the quaternary sector. However, works like doctors or teachers are difficult to categorise or because it is debatable how
focused they are on intellectual research and development.
Inclusive Resources and Materials:
An anticipation guide is a series of statements that students are asked to note their opinion about (e.g., agree/disagree). The idea
behind an anticipation guide is for students to think about what they already know, consider what they do not know, and revisit after
instruction to evaluate if their opinion has changed and why. Anticipation guides can also generate interest and curiosity about the
upcoming lesson.
To create, begin with about 4-5 thought-provoking statements. Make a column on the right with Agree/Disagree options, or place
the options below the statement. You can also consider adding space for a Why? response, where students note the rationale for
their responses. Students individually complete these and the instructor can then choose whether to have students share responses in
pairs, small groups, or as part of a whole class discussion. At the end of the lesson (or a unit), ask students to revisit their responses
and adjust responses if necessary. What have they learned that changed their opinion? See an example
h ttps://www.readingrockets.org/classroom/classroom-strategies/anticipation-guide
Additional Resources and Materials
Jobs and their classification: Primary, Secondary & Tertiary sector | Educational Videos for Kids
Jobs: Primary, secondary and tertiary sectors | LEARNING WITH SARAH | Educational videos for Kids
160
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Primary Sector : Jobs and their classification | Educational Videos for Kids
Secondary Sector: Jobs and their classification | Educational Videos for Kids
The Tertiary Sector : Jobs and their classification | Educational Videos for Kids
https://docs.google.com/document/d/e/2PACX-1vTI8nZ4hz08boOjnjRcBMHo_o8n6ctSerE84339oTQjD2YAzGoc_9F5ofC0r6b6-
3-Jap5sM4n_wjSK/pub
M y Island Economy: Sectors of the Economy & My Island Institutions
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Maths:
1. Data Processing: Survey students from grades 3-6 (dependent on school size) to collect data on the jobs their parents do.
Classify these jobs into the four economic sectors of the economy. Create a bar graph to display the information.
Research Skills: Reading a thematic map or secondary information in an atlas. The teacher develops a lesson that is linked to the
social studies objective. The teacher explicitly teaches the students how to use an atlas to gather data about a country. Students can
then work independently, or in peer groups.
Composition letter writing: Have students choose a job they would like to do. Students are guided to use the information provided
in the brochure/booklets to write a letter applying for their chosen job/ position.
Debate: Have a mini-debate on the automation of certain industries.
Create small groups of two to three members.
Provide students with various scenarios and have them blindly choose the side of the argument they will speak on.
The teacher will go around the class guiding the proposing and opposing teams. After they have their arguments laid out,
they will present.
Comprehension:
What is Industrial Automation?
After viewing and discussing the video class answers comprehension questions.
161
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand how our natural resources play an important role in shaping our way of life.
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
Focus Questions:
1. What are some uses of the land?
2. How do a country's natural resources influence its land use patterns?
3. What are some factors which affect land use in a country?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to: Conversation Viewing and Observing
Are students able to provide real
life examples of various land Tell the students that the following video helps them see the 7
4- EDM-K3 - Identify major
uses? main types of land use. Explain that as they watch the video, jot
uses of land and their location,
down examples that come to mind of these uses in their island on
such as residential, industrial, the following film graphic organiser
agriculture, industry, tourism
Land Use Types Examples
Institutional
Commercial
Transportation
Industrial,
Agricultural
Parks
Residential
Watch this video and discuss: Types of land use
Invite students to share their observations and examples
of these seven types in small groups
162
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Now facilitate a whole group discussion where students
share their examples of these seven different land uses,
focusing on diverse geographical regions, such as those
surrounding the school environment.
Examples:
Residential: Single-family homes, apartments,
condominiums.
Commercial: Offices, retail stores, restaurants, hotels.
Industrial: Factories, warehouses, manufacturing plants.
Agricultural: Farms, orchards, vineyards, ranches.
Recreational: Parks, playgrounds, sports fields, golf
courses.
Institutional: Schools, hospitals, government buildings.
Green Space: Natural reserves, forests, wetlands,
undeveloped land.
4-EDM-S3 - Map the location The teacher facilitates activities where students work in
and distribution of various land teams to create comprehensive maps of land use.
u ses in your country Interactive applications such as SimCity 2000 and
Township are included, and the students are asked to
develop a map incorporating all land-use types.
SimCity BuildIt: Developed by Electronic Arts, SimCity
BuildIt allows players to build and manage their virtual
city. Players can construct buildings, manage resources,
and deal with traffic congestion, pollution, and disasters.
Township combines city-building elements with farming
simulation elements. Players can build their city while
163
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
growing crops, raising animals, and trading goods with
other players.
Atlas and Google Earth Activity
4 EDM-V3 - Appreciate that Product:
geographic factors influence Revisit the google earth activity from EDM 2 in which
Are students able to draw a map
how land is used students examined google earth locations of economic
that locates the various land uses
activities. Link this to the above exercise on the 7 land
and discuss how geographic
uses.
factors shape these land use
patterns?
Invite students to use this above information to draw a
map that plots examples of the seven land uses.
Observation
Use the following legend symbols
Can students use an Atlas to
compare and contrast land
Institutional= Church cross
patterns based on different Commercial=$ sign
economic factors: agriculture, Transportation=small car
i ndustrial, residential? Industrial= smoke stack chimney
Agricultural/fishing= fruits such as mango or fish
Parks=tree
Residential= small house
164
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Help the students speculate as to the reasons that have
affected the location of these various land uses such as
roads, soil, water
Use atlas and have students identify the different land
uses and formulate questions about the way the land used
based on each land use pattern identified.
E xploring Land Use - Atlas Activity
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
John Udell Michaelis. (1996). Social Studies for Children. Allyn & Bacon.
Ramsawak, R., & Jodha, S. (2024). Modules in Social Studies with SBA Guide (Revised) [Review of Modules in Social Studies
w ith SBA Guide]. Caribbean Education Publishers (2003) Ltd. (Original work published 1982)
Opportunities for Subject Integration: \
Art:
• Visual Arts: Create artistic representations of different land uses, landscapes, or environmental impacts, fostering
creativity and aesthetic appreciation
Science:
• Environmental Science: Explore the ecological impacts of different land uses, such as deforestation, habitat destruction,
and pollution.
165
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand how our natural resources play an important role in shaping our way of life
Grade Level Expectations:
K-Identify the diverse roles the ocean plays in supporting our country and understand the factors that threaten its health and
sustainability.
S- Explore jobs and sectors in the blue economy, focusing on their impact on marine environments and how sustainable practices can
reduce negative effects.
V-Appreciate how our economic activities impact the ocean which in turn impacts our economy
Focus Questions:
1. What are some ways the ocean helps our country?
2. How do jobs related to the ocean affect marine life?
3. What can harm the ocean's health?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to: Conversation: Preparation Assignment: “Flipped Classroom”
Can students discuss after preparatory
assignments and guided discussions how they Task: Assign a short reading or a video about the role of oceans
4 EDM-K4 - Identify the diverse roles the
believe the ocean is important to our world and in the global ecosystem and the challenges they face (such as
ocean plays in supporting our country and
what factors make it vulnerable?" pollution, overfishing, and climate change).
understand the factors that threaten its
Ocean Pollution Facts for Kids #TeamSeas
health and sustainability.
Sea Pollution | Ocean Pollution for Kids | Plastic Ocean Facts |
Facts about Ocean Pollution |Oceans
Ocean Pollution - Children Animation
Use a graphic organizer to record their thoughts on the following
Our Oceans
Examples of how our oceans benefit us
Human actions that harm our oceans
166
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Human actions that sustain our oceans
Concept Creation: Mind Mapping: Post-Viewing Activity
The teacher can invite students to share their individual viewing
observations that they have plotted on the graphic organizer.
Then the teacher can start with a circle in the middle that says
"The Ocean's Importance." Teachers draw lines to new circles
like branches on a tree. Each branch will have a circle for
different things the ocean gives us. Teacher guide with guided
questions.
Food -How do our oceans provide us with food?
> Fish and seafood
-> Importance for people's diets
Animals and Plants -How do our oceans sustain a diversity of
plants, fish and animals?
Different sea creatures
like dolphins, turtles, and
fish.
-> Colorful coral reefs and
seaweed
Weather -
How do oceans help our weather and climate?
Helps keep the Earth cool
-> Brings rain for plants and
drinking water
167
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Fun and Adventure -how do our oceans provide us with fun
and adventure? > Beach holidays and
water sports
Jobs -> How do our oceans provide us with jobs?
Fishermen, scientists studying the sea, and people working on
boats
Treasures: How do our oceans provide us with other resources
and treasures? Shells and pearls/ Underwater minerals and oil
Create another map starting with "Ocean Vulnerabilities" and add
branches showing things that can harm the ocean, like:
Pollution: how do our actions pollute the oceans?
Trash like plastic bags and bottles in the water
Oil spills from ships
Overfishing How can our fishing harm our ocean resources?
Catching too many fish, leaving fewer in the sea
Using nets that also catch other sea animals
Climate Change: how can our actions affect climate change
to our oceans?
The ocean getting warmer
Icebergs melting
Habitat Destruction How can our actions destroy marine
habitat?s
Coral reefs getting damaged
Mangroves being cut down
Invasive Species: How can our actions encourage invasive
species?
Non-native plants or animals that harm ocean life
168
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Noise How can our actions create noise pollution in the
ocean?
Loud sounds from ships and underwater machines that disturb
sea animals.
Use these main concept areas to build your concepot map and use
s tudent responses beside them.
Observation: Storytelling:
Can students identify what impacts from human
activities observed threaten the ocean’s health?" Create animation that shows the ocean, its roles and the
challenges it faces.
Cartoon Strip - Ocean .jpg
Cross-Curricular Learning:
Interactive Simulations In science:
In science class, use the platform PhET Interactive Simulations to
engage students with interactive science experiments, such as
building a food web or exploring the water cycle, helping them
understand ecological relationships and processes. This can also
be combined with ocean virtual tours
https://www.360virtualtour.co/portfolio/underwater-ocean-coral-
reef-virtual-tour/
https://gizmos.explorelearning.com/find-gizmos/search-
results?q=food+web
169
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Technology Integration:
Use an educational app like "Marine Biology for Kids" where
students can interact with different marine species, learn about
their habitats, and understand ecological relationships in the
ocean. This app could include quizzes and interactive maps to
link marine biology with geography.
https://www.amnh.org/explore/ology/marine-biology#games
.
Have students create an eco-friendly marine habitat model or a
digital story about the life of people in coastal communities.
Product Objective: Students create and perform a TV show skit that
Can students create a multimedia presentation or explores the importance of the ocean and the environmental
digital poster that shows what they have learned challenges it faces.
about the ocean's importance and the
environmental challenges it faces?" Materials:
Props (made from recycled materials or classroom items)
Costumes (simple outfits or accessories to represent different
roles)
Script (prepared by students or developed collaboratively in
class)
Role Assignment and Script Writing:
Divide the class into groups, each responsible for a segment of
the show. Possible segments include:
A news anchor explaining the role of the ocean in Earth's climate
system.
A field reporter interviewing a marine biologist about coral
bleaching.
170
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
A special feature on overfishing, including a discussion with a
local fisherman.
A weather report on how ocean conditions affect weather
patterns.
Tourist and Tour Guide Interaction: A feature with a tour guide
showing how they promote sustainable practices to keep
Caribbean waters pristine.
Prime Minister's Address:"Prime Minister" of a fictional
Caribbean country on efforts to protect the ocean and boost the
blue economy for national progress.
Each group writes a script for their segment, ensuring they
accurately convey the information while keeping it engaging.
4 EDM-S4-Explore jobs and sectors in the Product: Can students construct a Introduction of Terms: Blue Economy (link with previous
blue economy, focusing on their impact on model /presentation to demonstrate their knowledge)
marine environments and how sustainable understanding of sustainable practices within the
practices can reduce negative effects. blue economy? Video Exploration: Teacher presents a curated selection of videos
that illustrate various aspects of the blue economy.. After
viewing, engage students in a guided discussion to connect the
video content with key concepts of sustainability and economic
impact on marine environments.
Sustainable Blue Economy, 4th theme of the 2017 #OurOcean
conference
Ocean Decade Challenge 4: Develop a sustainable and equitable
ocean economy
Blue Economy
171
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Storytelling Session: Teacher creates or uses an existing story
that revolves around a community or character engaging with the
blue economy. The story should highlight the challenges and
successes of implementing sustainable practices in ocean-related
industries.
After the storytelling session, allow students to create a
skit/comic strip or stories, where they express their understanding
and thoughts on the story’s themes.
(See Story Example here)
“My Sustainable Beach Day” Presentation
Students will create a presentation/ model that depicts a day at
the beach, designed with sustainable practices that help protect
the coastal environment.
Materials Needed:
• Construction paper, markers, crayons
• Glue, scissors, magazines for cutting out images
• Computer and simple presentation software (like Google
Slides) if available
Steps:
Introduction: Discuss what sustainability means, focusing on
simple actions to protect beaches.
Design: Students imagine and sketch a beach day that includes
sustainable activities like using reusable items, playing eco-
friendly games, and participating in a beach clean-up.
172
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Create Presentation: Students use drawings, cut-outs, or digital
tools to depict each activity of their beach day, explaining how it
helps protect the beach.
Present: Each student shares their sustainable beach day with the
class, highlighting the importance of each activity.
Discuss and Reflect: Conclude with a discussion on what was
learned and a reflective writing activity on how students can
a pply these practices.
Conversation: Can the student apply insights Video Discussion:
from multimedia resources to discuss ways to
address the negative consequences of our actions Marine Pollution
a ffecting the sustainability of the blue economy ?
The Adventures of Zack and Molly is a 5-part short video series
about the adventures of an unlikely duo in the deep ocean. A
learning guide for teachers to accompany the film is available for
download at www.ecogig.org/zackandmolly.
Part 1: Zack Finds a Roommate
Part 2: Zack Visits Molly's World
Part 3: Human Impacts in the Deep Ocean
Part 4: The Amazing Beggiatoa
Part 5: To the Bottom of the Ocean and BEYOND!
Preview and Predict: Before watching the video, ask students to
predict what types of jobs and industries they think are connected
to the ocean and what environmental concerns might be
associated with these activities. This will engage their prior
knowledge and curiosity.
173
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Watch the Videos: Play the video in class, asking students to
pay attention to the different jobs and industries mentioned and
the environmental impacts highlighted.
Teachers uses a powerpoint or Interactive Nearpod with the
addition jobs and industries (See List):
Discussion: After watching the videos and Presentation, lead a
discussion on what students observed. Ask questions like:
What jobs or industries related to the ocean were mentioned in
the video?
How do these industries affect the ocean's health and coastal
landscapes?
Were there any environmental concerns discussed in the video?
How can they be addressed?
Research and Explore: Assign students to small groups and
have each group research one of the jobs or industries mentioned
in the video and slides
They can explore the role of this job in the economy, its
importance to the ocean's health, and the environmental
challenges it faces.
Present and Share: Have each group present their findings to
the class, either through a short presentation, poster, or digital
slideshow.
Reflection: Conclude the lesson with a reflective activity where
students express their thoughts or write about how human
activities impact the ocean and why it's important to work
t owards sustainable practices in these industries.
174
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Observation: Can the student accurately Cross-Curricular Learning:
document and analyze the impact of human
activities on ocean health and reflect on their Students could read stories or watch documentaries about coastal
observations in light of sustainable practices communities, then create
learned? 1. Art projects
2. Write essays
Topic: Reflect on how these communities depend on and affect
the ocean.
Role-Playing and Simulations:
Engage students in role-playing activities where they assume
roles of various stakeholders in ocean-dependent industries:
Fishermen: Simulate a fishing expedition where students must
make decisions on sustainable fishing practices while trying to
maintain their livelihood.
Tour Operators: Role-play in managing a coastal tour company,
balancing tourist satisfaction with the preservation of marine
ecosystems.
Marine Conservationists: Act out a scenario where students as
conservationists advocate for marine protection measures in a
community meeting.
Policymakers: Engage in a mock legislative session where
students as policymakers debate and create laws on ocean
resource management and environmental protection.
Marine Researchers: Simulate a research expedition to study
marine life and the effects of human activities on ocean health,
presenting findings to a scientific community.
175
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Coastal Community Leaders: Role-play in leading a
community response to coastal erosion and marine pollution,
coordinating with various stakeholders to find solutions.
Shipping Industry Executives: Manage a shipping company in
a role-play, making decisions about routes and practices to
minimize environmental impact while remaining profitable.
Environmental Advocates: Simulate an advocacy campaign
where students raise public awareness about the threats to marine
environments and lobby for change.
Aquaculture Farmers: Role-play in running an aquaculture
farm, facing challenges related to sustainable practices and
environmental regulations.
Maritime Safety Officers: Conduct a mock safety inspection of
a vessel or port facility to ensure compliance with environmental
and safety standards
Product: Can the student synthesize their learning Integrative Art and Storytelling Projects:
into a project that presents ocean-related jobs, Teacher uses an Interactive Job Exploration Board: Teacher will
their environmental impacts, and identifies Create a digital "Ocean Careers" board where students can click
sustainable practices? on different ocean-related jobs to learn about them through
videos, interviews with professionals, and fun facts. This can be a
collaborative online activity that allows students to explore at
their own pace and share interesting findings with the class.
I Want To Be a Marine Biologist - Kids Dream Jobs - Can You
Imagine That?
Ocean Explorer: Katy Croff Bell | Best Job Ever | Nat Geo Kids
Students create storybooks, paintings, or digital stories that
illustrate the interconnectedness of human activities and marine
health, encouraging a personal and emotional connection to the
s ubject.
176
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4-EDM-V4-Appreciate how our economic Conversation: Interactive Multimedia Lesson:
activities impact the ocean which in turn Start with a short, animated video that shows various economic
impacts our economy Can students discuss their thoughts on how activities related to the ocean (like fishing, shipping, and tourism)
economic activities affect the ocean? and their positive and negative impacts on ocean health. Use this
as a discussion starter.
Blue Economy 101 – Cape Cod Blue Economy
Project
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EgdjHzN9ch8
What is the Blue Economy?
What does "blue economy" mean, and how is it good for the
ocean?
Can you think of ways people can make money from the ocean
without harming it?
Activity: Ocean Role-Play and Solution Stations
Introduction (10 minutes): Start with a brief review of what
students have learned so far about why oceans are important
economically (providing food, jobs, transportation) and what
environmental impacts are affecting oceans (pollution, climate
change
Role Assignment: Divide the class into small groups and assign
each group a role related to the ocean's economy, such as
1. Fishermen
2. Marine Biologists
3. Tourism Operators
4. Shipping Company Executives
5. Coastal Developers
6. Environmental Advocates
7. Offshore Oil Rig Workers.
177
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Scenario Exploration: Give each group a scenario card that
describes a specific environmental challenge impacting their
role.
1. Fishermen:*Fish stocks are low due to overfishing. How can
you sustain your livelihood and help recover fish populations?
2.Marine Biologists:Ocean acidification is harming coral reefs.
Observation: What actions can you propose to address this issue?
Can student’s show evidence of their 3. Tourism Operators: Pollution is impacting tourist beaches.
understanding of the ocean's economic importance How can you reduce pollution and maintain tourism?
and environmental impact, through real-world
scenarios? 4. Shipping Company Executives: Increased traffic is causing oil
spills and wildlife collisions. What improvements can your
Product: company make to reduce these incidents?
Can students illustrate the relationship between 5. Coastal Developers: Your projects are causing coastal erosion
economic activities and ocean health in their role and habitat loss. How can you balance development with
play? environmental preservation?
6. Environmental Advocates:Plastic pollution in the ocean is
worsening. What strategies can you develop to reduce plastic
waste in marine environments?
7. Offshore Oil Rig Workers:Oil leaks from rigs are
contaminating the ocean. What measures can you take to prevent
leaks and protect the ocean?
Solution Station: Each group discusses their scenario and comes
up with creative solutions to mitigate the environmental impact
while maintaining their economic benefits. Encourage them to
use the craft supplies to create simple props or visual aids that
help explain their role and solutions.
178
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Presentation and Discussion: Each group presents their role, the
challenges they face, and their proposed solutions to the class.
After each presentation, allow other students to ask questions or
offer additional ideas.
Ask them to think about how these issues might affect their own
l ives and what actions they can take to help protect the ocean.
Conversation: Can students collaboratively discuss Conservation as a Value: Hands-On Activities Teach and
the effects of human activities on the ocean and its student build a classroom ocean model using recycled materials
economic impact, and brainstorm solutions to to teach about pollution and its effects on marine life. (Click here
mitigate these issues? to see description)
Students can simulate clean-up operations and discuss how
reducing waste can help save ocean habitats.
Collaborative Learning:
Create final teamwork projects that require students to create
solutions or campaigns for sustainable ocean use, combining
their knowledge of science, economics, and environmental
studies. They could design posters, digital content, or
presentations that advocate for responsible economic activities
related to the ocean.
Additional Resources and Materials
Educational Resources:
Information Sheets: Prepare briefs or fact sheets on each economic activity, detailing its benefits and environmental impacts. Include case studies or examples
where applicable.
Documentaries and Videos: Provide links or access to documentaries about the ocean, such as those from National Geographic or the BBC’s "Blue Planet"
series, focusing on human impact.
Websites: List reputable websites where students can find additional information, such as NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration), WWF
(World Wide Fund for Nature), or the Marine Conservation Society.
Creative Materials:
179
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Art Supplies: In addition to basic drawing materials, consider including watercolors, stencils, and stamps that can add visual appeal to the posters.
Graphic Design Software: If available, allow students access to graphic design software like Canva or Adobe Spark for creating digital elements of their posters.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Geography Science Mathematics History Art & Design Language Art ICT
Use the curriculum's Link the curriculum Have students By exploring the Encourage students Have students read Incorporating
focus on ocean with biological analyze data history of maritime to express their and write about lessons on how
ecosystems to teach sciences by studying related to ocean exploration, trade, learning creatively topics related to the technology is used
geographical marine life, economics, such and the through art projects, blue economy, such in marine
concepts like ecosystems. as calculating the development of such as designing as literature on sea research,
mapping, landforms, Students can explore economic value of ocean-based posters or digital explorations, human- navigation, and
and natural resources. topics like fisheries, tourism, economies. media that promote ocean interactions, sustainable ocean
Students can explore biodiversity, food and marine Students can ocean conservation, and sustainability resource
the relationship webs, and the resources. They investigate how creating artworks narratives. They can management.
between geographical impact of human can also study historical maritime inspired by marine also develop their Students can
features and the blue activities on marine statistical trends in activities have life and habitats, or communication skills engage in projects
economy, studying ecosystems, thus pollution levels, shaped current developing eco- through debates and that use
how coastal areas and understanding the overfishing, and economic practices friendly product presentations on technology to
water bodies scientific principles the effects of and environmental designs that reflect ocean conservation solve real-world
influence economic that underpin the conservation challenges in the sustainable use of topics. problems related
activities and curriculum’s efforts on ocean blue economy. o cean resources. to the blue
environmental sustainability focus. health. economy.
sustainability.
Elements from Local Culture:
Local Marine Life Historical Maritime Local Industries Traditional Practices Local Environmental
Activities
Include studies of species Explore the history of the Study the local ocean- Traditional Practices Local Environmental
that are native to the local local area’s interaction related industries, like Discuss traditional Challenges Examine
180
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
region, which students may with the ocean, such as fishing, shipbuilding, or practices related to the ocean, environmental issues faced by
be familiar with. This can traditional fishing methods, tourism, to illustrate the such as navigation, conservation the local marine areas, such as
foster a connection between maritime trade, or practical applications of methods, or folklore related to pollution, habitat destruction, or
students’ everyday historical figures in ocean the blue economy in the sea, to deepen students' overfishing, to make the
experiences and the broader exploration, to provide a students' own understanding of cultural and curriculum relevant to the
concepts of marine biology historical context to the c ommunities. e nvironmental interconnections. students' own experiences and
and ecosystem health b lue economy. o bservations.
181
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand how our natural resources play an important role in shaping our way of life
Grade Level Expectations:
K- Explore how environmental issues (eg. climate change, pollution, weather systems) have a negative impact on our economy
S- Categorize the impacts of environmental issues on our economy
V- Appreciate the ways that our country is protecting the coastal and marine environment and determine additional approaches that
would enhance this
Focus Questions:
1. What is climate change and how does it impact our economy?
2. How does how we treat our coastal environment affect our economy?
3. How can we contribute to the care and preservation of our environment?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to: Product: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Can students list the factors of climate change and Ongoing Class Centres: Themed Environmental Issues
4-EDM-K5- Explore how environmental
the four types of pollution? Create class centres that focus on different environmental
issues (eg. climate change, pollution, weather
issues
systems) have a negative impact on our
economy Conversation: Pollution & Waste Management
Can students identify and explain one way each Coral Reef Degradation
issue impacts the economy? Coastal Erosion
Extreme Weather: Storms and Hurricanes
Can students explain the affects of climate change Volcanic Eruption
and extreme weather on the environment, our Deforestation
livelihoods and health? Man-Made Disasters: flooding and droughts
Can students link human activity to global After each lesson or for learning extension, students will add
warming and global warming to environmental information to each station; they can ask questions at the
degradation?
182
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
station and other students can respond. The teacher can start
- the process by putting a trigger question, scenario or picture.
Help students link environmental degradation to a decline in
human health, economic output, and living standards.
Engage students in a discussion about the affects of climate
change and extreme weather on the environment, our
livelihoods and health. Support students to identify the
physical, social, economic and health issues associated with
environmental degradation, weather systems and pollution.
Drawing Conclusions:
The teacher provides students with scenarios or pictures;
Students draw conclusions based on these.
Picture Mural (Can be done online or traditionally)
Create a class picture mural on the different types of
pollution.
Students go around their neighbourhood and take pictures of
the pollution they find.
The teacher will guide the students in organising their
pictures in a large picture mural on the classroom wall.
Graphic Organiser
Think Pair Share
Example:
The teacher can ask a trigger question for each concept being
taught (Climate change, Pollution, Extreme Weather
Patterns); Students think of a response and share it with a
peer.
183
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Video Assisted Learning (VAL)
Teachers should play a wide variety of videos to give students
a visual to help them comprehend the concepts and extend
learning: (See Additional Resources)
The teacher employs a range of learning strategies with the
use of videos to diagnose and deepen understanding and
clarify misconceptions.
Here are some example examples of learning strategies to
choose from
Before video
1. Think Pair Share (activate prior knowledge)
1. Anticipation Guide
1. KWL Chart
1. What’s the Purpose ( The teacher explicitly tells students
the reason for the video and the key areas the class will
focus on. For example: “We are looking for…”; “Listen
for keywords like…”; “After the video we will…”)
184
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
During the Video
1. Pause and Check
a. Allow the teacher to explain finer details or new
words
a. Allow for processing of the information
a. Give opportunities for students to ask questions or
make related comments
a. Keeps class actively as opposed to passively
engaged in the content
1. Watch- Think- Write
a. Watch: Students watch the segment. No writing
allowed.
a. Think: The whole class or table group discusses the
segment. No writing allowed. (The time given for this is
adjusted depending on the class and content.)
a. Write: Students are able to include the new
information in their guided notes, and even summarize or
pose new questions to address.
After Viewing
1. Turn and Talk/ buddy Share:
a. Students can discuss key points in partnerships,
using their guided notes as a way to explain the content
to each other.
1. Learning Event. Using a “Did you know…?” format,
or “ I was this years old when I learn…format students
can briefly share something which interested them or
185
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
something new they learned with the class or with other
classes.
1. Concept maps. Students can create concept maps
based on prior knowledge and new ideas gleaned from
the video segments.
Problem solvers. Students use information from the video to
answer a question or solve a problem.
Video curators. Students find a video clip that explains a
specific key point not discussed in the original video
presented and share it with the class.
Video creators. Using the segment presented as a model,
students develop their educational videos or documentaries.
Graphic Organizer: Students will use the organiser to display
their findings.
a. Sample: Human Impact: Defforestation
186
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Research: Using primary sources of Information
Project: Interview a Grandma/ Grandpa
(Students should have had lessons on writing interview
questions prior)
Have students interview an elderly family/community
member to find out information on
• the weather patterns during their youth and the
weather patterns now
• the changes they have noticed as a result of the
changes
• Effects of these changes on their livelihood
Students should present their findings to the class in the form
of an audio or Flipgrid video.
Calculate your Carbon Footprint:
The teacher guides students to use the app to calculate their
carbon footprint
C arbon Footprint Calculator for Kids | 8 Billion Trees
187
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4- EDM-S5-- Categorize the impacts of Product: Graphic Organiser:
environmental issues on our economy Can students identify the impact of environmental
issues on our infrastructure, health and Complete Chart
productivity, agriculture, tourism and other Write two environmental impacts for each category.
businesses?
Infrastructure Health Agriculture Tourism
Conversation: Prediction:
Can students predict how sea level rise will affect
low-lying land and coastal habitats? Video reflection worksheets
Online Quiz- Quiziz
Subject integration: Comprehension: Antarctica Ice Sheet is
Melting
Experiment: Melting ice in a glass. (Science Link)
NASA's Earth Minute: Sea Level Rise
Sea Level Rise: Causes & Effects | Understanding the Impact
of Climate Change | Letstute
188
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4-EDM-V- 5Appreciate the ways that our Conversation: Resource Person
country is protecting the coastal and marine Are students able to discuss the value of coral
environment and determine additional reefs to their island habita and economy? Invite personnel from the Fisheries Division and a fisherman
approaches that would enhance this to speak or ideally visit the fisher at the place where they land
their fish or haul in their nets on shore. Many schools in rural
Observation: are locted near a small harbour where fishers keep their
Are students able to identify the positive actions boats dso this ius an ideal opportunity to observe the fisher in
that fishers take to ensure their practices are action. :
environmentally sound? Fisherman: measures fishermen take to ensure that they use
the resource sustainably and how pollution and extreme
weather affect the marine environment and in turn their
Conversation
catch.
Can students propose measures their communities
can take to protect the coastal and marine
e nvironment? Personnel: the policies that are in place to protect the
coastline and marine environment.
Beach Clean-up
Class cleans up a section of a beach
Or
Students can rally other children in their community and form
a small group to clean up their beachfront. Students submit
photos of the activity.
Letter Writing.
Write a letter to the village council with measures that can be
put in place, to discourage littering and indiscriminate
d umping of garbage into the sea.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Key terms:
➢ Emissions-in the context of climate change, the gasses that cause global warming released by a country
189
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
➢ Industrial Revolution- an economic transition that included the growth of factories and increased burning of fossil fuels
➢ Greenhouse Gasses- gasses such as carbon dioxide, methane, and others that absorb heat in the atmosphere causing a warming effect
➢ Renewable Energy- energy derived from sources such as sunlight, wind, and flowing water
➢ Fossil Fuels- energy sources such as crude oil, coal, or natural gas, that are derived from fossils and other organic matter that were buried under the
earth millions of years ago.
➢ Alternative energy- energy sources that are not fossil fuels. Derived from biofuels, solar, wind, geothermal, tidal, or even nuclear power. These sources
release few to no greenhouse gas emissions.
Additional Resources and Materials
Anticipation Guide | Reading Rockets
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4vUV9mw3ltA&t=206s What are the effects of Climate Change World 101
How climate change, rising sea levels are transforming coastlines around the world l ABCNL
How Earth Would Look If All The Ice Melted | Science Insider
Economic Impact of Deforestation CNN Explains: Deforestation
Sample Graphic Organiser: Human Impact: Defforestation
h ttps://www.education.com/download/worksheet/176520/human-impact-deforestation.pdf
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
This topic is linked to Science: Weather & Climate: Global Warming and Pollution
Linked to Comprehension Cause and Effects & Main Idea and Supporting Details & Fact and opinion.
Science Experiment: Sea Level Rise
Sea Level Rise Experiment
Or
S tudent Project: How Melting Ice Causes Sea Level Rise | NASA/JPL Edu
190
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
E ssential Learning Outcome: To understand how our natural resources play an important role in shaping our way of life
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
Focus Questions
1. What are ways our country can meet the energy needs of its citizens?
2. How is the use of renewable resources beneficial to humans?
3. How does the use of various sources of energy consumption affect the environment?
4. How important is the use of renewable energy to consumers and the environment?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to: Observation: Introduction activity:
Are students able to explain and identify Pre-Walk about planning
resources in their environment? Before going on a walk about their community, the teacher
4- EDM K-6 Describe the ways that our
introduces the concept of resources and assist the students to
country meets its energy needs for
Can students differentiate between the define resources.
electricity and transportation and
explore the use of renewable sources
types of natural resources?
This can be done by listing the following ten items on the board:
Sugar, fresh water, salt water, wind, gasoline, gravel, mango or
other fruit tree, goat, wind, sun. Help students to see what these all
have in common. .i.e. they are all useful things. You might discuss
the fact that some are used for electricity, and some were used in
the past to help with sugar production eg windmills.
During Walk about
Explain that you will be doing a walk through the community
using their observation skills to identify the things that they see
that are resources. They might look for those above or others. Get
them to jot down what they see.
Post- Walk about discussion and debrief
Students can have a discussion which leads to the observation of
resource types.
Identify the difference between natural resources and
"unnatural" products in the environment. Students list
resources they saw on their walk.
191
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Ask the students to consider:
• What are the major resources in the Caribbean and work
and some of their by-products?
• How do we ensure renewable resources are protected for
continued use?
• How so we protect non-renewable resource so that they
may last longer than expected
• Do students understand the terms exhaustible and
inexhaustible as it relates to resources?
Categorizing Activity
Students must categorize the resources they identified earlier
Students create a cluster map to show how these resources are
different from each other (natural, man-made)
IT Research:
Students identify the types of natural resources and list details
about them.
renewable/non-renewable, by-products, uses, misuses,
conservation methods.
Research is done either on manilla as a chart, or a booklet
which must be shared with class. (inclusive of diagrams)
Report on resource by products
Make a resources products scrapbook.
Create a page for each natural resource: plants, trees, water,
animals, fossil fuels, metal ore, sand, bauxite, asphalt,
minerals.
On each page students draw, print stick pictures of products
which are derived from this resource.
192
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Conservation activities:
•
World Water Use Experiment: Students come up
with ways we use water each day and we think
through how we can use water in a wise way while
watching the water levels rise and fall.
•
Conservation Red Light/Green Light: Gets students
moving while deciding if specific actions are positive
or negative for Conservation
193
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
•
Craft project: Build a product from cardboard,
plastic, paper etc
•
Which resources do they use the most?
194
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
•
What are the natural resources that they throw in the
trash the most?
Students identify the most common garbage people find
washed up on the beach, in rivers or parks and challenges
them to think of alternative uses for these items
4- EDM-S- 6 Conversation
Assess the impact of our current energy Can students understand the difference Pre
sources on our local and global economy between renewable and non-renewable
and environment energy as far as impact on the environment
Field trip
1. The exploration of resources as a and sustainability? Visit a geothermal plant, or another renewable energy project and
means of renewable energy
have resource people discuss its benefits and uses or provide
Do students understand the global impact students with information about one of these sites.
of using renewable energy on the
environment?
Contrast this with the islands power plant that uses diesel or
bunker C
Observation:
Can students identify which renewable
Students develop a compare and contrast graphic organizer that
resources are utilized or promoted in their
can include images.
c ountry?
Include categories such as impact on the environment, costs,
scale of operation, sustainability
195
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Create this compare and contrast poster that compares
and contrasts different energy sources such as fossil fuels
and renewable sources. They should include information
on how they impact the economy (costs, jobs) and the
environment (pollution, climate change)
EDM V-6-Appreciate the value of Product: • Renewable Energy Poster Making:
renewable sources of energy (such as Buiding on the information explored in EDM-S-6 above about
solar, wind, geothermal and hydroelectric) Do student’s posters show that local renewable and non-renewable resources, students create a
f or our economy they understand the importance of poster to illustrate the benefits of one form of renewable resource
generating renewable resources for energy.
balancing environmental and economic Information should detail how the source works, its environmental
i mpacts for the country? benefits and its economic importance. (impact on the
environment, costs, scale of operation, sustainability, impact
on the economy). Display these posters in the classroom and on
the outside of the classroom so that parents and other students
can see their work.
• Scavenger Hunt:
Teacher creates a hunt for students to find renewable energy
courses in their community. Ex solar panels on houses, water
tanks, solar light panels, turbine light panels. Students can use
devices to remove photos or sketches of finding to present to class.
Class Discussion
• Using their posters each group prepares to discuss the
benefits of renewable energy source with the other
members of their class. Students may share why this
energy source is a viable option for their island economy
in terms of its cost, scale of operation, availability of
resources, and renewable/sustainable environmental
impact.
196
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Renewable Energy Infographic
In groups students create infographics that explain the benefits of
renewable resources to the economy. This infographic should
i nclude facts, illustrations, and statistics
Additional Resources and Materials
Power Plant, resource persons
Sample diagram of a infographic
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Resources are any materials that man finds useful in his environment.
-any material that is needed and used by people.
Natural ( renewable and non-renewable)
197
Grade 4 Social Studies Curriculum
Renewable: resources which can be used over and over again.
Non-renewable: resources which can only be used for a limited time, they will run out.
Physical ( human, capital and technology)
Preservation: to keep from destruction. Keep the Earth safe by protecting the environment from harmful human activities.
Conservation: (proper use of nature) the care and protection of the Earth so it can remain for future generation by using the resources responsibly
Why is it important to conserve natural resources? Because we need resources for food, transportation and everything else. If we use them up, we will not have
the things we need, or the next generations will not have the things they need.
» What would happen to the earth if we used more resources than it could make? We would run out of the things we need to live.
» How can we conserve natural resources in our daily lives? Reducing, reusing, recycling, and composting
Bauxite, copper, soil, petroleum( crude oil), asphalt (tar)
W ater, forest wind, Gold, silver, coal volcano (Geothermal), natural gas
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Arts and Crafts: Use some materials collected to create a new product.
Science: topic Energy. Renewable energy forms can be detailed and their relevance stated.
198
