November 2024
OHPC GRADE 5 LANGUAGE ARTS
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
INTRODUCTION TO THE OECS HARMONISED PRIMARY LANGUAGE ARTS CURRICULUM
The design and content of the OHPC Language Arts curriculum provide teachers with opportunities to not only reflect on the best of existing practices, but also
opportunities to learn about and implement evidence-based shifts in pedagogy that ensure all learners have the best possible chance to succeed.
As with any new curriculum there will be questions. Frequently asked “up front” concerns are addressed below as part of the Introduction which provides an overview
of implementation of the Language Arts OHPC.
I. Frequently Asked Questions
1. If I were to peek inside a Primary School classroom using the curriculum, what would I see?
The chart below provides an overview of the wide range of daily learning opportunities included in the Language Arts OHPC.
Examples of Daily Opportunities to Engage in Language Arts Learning
Listening and Speaking Reading and Viewing Writing and Representing
Learners have daily opportunities to: L e a r n e r s h a v e d a i l y o pportunities to: Learners have daily opportunities to:
- discuss topics of Learner interest - browse through a wide range of paper- - explore formal and informal writing in
- listen, reflect on, and contribute to stories, based books, magazines, digital texts, etc. various genres throughout the day
poems, nonfiction, music, conversations, on topics of interest - co-construct or independently write on
etc. - engage in reading throughout the day topics of interest using various genres
- participate in lessons that build strategies - interact with engaging texts, lessons and - apply writing lessons in various genres to
in listening and speaking that build reading skills and strategies demonstrate understanding of organisation,
- view listening and speaking as a tool to ideas style, form, and conventions
- share reading with small groups of peers
communicate with peers, the community, - share writing with peers and the community
and the world
Throughout the day, Learners receive regular feedback from the teacher about progress made and the next steps of learning.
2
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
2. Will this curriculum improve the literacy rates for all Learners in OHPC?
This curriculum reflects the principles and practices of international research about equitable and effective instructional practices that
increase learners’ levels of engagement and learning success.
3. Does instruction designed from this curriculum provide an equitable learning experience for all Learners?
Yes. Suggestions to differentiate instruction for Learners who excel, Learners who make average progress and Learners who struggle
are provided
4. Does this curriculum recognise and celebrate on the culture and context of OECS?
Yes. Teachers will find local images, stories, songs, poetry to use as anchors or prompts throughout the curriculum. Home and
community languages and knowledge are valued as foundational building blocks to learning and ensure the culture and context of
OHPC are visible, valued and preserved.
5. How do the strands of Language Arts connect?
While Speaking and Listening, Reading and Viewing, Writing and Representing are presented as different strands, teachers know that
learning
about one strand supports learning about other strands. Strands may be taught independently or integrated with other strands in
Language Arts
AND among the other strands.
Throughout the OHPC Language Arts Curriculum, the braiding icon indicates some of the opportunities to braid the strands of
Language Arts.
6. Does the curriculum provide opportunities to integrate Language Arts with other subject areas?
Yes. The use of local, national, and international images, nonfiction, poetic, visual and lyrical texts provide anchors to connect Language
arts
learning with the content of all other subject areas. For example:
a) The leaf of a flamboyant tree can be used as an anchor to teach descriptive language (Language Arts), plant study (Science),
symmetry
(Mathematics and Art) and food study (Health &amp; Wellbeing).
3
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
b) A science experiment focussed on the states of matter can be used as an anchor for interpreting cyclical diagrams
(Mathematics), descriptive language in Language Arts and representing the states of matter in artistic formats (the Arts).
Throughout the OHPC Language Arts Curriculum the puzzle pieces icon indicates some of the opportunities to integrate
other
subject areas with Language Arts.
7. How do I navigate the OHPC Language Arts Curriculum?
The OHPC Language Arts Curriculum is divided into seven Essential Learning Outcomes (ELOs) representing the three strands of Language Arts.
Strand: Listening and Speaking (for pleasure, respectful interaction, and critical thought) – ELO 1
Strand: Reading and Viewing:
- ELO 2 (Independent Reading as a time to enhance understanding of the reading process)
- ELO 3 (Comprehensive Reading Instruction)
- ELO 4 (Understanding and Appreciating Author’s Craft)
Strand: Writing and Representing:
- ELO 5 (Prewriting, Brainstorming and Drafting)
- ELO 6 (Revising)
- ELO 7 (Editing and Presentation)
Each ELO begins with an overview of the Purpose of Language Arts and an Introduction to the Strand. This information is followed by a description
of the ELO and the Grade Level Expectations(GLEs) for the Strand. (NOTE: The italicised GLEs are originally found in the OECS Standards)
The description of the ELO provides the framework for the Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCO), the Inclusive Assessment Strategies (IAS)and
the Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS), which are provided in the three columns.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS)
The column answers the question, “What are the The column answers the questions The column answers the question,
students expected to learn by the end of this grade?)
4
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS)
“How will I keep track of learner progress to inform What are some suggestions for planning
This column is divided into three colour coded my student responsive lesson planning?” lessons that introduce or reinforce
sections; each section provides information about the Language Arts learning? NOTE: The ILSs
learning expected in each component of the ELO. The assessment strategies in this column may be provided are intended as a start point to
applied to all components of the ELO. plan lessons. As teachers become
comfortable with the ILSs presented in this
column, they will have a foundation on
which to create new ILSs for their
classroom use.
This column is divided into three colour
coded sections that match the colour
coding of the SCO column. Each colour
coded section provides information about
the suggested learning strategies for an
SCO or SCOs within each section of the
ELO.
ILSs often cluster several SCOs to
demonstrate the interrelationships among
them.
NOTE: the dotted line between the IAS and ILS columns provides a reminder that all learning activities provide the teacher with
opportunities to observe and make note of learner progress and use that information to inform the next steps of instruction.
The three columns are followed by:
- Additional Resources to assist in lesson planning
- Support for teachers about the content of the ELO
5
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
II. Creating Welcoming, Learner Responsive and Engaging Classroom Spaces for Language Arts Learning
Responsive classrooms provide opportunities and learning spaces for learners to work in small groups or individually, etc. Every classroom should be a
space that invites learning. This includes:
➢ A classroom library with books, magazines, pamphlets, etc. of all genres
➢ Walls with Learner and teacher generated poems, stories, schedules, and reference information (Word Wall, What We’ve Learned, Classroom
Rules, etc.) written in large font for ease of viewing throughout the room
➢ A space for multi-subject exploration (realia table, writing table, science space, math manipulatives, etc.)
➢ Learning centres that invite Learners to explore writing, reading, listening and technology.
➢ Opportunities to use the school outdoor space and community as learning spaces
III. Using Formative Assessment as an Opportunity to Observe Learner Learning
There are many opportunities to observe learners learning, to assign tasks for Learners to demonstrate learning, and to provide feedback to Learners. The
OHPC provide teachers with a wide range of formative assessment strategies to inform these observations, such as grade level rubrics and checklists,
graphic organizers, opportunities for visual, oral, and written displays of learning and quizzes. Suggestions for self-assessments encourage learners to
monitor their work and use fix up strategies as needed. Suggestions for peer assessments provide opportunities for peer collaboration about the focus of
learning and not on judging a peer’s learning.
An important part of teacher observations of learning is feedback: sharing information about what has been accomplished and how these accomplishments
provide the foundation for the next steps of their learning.
6
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Listening and Speaking
Introduction to the Subject
Language is the foundation of communication and the primary instrument of thought. The study of Language Arts provides access to multiple and interrelated oral,
aural, written, and visual ways of representing, exploring, problem-solving, communicating, and sharing meaning. Through listening, speaking, writing, representing,
reading, and viewing a wide range of text and text form, the student continues to develop an awareness of culture, personal identity, and the strategies needed to
participate, communicate, and reflect critically on thought and action.
Introduction to the Strand
Listening and Speaking are foundational for all learning. The strategies and skills of listening and speaking allow learners to contribute meaningfully to social environments.
As learners receive, reflect on, and communicate ideas, they develop increasing proficiency in cognitive organization, critical thinking, and problem solving. Listening and
speaking strategies and skills are foundational for the development of reading, viewing, writing, and representing.
Grade Level Expectations
For pleasure and personal growth
• listen to music, stories, information, conversation, and environmental sounds for personal enjoyment
• demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in sharing the experiences of others and with oral stories and information sharing
To form and foster relationships
• become aware of how empathy impacts communication among peers
• listen respectfully to what other people are saying as they become aware of the how to respond respectfully and share with clarity
• become more aware of active listening and speaking strategies as well as verbal and non-verbal behaviour as they work in small groups, as a class and joining in discussions
To develop cognitive tools for engaging in and sharing learning
• observe and practice using tone, fluency and intonation impact meaning and mood
• demonstrate understanding by retelling an oral story or restating information in Home Language(s) and/or Standard English.
• begin to apply listening comprehension strategies enhance understanding of spoken language, music, and environmental sounds
• begin to identify overt and implied messages
• talk about and reflect on past and present experiences.
• continue to engage in and apply phonological awareness and word play to discriminate among letters and letter patterns
• develop and apply vocabulary and language structures to enhance their understanding of how to communicate ideas with purpose and focus
7
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 1: The learner will explore, use, and critically apply oral language for pleasure, personal growth, to foster
relationships and to develop an appreciation and celebration of culture and of oral languages.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
Listen and speak for pleasure and personal Formative assessment of listening and speaking helps ELO 1 emphasizes the development of learners'
growth teachers identify strengths and weaknesses, enabling listening and speaking abilities, which are essential for
them to improve communication and language their academic, social, and professional advancement.
1.1 Clarify opinions by responding to the proficiency. Through conversations and observations, Engaging in these activities helps foster personal
questions and ideas/opinions of others teachers gain a better understanding of an individual's growth, strengthen interpersonal connections, and
through providing evidence to support abilities. Conversations assess understanding, response, promote appreciation and respect for diverse cultures
thinking. and engagement, while observations evaluate non-verbal and languages.
cues like body language and facial expressions, offering
1.2 Continue to use intonation, tone, and insights into comprehension and communication skills.
Listen and speak for pleasure and personal growth
expression to communicate ideas and
CONVERSATIONS
feelings in a variety of situations,
considering audience and purpose.
Listen to understand; speak to be share
1.3 Discuss news, current events, opinions, information (1.1, 1.2, 1.4, 1.7, 1.8,)
feelings, strengths, challenges, future
Begin the year with a shared viewing of the Communication
jobs and hopes in class discussions.
Olympics
1.4 Reflect on and identify their strengths as
https://www.presentermedia.com/powerpoint- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BW82k7lwI_U
listeners and speakers, areas for
clipart/business-interview-person-pid-19739
improvement and the strategies they Pause at each section and discuss.
found most helpful in oral Interviews: Learners interview a local artist e.g., a
communication situations. calypsonian to discuss the subject of their work, purpose,
8
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.5 Participate as active listeners in group thematic content, and societal impact. Create the Throughout the year, organize
learning activities by listening to: questions with learners and allow different persons to ask learners into small groups and
• identify the main points the questions. have them listen to a podcast
• determine the sequence events to practice their listening
Learners take turns to ask the questions and take
• give an accurate account skills.
note, summarize their findings, and share orally.
• take notes
Assess learners’ ability to effectively listen and Visit
accurately record information. https://www.commonsensemedia.org/podcast-lists
1.6 Report on a topic or text, tell a story, or
for podcast selections.
recount an experience in an organized
I nterview questions
manner, using appropriate facts and
What does it mean to be a good listener? (SCO
relevant descriptive details to support
1. What inspired you to become a calypso artist? 1.4, 1.7)
main ideas or themes; speak clearly at an 2. Can you share a memorable performance
understandable pace. or experience you had while performing Share a blank anchor chart with the title: What does
calypso music?
it mean to be a good listener? With the learners.
3. Are there any specific themes or messages
1.7 Follow agreed-upon rules for discussions Explain that over the next few days and months,
you like to share through your music?
and carry out assigned roles. 4. Who are some of your biggest influences in they’ll be working together to find the answer to this
the calypso genre? question.
1.8 Create and/or use visual aids in 5. How do you feel about the current
presentations when appropriate to state of calypso music in your country? Begin with a discussion about what they’ve learned
enhance development of themes and/or
6. How do you feel calypso music reflects
so far about effective listening. After this discussion,
local culture and traditions?
main ideas (e.g., Graphics, sound) invite learners to conduct research by interviewing
7. How do you think calypso music can
continue to thrive in today's music industry?
peers and family by asking the following questions:
1.9 Use appropriate facial expressions and 8. What advice would you give to aspiring
calypso musicians? - “What does it mean to be a good listener?”
gestures to support, accentuate, or
dramatize the message
9. What challenges have you faced as a
calypsonian and how have you overcome - “How do you feel when you know someone is / is
them? not listening to you?”
1.10 Adapt speech to a variety of contexts
and tasks, using formal English when - “When you share information, how do you make
appropriate to task and situation. sure your message is clear?”
9
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.11 Orally present an argument or - Solicit additional research questions from the
perspective learners
After individual learners have conducted their
1.12 Create, presents, participates in mini
research, learners work in groups and share their
debates/speeches using persuasive
research results with each other. Decisions are
techniques e.g., promises, dares, flattery,
made about the most important qualities of a good
glittering generalities, intonations that
persuades people to buy or do something.
listener and each group presents their research as a
PPT, a classroom anchor chart, a video of a “person
https://clipart-library.com/cliparts-nervous-speech.html.
in the street” interview, etc.
1.13 Identify the reasons and evidence a
speaker provides to support points. Impromptu talk - Give the learners familiar topics to speak
Upon completion of this research and presentation,
about. Allow 30 seconds to think about it and one minute
engage the learners in a follow up discussion
1.14 Respond to and to give sequential multi- to speak. Consider factors like appropriate content, clarity
focussed on the question Why is listening so
step directions and instructions with of speech and ability to respond promptly. Take anecdotal
important.
increasing detail notes of learners’ listening and speaking behaviour during
responses. Use one of the checklists below to assess the
For more information and activities, visit
1.15 Listen to identify and discuss critically speaker https://www.centervention.com/active-listening-
persuasive techniques used in exercises/
(Checklist can be modified for use in Grade 5)
advertisements
https://www.scusd.edu/sites/main/files/file-
L isten and speak to form and foster
attachments/book_4_grade_2_sp
relationships
eaking_and_listening_checklist.pdf
1.16 Critically listen to the ideas and Checklist for assessing oral reports
perspectives of others in a variety of
A good speaker:
collaborative learning experiences Scoring key –
showing growing control of when to Process clearly demonstrated
Some evidence of process being demonstrated
listen and when to speak. A good speaker:
Process not demonstrated by pupils.
● speaks clearly and confidently
10
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.17 Develop ability to adjust level of ● is engaging and captivating
Process yes no
language used to suit the specific
Active listening - Morning message (SCO 1.4, 1.5,
communication situation.
Pupils appears interesting in 1.6) Engage learners in activities throughout the year
the topic where they develop and demonstrate active listening
1.18 Reflect critically upon a variety of oral skills. This helps improve their concentration and
presentations evaluating the speaker’s Is knowledgeable about the
retention of information. It also promotes effective
perspective topic
communication skills and enhances critical thinking
abilities. Share daily ‘morning messages’ with the
States main points clearly
1.19 Make language choices that affirm class. For example, a news item on a topic of interest
Uses examples or reasons to
sensitivity and respect the ideas and
or importance to the community. Learners listen and
make point clear Summarizes
experiences of others
may wish to take notes. Learners retell the message in
main point at the end of the
their own words (see links for more information on
talk
1.20 Listen to understand and respond morning message and active listening activities).
appropriately in a variety of situations and
Select words that
for a variety of purposes https://www.weareteachers.com/morning-message-
expresses ideas clearly
ideas/
Keeps attention of
1.21 Review the key ideas expressed and draw
audience during talk
conclusions considering information and
knowledge gained from the discussions. Uses appropriate pictures,
objects or diagrams Appears CROSS CURRICULAR
1.22 Engage in self and peer reflection on to be at ease Uses INTEGRATION - Impromptu speaking - Select
accuracy of providing or identifying appropriate a list of familiar topics from different subject areas –
information
Science, Social Studies, Health, and Family Life etc.
non-verbal signals and
Place these topics in a bag and have learners
gestures
1.23 Consider others’ responses and begin to randomly pick one to talk about.
offer opinions supported with some
https://balbrigganetns.scoilnet.ie/blog/files/2016/06/3.0392-English-
evidence Assessing-oral-language.pdf Allow 30 seconds for them to prepare their thoughts
and speak for 1 minute. Use a checklist to assess
1.24 Ask questions to check understanding of
information presented, stay on topic, and
11
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
link their comments to the remarks of Dialogue – Engage in a roundtable dialogue with learners speaking skills (see assessment for speaking
others. on a familiar topic where they can give information, ask checklist)
questions, and respond appropriately. Encourage them to
1.25 Ask a speaker for clarification about the elaborate on their answers and share additional details.
subject matter of his / her contribution. Have them assess listening and speaking skills using a
rubric or checklist (see assessment).
1.26 Talk confidently in complete sentences
Reflect on the conversation and discuss with the learners
using appropriate intonation and
courteous expression with peers and in what went well and areas for improvement. Assess learners’
various levels of formality. ability to actively, respond appropriately, and engage in a https://www.istockphoto.com/illustrations/debate-
clipart
meaningful conversation. Provide opportunities for practice
1.27 Create age-appropriate media messages and further development of listening and speaking skills. Debate- Converse, Convince (SCO 1.7, 1.9, 1.10,
Use a rubric or checklist to evaluate their listening and
(e.g., videos, podcasts, print 1.11, 1.12) Refresh your understanding of debate
speaking skills objectively.
advertisements) for evaluation, focusing techniques by visiting this information on the “Candy
on effectiveness of the message Bar Method” of debate preparation. Based on your
Rubric adapted from Roundtable discussion rubric from the conversation of learners’ conversations, choose a
Listen an d speak to develop appreciation and link below: relevant and engaging topic that encourage critical
celebrati on of culture and oral languages.
thinking and discussion and create a debate question.
8 6 4 2 (Samples available at
1.28 Converse and collaborate in a variety of https://www.boredteachers.com/post/debate-topics
situations with increasing sensitivity and Listening -make eye -Sometimes -makes -never
respect, considering cultural contexts, contact with makes eye little eye makes eye Review or introduce the basic rules of debate. Guide
speaker contact contact contact with
learners to work collaboratively to research and structure
audience, and purpose
with with speaker
-refers to or speaker speaker their arguments logically with an introduction, main points,
1.29 Explain ideas and opinions with
questions - never and a conclusion. During the debate, allow learners to
othe-r Sometimes - barley refers to or
assess the debaters using a checklist (see IAS column for
supporting details, and respond to others’ students’ refers to questions questions
questions and ideas comments or or refers to other checklist). Provide constructive feedback on learners'
questions other students speaking skills, including voice projection, clarity, and
other students comments
1.30 Speak clearly in an audible voice using comments
confidence. (See link below for debating tips)
volume, pitch, phrasing, pace,
12
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
modulation, and gestures to enhance students https://pointavenue.co.th/blog/tips-to-improve-
comments
meaning at various levels of formality speaking-skills-and-debating-competency/
Speaking - speaks -speaks - unclear -does not Speak up! Stand out! Communication is key. (SCO
1.31 Listen to distinguish between Standard
clearly and clearly speak at all
1.2, 1.3, 1.8, 1.13) Direct one learner to act as a customer
English and nonstandard varieties spoken convincingly -sometimes
-uses a loud uses a loud -unclear – with a complaint, and another as a supervisor handling the
in the Caribbean
-uses a loud voice voice offensive
issue, or create the opportunity for mock interviews where
voice and language
1.32 Use complex sentences that incorporate articulates -makes eye -sometimes used learners take turns interviewing each other about their
contact makes eye mumbles hobbies, interests, or favourite things. Learners record the
specific vocabulary and style to enhance
-Makes eye with the contact incoherently
activities and share with the class
oral presentations contact with group. with the
the group group -relies on
slang or Dialogue - Engage in a roundtable dialogue with learners
1.33 Use words for their figurative and - precise -overuses colloquial on a familiar topic where they can give information, ask
metaphorical meanings in their oral content prohibited language
questions, and respond appropriately. Encourage them to
specific words
presentations
vocabulary - irrelevant elaborate on their answers and share additional details.
used comments
1.34 Interpret the meanings of words in the Li sten and speak to form and foster relationships
contexts in which they are used
https://www.rcampus.com/rubricshowc.cfm?sp=yes&code=AX6A57A&
1.35 Paraphrase portions of a text read aloud,
OBSERVATIONS
or information presented in diverse media
and formats, including visually and orally Prompt and Observe: Expose learners to different
forms of text/media (such as a poem, news item,
passage, videos, podcasts, etc.). Give them specific
speaking prompts or discussion topics to guide their
https://www.readingrockets.org/classroom/classroom-
conversations and observe them as they engage in strategies/listen-read-discuss
active discussions in groups. Monitor discussion and
Pre-reading discussion (SCO 1.19, 1.20, 1.21, 1.22,
give relevant feedback. During these tasks, observe
1.23) Before your daily Teacher Read Aloud, engage
learners closely. Take note of how well they listen to
learners in discussion to activate their prior knowledge
instructions, engage in conversations, articulate their
and generate interest in the topic or story. Share a
13
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
thoughts: and respond to others. After the question about the text to set a clear purpose for
observation, provide feedback to each student. listening. Introduce key vocabulary or concepts, allow
predictions about the text, and discuss relevant
Highlight their strengths and areas for improvement.
background knowledge.
https://www.edu.gov.mb.ca/k12/tech/imym/6/tblm/tole_7_4.pdf
Following the Read Aloud, learners engage in a "Think-
observation checklist for listening and speaking Pair-Share" activity where learners think about a
question, discuss with a partner, and share with the
Anecdotal note - Complete the story –
class.
Observe learners as they complete an activity. For
example, one person starts a story by giving one sentence
and then everyone takes turns to continue the story from
the last person’s idea. The point is to build on the previous
sentence to make a coherent story. https://www.istockphoto.com/illustrations/round-table-
discussion
During the task, observe learners closely. Take note of
how well they listen to follow the sequence, engage in the Engage and connect - Roundtable discussion
activity, and articulate their thoughts. (SCO 1.19, 1.20, 1.22, 1.23, 1.24)
Arrange interactive discussions for groups of learners
seated around a table to delve into engaging topics
relevant to daily life. Equip them with resources and
guidelines, appoint a moderator to guide the conversation,
ensuring all participants have a chance to speak.
Encourage active listening and note-taking for questions.
Reserve time for a question and answer session to
promote interaction and sharing of thoughts.
http://margdteachingposters.weebly.com/oral-language.html
14
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Listening comprehension - Administer listening Analyse language use in both formal and informal
assessments where learners listen to recordings or live contexts. Provide constructive feedback on speaking skills,
reading and answer questions orally. Observe responses highlighting areas for enhancement.
and take note of learners who had difficulties responding
to the questions
BRAIDING THE STRANDS
PRODUCTS
Read aloud a text and allow learners to summarize in 3 or
more written sentences. To accommodate the different
Learners create an anchor chart depicting effective listening learners, encourage them to listen carefully and follow
and speaking skills. Encourage the use of online tools such along by drawing what they hear.
as Canva and adobe to design and create the chart.
https://clipart-library.com/speaker-person-cliparts.html
Listen and Learn - Enrich your minds (SCO 1.16,
1.17, 1.18, 1.19, 1.22, 1.23, 1.24)
Listening Journals: Assign learners to keep listening
Invite a guest speaker to talk to the class on a topic of
journals where they record their reactions, thoughts, or
interest. Have learners prepare questions in advance.
reflections on audio clips, podcasts, or songs they have Assign roles such as introducing the speaker and
listened to both in and out of class. Instruct them to write giving a vote of thanks. Encourage active listening
during the talk. Afterward, facilitate a feedback session
entries that focus on the purpose, language, and thematic
for questions, evaluations, and reflections. Allow
content of the material, and enable them to make
learners to interact informally with the speaker for
connections to their own experiences or prior knowledge. further questions and connections.
Learners will share, discuss, and will use a checklist to
critique the content of their journals in small group
interactions.
15
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
PEER ASSESSMENT
Assessing comprehension - One learner reads a
Act it out! (SCO 1.15, 1.16, 1.17, 1.19)
text aloud to his/her peers and asks questions. The
others respond to the questions. Assess peers ability to Incorporate interactive games into language learning
retain information and comprehend. Switch roles at the activities.
end of the activity.
Oral reading assessment - Pair learners and have them
read aloud a text focusing on expression tone and fluency.
See link below for reading passages.
https://creazilla.com/nodes/1663989-string-listen-game-
https://mrswarnerarlington.weebly.com/fluency- illustration
practice.html
Assign roles to learners and have them act out
Use a checklist such as the following to assess reading different scenarios, such as ordering food in a
restaurant, a tourist asking for directions or a
Criteria yes no receptionist taking calls at a hotel. These activities
enhance speaking and listening skills in a fun way. For
Expression is natural.
more listening games, visit:
The volume is loud enough
https://www.edutopia.org/discussion/12-fun-speaking-
Words were read in phrases games-language-l earners
Paid attention to punctuation.
Listen and speak to develop appreciation and celebration
of culture and oral languages.
The reading is smooth and accurate.
Mistakes are corrected quickly
In the Caribbean region, there are specific times of the
Modified from: year when each nation celebrates its unique culture. Take
https://www.lexialearningresources.com/powerup/licensed/fluency/PowerUp advantage of these occasions to enhance learners ' oral
_Fluent_Reading_Student_Checklist.pdf
language skills while they express their cultural
appreciation
16
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
SELF ASSESSMENT
Encourage learners to reflect on their own listening and
speaking abilities, identifying strengths and areas for
improvement. Use the checklist below to self- assess.
Self-assessment speaking checklist
https://clipart-library.com/children-of-the-world.html
Name Date
never sometimes a l ways
I made eye contact
with my audience.
https://www.bajanthings.com/cooking-on-a-cast-iron-
coal-pot-stove/
I spoke clearly
Show, Tell, Discuss (SCO 1.27, 1.28, 1.29, 1.31)
I spoke loudly
enough so Encourage learners to bring in objects representing
everyone could traditions, history, or aspects of the community like
hear me traditional clothing, instruments, artwork, or historical
objects. Use pictures of the artifacts for conversations
I stayed on topic
where learners share opinions, describe what they see, and
I let others have a discuss their cultural and historical significance. Give
chance to speak constructive feedback on their speaking skills
and didn’t talk over
them BRAIDING THE STRANDS
I set a good pace
Have each learner choose an artifact and conduct research
and prepare a presentation, including the history, cultural
17
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
I stood straight significance, and personal connections. Create a class
and confident booklet of local artifacts then and now.
I let my audience Explore the beauty of language (SCO 1.29, 1.30,
know when I was 1.32, 1.33)
finished speaking.
Listening to text in a dialect is a great way to immerse
https://www.scribd.com/document/407864318/ca2-pa-9-student-selfassessm oneself in the language and culture of a specific region.
ent-speaking-skills-activity-sheet
Select a local story with dialect. Allow learners to view and
listen e.g., on You Tube.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F-jBu5P8llw
Guide learners to listen to:
● identify words used in dialect
● pronunciation and grammar
● share insights to the local culture
● understand the context and meaning of the text
Create a chart showing words used in Standard English
and dialect. Allow learners to research and view clips of
Caribbean news, podcast or videos and discuss varieties in
18
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
accents, pronunciation and word choice used in different
islands in the Caribbean e.g.,
Words Dialect Pronunciation
child chile
pickney
zafan
https://www.dreamstime.com/illustration/caribbean-
music.html
Music in our bones (SCO 1.32, 1.33, 1.34)
Encourage students to listen to and recognize appropriate
musical genres from the Caribbean. Prompt them to
discuss their favorite genre.
Provide the opportunity for learners to perform a song
from any genre in class. Record and play back the
performance for positive feedback.
Evaluate students' pronunciation. Teach traditional songs
or rhymes in the local dialect in a fun way to improve
listening skills and speaking vocabulary.
19
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
BRAIDING THE STRANDS
Analyse the lyrics of a popular genre and identify
vocabulary, phrases, and unfamiliar expressions and tell
how language choice contributes to the overall message of
the song. Or analyse a text written in dialect and transpose
pieces to Standard English and discuss the effect/impact
of the change.
Embrace your dialect; Ah Fu Ah We! (It is Ours)!
(SCO 1.27, 1.29, 1.30, 1.32, 1.33)
Set aside a specific day to immerse in oral language
activities using the variety of dialects spoken by the
learners (for example Creole Day is celebrated in
Dominica once a year). Create the opportunity for learners
to listen to, perform and dramatize dialect in various art
forms. For example, play the YouTube video of the poem
‘Song of the Banana Man’
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FXjdjCyYG80
20
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Ask learners to view and listen carefully and allow them to
share their thoughts on the poem's mood, tone, and
impact. Have them share words used in dialect and give
the Standard English version. Encourage learners to
interact with and explore other examples of Caribbean
dialect in local plays, videos, stories to cultivate their
appreciation of language, culture, and West Indian history.
(See assessment tools for assessing learners’ activities)
Additional Resources and Materials
ELO 1 focuses on allowing learners to explore, use, and critically apply oral language for pleasure, and personal growth, to foster relationships and to develop an
appreciation and celebration of culture and oral languages. The following suggested resources and materials would assist the teacher in accomplishing the ELO.
Teachers can also access information from Chatbot, Víola and other similar sources which will also provide information about familiar stories, songs, etc. of other
cultures and languages. Note also that the school environment is filled with opportunities for listening and speaking for learners in the upper grades. Debates, impromptu
speaking
To support ELO 1 Speaking and Listening:
Remember that the entire school, school grounds and community provide excellent opportunities to learn about and develop oral
Video Creator for Schools
● How to teach listening (youtube.com)
● SC-834483_L.jpg (1000×1000) (dkoutlet.com)
21
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Checklist sample: The following checklist can be used in the following ways (but not limited to):
● Role-Playing Scenarios
● Information Sharing Sessions
● Peer Teaching
Listening: Students can evaluate their listening skills by considering how effectively they grasp or understand information shared by others, and if they asked for
clarification when needed
Speaking: Learners can evaluate speaking skills by assessing clarity of information, accuracy of facts, and use of clear language.
Listening centres provide opportunities:
● for technology integration
● to cater for different learning abilities in the classroom
● to allow teachers to tailor activities to meet individual learner needs, offering opportunities for both remediation and enrichment.
● enhance listening and speaking activities.
22
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
ELO 1 focuses on allowing learners to explore, use, and critically apply oral language for pleasure, and personal growth, to foster relationships and to develop an
appreciation and celebration of culture and oral languages. The following suggested content would assist the teacher in accomplishing the ELO
● https://essentialsoflanguageteaching.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/teaching-listening.pdf (This document is a good resource for teaching
Listening activities. Refer to pages 6-10 and 15-18 for insights on designing listening activities that foster comprehension and critical thinking, and pages 22-25
for techniques on integrating these activities with speaking and writing exercises.)
● https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=drmg3NBNKoE (The video "A Sea of Talk" highlights the integral connection between listening/speaking and
writing/representing. It emphasizes how effective communication through listening and speaking activities can significantly enhance learners' writing and
representing skills by fostering critical thinking, idea organization, and expressive abilities.)
● (Edutopia) (Education Victoria) (Share My Lesson). These sites provide practical strategies and activities to enhance speaking and listening skills in the
classroom, promoting literacy integration through interactive and engaging methods.
● https://www.bing.com/videos/riverview/relatedvideo?q=resources+for+listening+and+speaking+for+teachers&mid=1E1473372B46DC7DAAF71E1473372
B46DC7DAAF7&FORM
Developing Critical thinking skills in learners. Teachers can use the following video to plan activities. It offers various strategies for teachers to develop learners' critical
thinking abilities during speaking exercises. It underscores the significance of interactive methods like debates, discussions, and problem-solving assignments that prompt
learners to express their ideas, challenge assumptions, and assess evidence critically. The video also emphasizes the value of fostering a welcoming classroom atmosphere
where learners are encouraged to share their thoughts and participate in meaningful conversations.
● https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4rXptKkXIDQ
● The following video provides practical advice for educators to improve critical thinking in the classroom through techniques like asking open-ended questions,
fostering debate, using real-world problems, and encouraging reflective thinking. It stresses the significance of establishing a supportive environment for learners
to question assumptions and consider diverse viewpoints. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xRkBIcrU1a4
Listening Comprehension is crucial for this level
Strategies include Predicting, Connecting, Visualising, Determining Importance, Analysing, Synthesising, and Inferring. Note: Listening Comprehension
23
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Strategies are the same as reading comprehension strategies and are applied in all subject areas. By developing this skill in learners, they are better able to function and
excel in areas across the curriculum.
● Retelling: learners retelling information or a story they have listened to.
● Connecting - When learners preview text, they tap into what they already know (Funds of Knowledge), which will help them to understand the text they are about to read.
This provides a framework for any new information they listen to and read.
● Visualising - learners who visualize while reading often have better listening comprehension. Readers can take advantage of illustrations that are embedded in the text
or create their mental images or drawings when reading text without illustrations.
● Predicting - When learners make predictions about the text they are about to read, it sets up expectations based on their prior knowledge about similar topics. As they
read, they may mentally revise their prediction as they gain more information.
● Recognizing Literal Meaning: Questions about facts, details or information explicitly stated in the audio story (or other genre).
● Making Inferences: Questions asking learners to make inferences as they listen to audio stories, interpreting what is said by going beyond the literal meaning.
● Identifying Main Idea: Questions asking learners to identify the central idea or gist of an audio story (or other genre).
● Drawing Conclusions: Questions asking learners to conclude by synthesizing information in an audio story (or other genre).
● Analysing Reasoning: Questions asking learners to analyse reasoning supporting a claim in an audio story (or other genre).
● Finding Evidence: Questions asking learners to identify statements or details in an audio story that provide evidence to support claims.
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Opportunities for subject integration and braiding of the Language Arts Strands are embedded in the ILS column.
Engaging in listening and speaking across various subjects necessitates blending speaking and listening with reading, writing, and observing. Within each subject, this
entails:
1. Employing terminology specific to the subject.
2. Transitioning from everyday language to the nuanced language that embodies the grammatical and conceptual frameworks of the discipline.
3. Utilising language during social interactions is essential for tasks aimed at enhancing both content knowledge and skills development.
24
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Reading & Viewing
Introduction to the Subject
Language is the foundation of communication and the primary instrument of thought. The study of Language Arts provides access to multiple and interrelated oral,
aural, written, and visual ways of representing, exploring, problem-solving, communicating, and sharing meaning. Through listening, speaking, writing, representing,
reading, and viewing a wide range of text and text form, the student continues to develop an awareness of culture, personal identity, and the strategies needed to
participate, communicate, and reflect critically on thought and action.
Introduction to the Strand
The purpose of Reading and Viewing instruction is for pleasure and personal growth and to develop readers who enjoy and interact meaningfully with a wide
range of genres and text forms. Meaningful interaction with texts is developed through learning how to access and build on background knowledge and use the
information of provided by various sources of meaning, developing vocabulary, recognising, and using language structures and meaningful application of graph
phonic elements of the text.
Grade Level Expectations for Reading and Viewing:
Read for pleasure and personal growth
● develop increased personal choice in favourite authors, genres, and text forms
● reflect on and identify their strengths as readers, areas for improvement and the strategies they found most useful before, during and after reading
Use background knowledge
● refine skills and strategies as progress toward the Proficient reading level consolidates
● discuss, reflect, and respond to a wide variety of literary genres and informational text using evidence from text and background knowledge
25
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Interact meaningfully with a wide range of genres and text forms
● recognise a variety of texts forms, text features and stylistic elements, and demonstrate understanding of how they help communicate meaning
● self-monitor reading and adjust use of comprehension strategies, vocabulary knowledge and word solving to become better readers
● choose a range of more challenging texts based on personal preference, topic, genre, theme, or author
Develop vocabulary
● apply knowledge of vocabulary to read fluently
● participate in vocabulary studies of complex roots and affixes
Recognise and use language structures
● apply genre specific fluency to demonstrate understanding of the impact form and structure
Apply graph phonic elements meaningfully
● integrate word study with meaning and structure to solve unknown words with increasing automaticity
● read most words in common use
● use context, background knowledge and word solving to make predictions about the meaning of unknown words
26
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 2: Students will demonstrate a variety of ways to use background knowledge and interests to select and
engage critically with a range of culturally diverse paper based, visual, and digital texts for pleasure and personal growth.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learner will be expected to:
Read and view to use background The focus of ELO 2 is Independent Reading Time. As ELO 2 focuses on Independent Reading time, a time when
knowledge and interests to select books learners are reading, teachers have an excellent learners’ practice and demonstrate a variety of ways to
opportunity to use formative assessment. engage in strategic Reading and Viewing. Each Independent
Reading session begins with a mini lesson, based on the
2.1 Select engaging paper based and
(Conversation, Observation, and Product) to observe
ILSs provided below, that reviews or introduces a reading
digital, visual texts for Independent
and assess learners’ reading proficiency.
and viewing strategy. It also emphasizes the learners’ need
Reading based on:
to utilize background knowledge and interests to select a
At the beginning of the school year and at regular
- interests range of culturally diverse paper based, visual, and digital
intervals throughout the year, use an oral reading to
texts. Learners’ selection and engagement with text will be
assess each learner’s progress.
- learning needs
useful for both pleasure and personal growth.
CONVERSATION
- appropriate level of difficulty
R ead and view to use background
Schedule regular individual conferences with learners knowledge and interests to select books
- various genres
about books read independently to gain a better
- diverse cultures understanding of how well the learners have
Text Exploration (SCO: 2.1, 2.2, 2.3)
comprehended the text.
2.2 Utilise background knowledge to:
Engage learners in opportunities to explore and interact
Guiding questions:
with text in an in-depth and meaningful way. Provide
What is the main idea of the passage?
27
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
- better comprehend a topic, picture, or Can you give at least 3 important details that support the learners with a variety of visual texts such as comic books,
title before, during and after reading main idea? graphic novels, illustrated storybooks, and magazines.
- question and analyse information in What have you learned from the passage? - Encourage them to explore the texts individually,
text read flipping through the pages and examining the
Did you know anything about the topic before reading?
illustrations and layout.
- share connections between their
How has this information helped you to understand the
experiences and the themes or settings - Ask learners to select one or more texts that appeal
passage?
of the books read to them based on their personal interests, hobbies,
or favourite topics.
OBSERVATION
2.3 Read widely and experience a variety
of literature from the Caribbean and As learners read independently, schedule 2-3 minutes - Learners would then write a brief reflection
other cultures with 1 or 2 students each day to listen to them read. explaining why they chose their selected texts and
Listen to ensure: what elements of the visuals attracted them.
2.4 Reflect on and identify their
strengths and areas for improvement - They are reading with phrasing and expression - Discuss as a class the different types of visual texts
as readers while utilizing the chosen and the reasons behind their selections.
- The difficulty level of the text they are reading matches
strategies they found most useful
their reading progress thus far Comprehend - Connect - Reflect Reading (SCO 2.1,
during reading.
2.2)
- They notice errors and attempt self-correction
R ead and view to engage critically with
Develop learners’ ability to reflect on what they read, by
a range of texts for pleasure
- They employ a variety of strategies for self-correction
introducing or reviewing reading strategies in a mini lesson
(chunking groups of letters, rereading, etc.)
before the Independent Reading session begins. As learners
2.5 Use pictures and illustrations, word
read, they practice the focus of the mini lesson and provide
- They can provide you with a brief overview of what
structures and text features to locate
a brief reading response focussed on the lesson. For
they were reading.
information and verify their
example:
understanding of the information:
Use the notes from these observations to plan the next
mini lesson to begin Independent Reading.
28
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
- table of contents NOTE: When assessing fluency, use a rubric such as Comprehend-The learners will choose a text and debate its
https://www.timrasinski.com/presentations/multidime title, image, or issue. The learners will ask who, what, when,
- headings and subheadings
nsional_fluency_rubric_4_factors.pdf where, why, and how while they read.
- glossaries
This rubric connects rate of reading to meaning making Connect- The learners will search the text for key
and not speed. NOTE: Speed of reading is not a good information, or answers. They will look for connections
- indices
indicator or reading progress. between the story and their own lives.
- structures of narrative and different
Reading and Viewing Logs Reflect-Learners will explain to peers how the story applies
types of expository text and key ideas
to their lives.
Use learner reading logs to assess the variety of text read
2.6 Continue to develop and
and viewed and their appropriateness in terms of Multicultural Book Club (SCO: 2.3, 2.6)
demonstrate critical questioning
abilities and interest.
strategies to gather information from
Give learners texts from a range of cultural backgrounds,
favourite visual, musical, and written text
such as Caribbean literature, literature about the Americas (
re:
Date Date Title Type of Purpose Comme Mayas Aztecs, Incas). Use the steps below:
Start Ende Text nts
- point of view/perspective
1. Assign learners to small groups so they can read
ed d
and discuss books from other civilizations that
- purpose
2nd A independ I learnt highlight certain cultural origins.
- bias Mar 11th Wom Narrati ent that…
1. Learners will examine authors from the Caribbean
ch Mar an I ve reading …
- subtle messages ch Know and other cultures, talking about their origins and
the themes they explore in their writing.
- cultural perspective
2. Deepen awareness of many cultures, by having
2.7 Apply problem-solving strategies to
learners analyse and contrast themes, settings, and
follow written multi-step instructions
characters in the literature.
effectively (e.g., how to assemble a
product or play a game) while reflecting At this grade level, encourage learners to think about how
on their learning processes various cultures are represented. Are they represented as
“real people” or are they represented stereotypically. For a
29
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
R ead and view to select and engage Text - A Woman I Know by Niesha John video about stereotyping, visit
critically with a range of texts for https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hNBNuHDQW1U
Teacher observes students as they engage in reading
personal growth
activities and uses the rubric to assess the learner's
2.8 Use Independent Reading Time to
progress.
develop - - -reading fluency (accuracy,
phrasing, and intonation) Rubric: Engaging with Texts for Pleasure
Subject Integration
recognise quotation marks and marker
words (said, shouted, whispered, etc.) to Criteria 4 3 2 (Fair) 1 (Needs
Use text from Social Studies about the early settlers
determine the mood of the speaker in (Excelle (Good) Improve
to gain a deeper understanding of different cultures
nt)
the text ment)
and their positive or negative impact on local
cultures.
-connect punctuation in text to
meaningful interpretation of sentences Engage Actively Engages Shows Shows
Read and view to engage critically with a range of texts
and paragraphs ment engages with some little
for pleasure
with a texts, interest
engageme
variety participat in texts,
-change the rate of reading depending on
nt with
of texts, ing in participa Text Feature Scavenger Hunt (SCO: 2.5) Provide each
the mood of the text
showing discussio ting texts
learner or group a worksheet listing text features like table of
enthusia n minimall
-practice meaningful word solving contents, headings, glossaries, and indices. As a review, learners
sm and y
strategies (root word, chunking, affixes, find examples of each listed text feature in the texts, noting
interest
context clues)
where they found it and briefly describing its purpose.
Throughout the process, encourage learners to use strategies
30
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
-develop the art of skimming and for collaboration and peer discussion. Learning during listening
scanning Thinkin Think Demonst Shows Shows and speaking lessons.
g Skills critically rates limited minimal
2.9 Use all sources of information about basic critical critical Gather as a class to discuss the identified text features, their
(meaning, structure, visual) to search, texts, critical thinking, thinking locations, and how they help in finding information and
check, self-monitor, and self-correct with making thinking making understanding text.
connecti skills by few
grade appropriate, instructional-level text
ons and making connecti ‘Chatting’ with the text (SCO 2.6) Encourage learners to ask
asking connecti ons or and answer questions of a text being read. Learners can
2.10 Develop an understanding of how
insightfu ons and asking
generate their own questions or use prompts provided by the
illustrations enhance mood, establish
l asking basic
teacher. Use the question guide below:
setting, and advance plot in written or question questions question
visual text s s 1. Who is the narrator of this story?
2.11 Foster critical thinking skills and 2. What sentence from the passage best supports the author’s
Reflecti Reflects Attempts Reflects Shows little
appreciation for the relationship between point of view?
on on to reflect minimall on personal
words and images in storytelling.
personal on y on responses
3. How does the narrator’s point of view affect the events in
response personal personal
2.12 Apply higher-order thinking skills the narrative?
s to response response
including analysis, synthesis, inference,
texts, s but s lacking
4. What events in the narrative would change if the narrative
and application to critically evaluate
expressi with insights
was written from a different character’s point of view?
visual and/or text-based information ng limited
insights insights
5. Why do you think the narrator said......?
2.13 Deepen understanding of the
and
purpose and influences of different types connecti
ons
31
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
of popular texts (e.g., websites, 1. Do you agree with the author’s point of view? Why
advertisements, social media, etc. Habits Consiste Regularly Occasio Shows or why not?
ntly reads and nally inconsist
- reads views reading 2. What would you have done differently from the
ent
and texts and
main character? Why?
reading
views a occasion views
variety ally seeks texts, and Once questions are generated, the text is passed to a peer to
of texts, new rarely viewing
answer and add more questions.
actively opportun seeking habits
seeking ity new
Read and view to select and engage critically with a
new opportu
range of texts for personal growth
opportu nities
nities
Multimodal Reading Stations (SCO: 2.9, 2.10. 2.11, 2.13)
Create different reading stations around the classroom, each
featuring a variety of texts and media formats (e.g., books,
PRODUCT
audiobooks, videos, graphic novels, articles).
Character Selection and Analysis
Learners rotate through these stations during a class period
Each learner selects a character and fills out a character or over several days. Each station should have a set of
analysis worksheet, focusing on traits, motivations, and guiding questions and activities to help learners engage with
key scenes. the material critically.
PEER ASSESSMENT Guiding Questions
Collaborative Interview Station One: Paper based books or articles
The learners will work in pairs to conduct interviews on Character Analysis: Who is the main character in the book,
topics they both find interesting, such as various music and what are their key traits? How do their actions and
genres or poetry styles. Each learner will alternate roles decisions influence the story?
as both the interviewer and the interviewee. They will be
32
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
encouraged to ask engaging questions, actively listen, Theme Exploration: What is the central theme of the book?
and demonstrate genuine interest in the conversation. Provide examples from the text that illustrate this theme.
This will help to evaluate and enhance the learners'
Station 2: Audiobooks
communication abilities, fostering better understanding
and skill development in communication.
● Listening and Interpretation: How does listening to the
audiobook differ from reading the text? What
Learners Self-Assessment Checklist: Choosing
emotions did you experience when hearing the
Books
story read aloud?
Learners will use the following checklist to assess their
Station 3: Videos
choice of books.
● Visual and Content Analysis: What is the main
Responses
message of the video? How do the visuals (images,
Yes No colours, and movements) help convey this message
effectively?
Know What You Like
Station 4: Graphic Novels
Have I figured out what kinds of
books I enjoy reading? ● Combination of Text and Images: How do the
illustrations in the story enhance your
Do I know which genres or topics I understanding of the story?
find interesting
● Describe a specific scene where the images make
Think About What You Know your understanding clearer.
Have I thought about what I already Storybook Analysis (SCO: 2.11, 2.12)
know about different subjects?
Provide each learner or group with a picture book or comic
Am I willing to learn more about strip. Learners to discuss the relationship between the
things I don't know much about?
33
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Find Books That Match pictures and words in the book or comic strip, by asking the
questions below:
Have I used the library or asked for
recommendations to find books that ● How do words and images work together to
fit my interests? convey meaning?
Did I read a bit about the book to ● Are there instances where they convey conflicting
see if it seems like something I'd or opposing messages?
enjoy
● How does the layout of the storybook or comic
strip affect storytelling?
Visual Thinking Routines (SCO2.12, 2.13, 2.14) Guide
learners through the process of analysing and
interpreting visual information, such as images,
infographics, or videos.
Use routines such as:
• See - Learners observe the images, videos etc.
• Think - Learners discuss what they think is
happening, the literal and inferential messages the
image or video conveying, and the purpose of the
messages
• Wonder - Learners pose questions about the image
or video and how it could be used to influence the
viewer’s thinking
34
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Interactive Graphic Organizers for Text Analysis (SCO:
2.12)
Provide learners with graphic organizers such as Venn
diagrams, T-charts, or story maps. Review how a "Story
Elements Map" can help them analyse characters, settings,
plots, conflict, resolution, and themes. Learners complete a
Cause and Effect Chart or Venn diagram to be used to
compare and contrast, infer, and draw conclusions in non-
fiction texts.
The Purpose is…. (SCO 2.11, 2.12, 2.13)
Distribute a variety of popular texts, advertisements
and websites to learners in groups of three or four,
Allow learners to identify the purpose of each type
of text using the checklist below:
● The purpose of this text /website is clear
● The purpose of this text/website is to entertain
readers/viewers
• The purpose of this text/website is to inform
readers/viewers
• The purpose of this text/website is to persuade
readers /viewers.
• The message in this text/website is clear
• The message in this text/website is hidden
35
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
ELO 2 focuses on allowing students to demonstrate a variety of ways to use background knowledge and interests to select and engage critically with a range
of culturally diverse paper-based, visual, and digital texts for pleasure and personal growth. The following suggested resources and materials would assist the
teacher in accomplishing the ELO.
https://files.readinguniverse.org/Taxonomy/Language-Comprehension/Background-Knowledge/12-ways-to-activate-background-knowledge-reading-universe-
new.pdf (The chart, see below, list some ways in which teachers can activate background knowledge)
This site provides teachers with online stories/videos that can be used for reading for pleasure and engagement. These can be a welcome variation from the
classroom library. https://storylineonline.net/
Epic is a digital library designed for kids 12 and under, offering unlimited access to over 40,000 high-quality books, learning videos, and quizzes to foster a love of
reading and learning. https://www.getepic.com/
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
ELO 2 focuses on allowing students to demonstrate a variety of ways to use background knowledge and interests to select and engage critically with a range
of culturally diverse paper-based, visual, and digital texts for pleasure and personal growth. The following suggested content would assist the teacher in
accomplishing the ELO.
The links below provide teachers with a wealth of information on background knowledge and how it can promote active engagement and
comprehension.
36
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
● The following site provides the teacher with resources to help link students' background knowledge and experiences with classroom content, making
learning more accessible and engaging for learners. https://www.readingrockets.org/topics/background-knowledge/articles/connect-students-
background-knowledge-content-ell-classroom
● Teachers can use this website to gain information and tips on holding Socratic seminars for students. the website also outlines the advantages of student-
led discussions in promoting critical thinking, academic language, and a sense of belonging. The content illustrates choosing suitable texts, preparing
students, laying out the classroom, creating thought-provoking questions, and setting rules for productive and respectful conversations.
https://www.wherethemagichappensteaching.com/2021/07/socratic-seminars-for-elementary-students.html
● This site provides opportunities for motivating students to read. It furnishes teachers with resources and offers strategies for integrating reading into the
daily routine of students, supporting their literacy development through various activities and materials designed to enhance their enjoyment and
motivation to read. https://clpe.org.uk/system/files/Reading%20for%20Pleasure.pdf
● In the typical Caribbean classroom, there is a variety of abilities, interests, and other needs. This site provides guidance and strategies to help teachers foster
a love of reading among students. It includes approaches for creating a positive reading environment, encouraging students to connect with texts
emotionally, and developing self-regulation strategies to enhance reading comprehension. It also emphasizes the importance of tailored instruction to meet
diverse student needs and offers various techniques for monitoring and supporting student progress in literacy.
https://www.education.vic.gov.au/Documents/school/teachers/teachingresources/discipline/english/literacy/Reading_Engagement_and_Enjoyment_O
ct2023.pdf
Some examples are: Integrating Reading Across the Curriculum; Self-Regulation Strategies like monitoring comprehension and self talk; Interactive and Reflective
Activities; and promoting student choice.
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Opportunities to integrate subject and braid the strands of Language arts are embedded throughout the ILS column.
Project-Based Learning: Design interdisciplinary projects that require students to use their background knowledge and interests to engage with diverse texts. For
example, a project on global climate change could include scientific research, statistical analysis, and historical perspectives.
Reading Across the Curriculum: Encourage reading and critical engagement with culturally diverse texts across all subjects. This can include fiction, non-fiction,
and digital media relevant to each subject area.
Collaborative Learning: Foster collaboration among students from diverse backgrounds to share their perspectives and knowledge. Group projects and
discussions can help students appreciate different cultural viewpoints and develop critical thinking skills.
37
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 3: Students will interact with understanding and critical thought to a variety of genres and text forms
using vocabulary, comprehension strategies and graphophonic cues.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learner will be expected to: Gathering information Teacher Conversation, ELO 3 focuses on providing the learner with opportunities to
Observation, and Product (COP). COP allows the further develop and apply critical strategies in reading and
R ead and view to interact with
teacher to determine learning before, during, and viewing.
understanding and critical thought to after instruction.
Activities and strategies which assist in the attainment of critical
a wide range of genres and text forms
CONVERSATION thinking are of paramount importance as they will enable
u sing comprehension strategies
learners to see beyond the surface of what they are reading.
Provide learners with the opportunity to use
3 .1 Use prior knowledge and critical
Read and view to interact with understanding and critical
discussions to share their thoughts on a specific
thinking skills to support
thought to a wide range of genres and text forms using
topic before reading commences. This discussion
comprehension of grade-appropriate
continues during reading. At the end of the c omprehension strategies
texts
reading session, learners would share their learning
Grand discussions (SCO 3.1, 3.4)
3.2. Demonstrate continuing ability to experiences.
use a repertoire of comprehension
Learners will make connections:
strategies, including those listed below,
Braiding the Strands:
to understand and critique a range of
Text to self
genres and text forms:
Connect listening and speaking with reading and viewing with
Text to text and
Grand discussions. Engage learners in discussions to activate
- determining main idea
prior knowledge before they read material. Ask students to
Text to world.
- making connections skim through the text. They should look at pictures, graphs,
maps, or tables used.
- predicting
Guiding questions for discussion may include:
38
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
- visualising For example, learners will use the Think Aloud -What does the title of the material remind you of in your life?
strategy to make predictions before reading. Here
-sequencing - What do you think the material would be about based on the
they can make any of the three connections above.
title?
- inferring
This text reminds me of …
-What do the pictures remind you of in your life?
- analysing
From analysing the text, I can see the following
-What do you think the material would be about based on the
structures are parts …
- synthesising
pictures, graphs or maps seen?
Here are two inferences I can make based on what
-summarizing
-Does the material remind you of anything in your own life? In
I have read …
what way?
-questioning
OBSERVATIONS
-How does the knowledge you have about the material help you
3.3. Continue to utilize contextual clues
Running Records: Use running records to gather to understand what you are reading?
to derive meaning from language used
data about the learner's reading ability. The use of
in a variety of genres.
Modelling (SCO 3.2, 3.3, 3.4)
running records is to capture data related to the
3.4. Deepen the ability to make learner’s reading behaviours. As the teacher, you
Schedule regular opportunities for learners to model their use
connections that promote document everything you see and hear while the
of individual comprehension strategies and provide Think
understanding of information read and learner is reading. This includes all the miscues
Alouds to demonstrate how comprehension strategies can, and
viewed across a variety of genres: that might occur when the learner is reading the
should, be combined. For example:
text.
-text-to-self connections
- determining main idea combines with sequencing and making
connections
-text-to-text connections
- predicting is often based on visualising and synthesising
-text-to-world connections
- questioning is often dependent on analysing and synthesising
and often leads to predicting
39
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.5. Continue to utilize print and digital The possibilities for strategic combinations are endless.
dictionaries to aid comprehension of Learners at this stage are developing an understanding of how
written text across a range of genres. meaning making is a multi-faceted problem solving process.
Read and view to develop vocabulary
At the end of each opportunity to read, include a reading
response or an exit slip that provides an opportunity for
3.6 Deepen and widen vocabulary
learners to demonstrate their application of the comprehension
through reading a range of genres,
strategies. Visit
topics and work produced by a variety
https://www.readingrockets.org/classroom/classroom-
of authors.
strategies/exit-slips for information and exit slip templates.
3.7 Utilize with greater competence,
Context Clues Pinwheel (SCO 3.3)
print, digital and personal dictionaries to
comprehend unfamiliar words and add Instruct learners in the use of varying visual (pictures and
them to vocabulary repertoire. illustrations) and written context clues. Knowledge of the
source: https://www.readinga- different types of context clues will provide students with a
3.8. Continue to gain vocabulary
z.com/newfiles/levels/runrecord/runrec.html strategy to understand a variety of genres read.
through engagement of visual and
graphical presentations: Diagnostic Tests: These tests are used before The pinwheel below can be used to remind students of how
instruction. They are used to gather data about the synonyms, antonyms, and definitions are context clues.
-movies
learner as to his or her strengths and weaknesses.
It is on these premises that the instruction is
-videos
planned. For example, if the teacher wishes to
-art teach finding the main idea in expository text, a
pre or diagnostic test is done. The next step is to
-posters
analyse the data. The teacher would then take the
necessary action based on what the data analysis
-infographics
reveals. One such next step could be creating an
-advertisements
40
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.9. Continue to build vocabulary intervention plan to address the reading Dictionary Use (SC0 3.5) Encourage learners to bring along their
through the use and application of: weaknesses of the learners. print dictionaries to class. Refer them to the dictionaries when
they ask for the meaning of an unknown word. Learners should
- homonyms (homophones & Anecdotal notes can be taken about students’
also be taught how to access and use digital dictionaries.
homographs) strengths and weaknesses. Next steps need to be
Learners create their own personal dictionaries for new
documented as well.
vocabulary learner. This personal dictional should be accessed
- antonyms
during writing projects.
PRODUCTS
- synonyms
Reading Response Journals: These allow learners Read and view to develop vocabulary
3.10. Utilize existing knowledge of
to do several things from interacting with the text.
figurative devices to enhance
These include reflecting on what was read and
understanding of text:
analysing specific parts of the text including Building Reading Vocabulary (SCO 3.6)
setting, character, plot, themes, etc.
- similes
Engage learners in reading activities which will deepen and
They can also express their thoughts and feelings broaden their vocabulary and its use in various contexts.
- metaphors
by interacting with the text. The teacher can also Through exposure to a variety of genres through activities such
- onomatopoeia provide prompts to aid learner’s responses and as reading to younger grades, recording reading of news /
analyses of the text. sports / entertainment stories, etc. learners revisit known
- personification
vocabulary and learn new vocabulary and its application of
various contexts.
- alliteration
3.11. Continue to extend vocabulary
through the use of words encountered Braiding the strands Braiding the Strands
in cross-curricular content.
Presentations: This can be a creative way for Speaking Reading & Writing
3.12. Extend the ability to apply learners to showcase or demonstrate their
As learners read texts to extend their vocabulary, they are given
knowledge of word structure to read understanding of the text. Presentations could be
opportunities to search for new vocabulary in fiction,
unfamiliar vocabulary: done on devices using software like PowerPoint
nonfiction, and poetry. Provide “Search for a word the class
and Google Slides. They also provide a high level
may not know”.
of interaction between the presenter and the
41
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
- word roots audience. Presentations highlight and nurture Once found, groups of learners research the word for root,
skills such as communication, research, and history, etc., post the new vocabulary on the New Vocabulary
- prefixes
writing. Word Wall, and use the new vocabulary words in their creative
writing and speaking or oral presentation experiences.
- suffixes
Figurative device checklist (SCO 3.10)
- inflectional endings
Build on learners’ knowledge of figurative devices:
R ead and view to recognise and use
language structures - similes
- metaphors
3.16. Demonstrate a deeper
understanding of how word order
- onomatopoeia
impacts meaning Source: https://topteacher.com.au/resource/oral-
presentation-rubric/ - personification
3.17. Continue to apply knowledge of
how reading fluency impacts - alliteration
understanding
SELF-ASSESSMENT Guide learners through various ways to identify and
3.18 Deepen participation in shared understand the meaning of figurative devices encountered in
Fluency: Having understood the concept of
reading opportunities to: reading to aid their understanding of what they are reading.
fluency the learners should be able to do some
Provide them with the checklist below to help them regulate
- improve fluency self-assessment. This could be achieved using the
their own understanding.
checklist below. Share the Rasinski rubric
- guide intonation provided in ELO 2 ● I know what the <figurative device> is
https://www.timrasinski.com/presentations/mult
- convey the mood and intent of the text
idimensional_fluency_rubric_4_factors.pdf for ● I can define the <figurative device> used
- expand vocabulary learners to self-assess their fluency.
● I understand how the <figurative device> is used in
what I am reading
42
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
- increase comprehension The above tool can be used by learners to assess ● I can explain how the <figurative device> helps me to
their peers. Learners can also ask their peers understand what I am reading.
3.19 Strengthen the awareness of how
questions of areas of their reading fluency that
word choice and phrasing may be used ● I can interpret what the author is trying to
they have concerns about. These may include:
to describe persons and events in communicate through the use of <figurative device>.
positive or negative ways Did I make the correct stops at commas and full-
Cross-curricular words (SCO 3.11)
stops?
Read and view to interact with and
Draw learners’ attention to words and phrases that are used
Did I repeat words and phrases?
meaningfully apply
across content areas. Choose vocabulary from various
Early/Transitional graphophonic cues
Did I use different intonations? subject areas. Discuss the word, and, when applicable,
t o a variety of genres and text forms
deconstruct its root word, syllables, prefixes, etc. to
Vocabulary: Below is the Vocabulary Knowledge
determine meaning and, to broaden their vocabulary,
3.20 Improve their reading
Scale (VKS) that is used for learners to self-assess
learners search for multiple meanings in various contexts. For
comprehension by confidently using
and apply strategies to boost their vocabulary.
example:
background information and context
clues to grasp and understand unusual
Vocabul Nev Seen Seen Kno I can cyclical
words
ary er this it w use
preconception
words seen word befo this this
3.21 Improve reading comprehension
this befor re. I wor word
and word recognition by applying contrast
wor e but think d. It in a
knowledge of roots, prefixes, suffixes,
d don’t it mea senten illustrate
and syllabication
befo know mea ns ce
3.22 Strengthen their ability to use re its ns
phonological and word analysis to meani Subject integration
decipher words, improving reading ng
Have learners’ research scientific words and say how their use
speed and accuracy:
in science is different to their use in Language Arts. For
- vowel patterns appeal example:
digest, chip, sandwich, medium, culture
43
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
- common digraphs
splendid Read and view to recognise and use language structures
- diphthongs
Sentence scrambles (SCO 3.16, 3.17)
frivolou
- complicated letter patterns
s
Subject integration: Create sentences based on a text the
- words with silent letters
learners have encountered in language Arts of other subject
R ead and view to develop area. Cut up the sentences into words and/or phrases Engage
understanding and recognise how the learners in a sentence scramble activity.
use of genres and text features
Scoring instructions: https://shorturl.at/rANS5
- Place learners in groups to place complex cut-up
i nfluence meaning
sentences in the correct order.
Fluency checklist
3.23 Apply background knowledge and
- Accept that some words may be altered from the
information from poetry, expository, Provide learners with checklists such as the one
original and the sentence will still have meaning.
narrative, persuasive, and descriptive below which will enable them to monitor their
texts to make and modify predictions own rate of reading and how it affects their
- Learners read their sentences with fluency.
understanding of how groups of words work
3.24 Differentiate, with greater together to make meaning and assist one’s - Learners identify the parts of speech in their sentences.
competence, main ideas from
understanding of what they are reading. (nouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, etc.)
supporting information in poetry,
expository, narrative, persuasive and Name: ____________________ - They should also be encouraged to justify the choice of
descriptive texts word order for their sentences.
Story or Book Title: ______________
3.25. Demonstrate appropriate use of - To add challenge, ask for variations of verbs, nouns,
- My expression is natural. I sound like I am
prior knowledge of written and visual adjectives, etc.
talking to a friend.
information to form a judgment about a
particular point or issue Descriptive reading checklist (SCO 3.19)
- The volume of my voice is loud enough for
someone sitting next to me to hear every word.
Share a selected descriptive passage (person or place) with
learners. Strengthen learners’ awareness of the importance of
44
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.26 Exhibit a strong understanding of - I group words into phrases that show I describing words by reading a passage individually and using
meaningful and critical use of text understand the meaning of what I am reading. the checklist below to add examples:
features to locate and use information
- I pay attention to punctuation. I pause when I - This passage contains a variety of adjectives. Examples:
(titles, subtitles, table of contents,
see commas and periods and change my voice
glossary, index, etc.)
when I see question marks and exclamation - This passage contains sensory words. Examples:
3.27. Appreciate the contribution visual points.
- The descriptive words help my understanding of what
components make to facilitate
- My reading is smooth and accurate. If I make a is being described. Examples:
comprehension and promote a deeper
mistake, I correct it and continue reading.
understanding of poetry, exposition,
- I can see a mental picture of what is described.
narration, and description.
- My pace is conversational. I am not reading as Examples:
quickly as I can, and I am not reading so slowly
- fonts
- The sensory details appeal to three or more of the
that the text loses meaning.
senses.
- charts
What did I do well?
- images
What can I improve? BRAIDING THE STRANDS
- pictures
Source: https://shorturl.at/i9kiV Given a specific topic, learners will use sensory words and
- maps adjectives to write a descriptive paragraph.
PEER ASSESSMENT
Read and view to interact with and meaningfully apply
Gallery walks: Learners display their responses to
Early/Transitional graphophonic cues to a variety of
a reading assignment in a designated area in the
Read and view to develop genres and text forms
classroom. Peers can then walk around the
u nderstanding and recognise how
classroom providing feedback in the form of
vocabulary and language use
questions and comments and use sticky notes to
Think aloud (SCO 3.20 )
influence the meaning and mood of attach each response to the work.
t he text As you model the use of word solving techniques, express out
Peer Review Worksheets: This worksheet is
loud what you are doing and why you are doing it (see below).
designed with specific prompts that the learners
45
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.28 Strengthen ability to recognize and will use to evaluate specific aspects of their peers' This will remind learners of strategies they can use to help them
provide examples of how author’s reading comprehension, such as summarization understand what they are reading.
choice of vocabulary, phrases, and skills, ability to identify key ideas, use of evidence
I don't know what this word means but:
sentences evoke emotions, enhance from the text to support claims, and clarity of
description, and create humour expression. The peer assessor will provide
- I can use context clues to help me.
comprehensive feedback based on the prompts
3.29 Provide examples to demonstrate
- I can “chunk” the word by using syllables, root words,
how illustrators create mood in visual
prefixes, and suffixes
text
- The picture, graph, or chart can also help.
3.30 Utilize prior knowledge to discuss
the effectiveness and possible hidden
- My peers may know this word.
messages of emoticons and social media
posts - A dictionary or thesaurus also.
Learners then work in groups to create their own word solving
think alouds.
Source: https://tinyurl.com/ms774j9n Strong Readers Routines (SCO 3.22) Encourage learners to
use context, their prior knowledge of vowel patterns, blends,
words with silent letters etc. when reading.
These reminders can be inserted as a daily “One Minute Word
Solve”. Write a word in a sentence or connect it to an
illustration and let the word solving begin! Visit:
https://greenlight.com/learning-center/parenting-and-
family/spelling-words-5th-graders for sample words. With
repeated use, learners will internalise these reminders when
reading. The reminders can also be displayed in class.
46
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Strong readers-
➢ Pay attention to words as they read
➢ Break down large unknown words into smaller known
words
➢ Know how to use blends to help them pronounce
unknown words
➢ Know which letters are silent in words e.g., calm, when
and knowledge.
➢ Can use word solving rules to help them sound out
unfamiliar words.
Read and view to develop understanding and recognise how
the use of genres and text features influence meaning
Main Idea Guide (SCO 3.24)
Support learners as they practice differentiating between the
main idea and the supporting details across genres. The guide
below can be displayed in class or provided to students for
them to keep individually. Learners refer to this guide as
reading responses are being completed. Visit
https://www.scholastic.com/teachers/teaching-
tools/articles/five-minute-reading-responses-class.html
For free reading response templates.
47
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Prior knowledge checklist (SCO 3.25)
Support learners’ use of prior knowledge to form a judgement
about selected issues and establish their own perspectives on
issues. Checklists such as the one below will aid students
analyse the usefulness of information they possess.
1. What do I know anything about this topic? Yes/No
2. Is this information factual or an opinion? Yes/No
3. Is this information useful and relevant to the point?
Yes/No
4. Do I know where I can locate more factual
information to back up my point? Yes/No
Text features and me (SCO 3.26)
Review the purpose of text features and where this sort of
information can be located when they are reading. The table
48
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
below can be displayed in class or provided to learners for
individual use.
Reading text features (SCO 3.27)
As text features are encountered in various subjects, learners
co-create a tool such as the one provided below demonstrate
their understanding and application of how the use of text
features impacts meaning.
49
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Read and view to develop understanding and recognise
how vocabulary and language use influence the meaning
and mood of the text
(SCO 3.28) Word choice reflection tool
Engage learners in the discussion of how word choice can
affect readers’ understanding and emotions by providing them
with a selection of text poetry, stories, advertisements, songs,
etc.).
50
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Guide the discussion with the use of the self-reflection tool
below. Encourage learners to use the tool to record examples
of how word choice affects them. Affects a passage’s meaning.
- The author/poet uses a mixture of simple and complex
sentences. <example>
- The author/poet uses a mixture of simple and difficult
words. <example>
- The author/poet uses several descriptive words.
<example>
- The author/poet makes me feel certain emotions by
the way he/she chose his/her words. <example>
- I can explain how the author/poet makes me feel.
<example>
- I understand that authors/poets select words to help
readers feel and understand what they are reading.
<example>
What do pictures say? (SCO 3.29)
Assist learners to understand how illustrations contribute to
mood and meaning in written and visual texts. Do this by
providing students with a variety of texts, with embedded
illustrations. Allow students time to review the illustrations and
discuss:
❖ how they make them feel
❖ how they contribute to their understanding of what
they are reading/viewing
❖ their purpose
❖ if they are effective
51
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Prior knowledge organizer (SCO 3.30) Scaffold learners in
their attempts to use their prior knowledge to understand and
evaluate the effectiveness of hidden messages in passages,
poetry, or social media posts. Provide learners with a graphic
organizer such as the one below which will allow them to
activate what they know about the passages, poetry, or social
media posts you wish them to analyse and evaluate. NOTE: To
increase learner’s confidence, change the wording of “what I
Know” to “What I think I Know”. This encourages to share
ideas without feeling they must be correct.
52
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
ELO 1 focuses on allowing learners to explore, use, and critically apply oral language for pleasure, and personal growth, to foster relationships and to
develop an appreciation and celebration of culture and oral languages. The following suggested resources
and materials would assist the teacher in accomplishing the ELO.
Teachers can also access information from ChatbotGP, Víola and other similar sources which will also provide
information about familiar stories, songs, etc. of other
cultures and languages. Note also that the school environment is filled with opportunities for listening and
speaking for learners in the upper grades. Debates, impromptu speaking
To support ELO 1 Speaking and Listening:
Remember that the entire school, school grounds and community provide excellent opportunities to learn about and develop oral
Video Creator for Schools
● How to teach listening (youtube.com)
● SC-834483_L.jpg (1000×1000) (dkoutlet.com)
Checklist sample: The following checklist can be used in the following ways (but not limited to):
● Role-Playing Scenarios
● Information Sharing Sessions
● Peer Teaching
Listening: Students can evaluate their listening skills by considering how effectively they grasp or understand information shared by others, and if they asked
for clarification when needed
53
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Speaking: Learners can evaluate speaking skills by assessing clarity of information, accuracy of facts, and use of clear language
Listing centres provide opportunities:
● for technology integration
● to cater for different learning abilities in the classroom
● to allow teachers to tailor activities to meet individual learner needs, offering opportunities for both remediation and enrichment.
● enhance listening and speaking activities.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
ELO 1 focuses on allowing learners to explore, use, and critically apply oral language for pleasure, and personal growth, to foster relationships and to develop an
appreciation and celebration of culture and oral languages. The following suggested content would assist the teacher in accomplishing the ELO
● https://essentialsoflanguageteaching.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/teaching-listening.pdf (This document is a good resource for teaching
Listening activities. Refer to pages 6-10 and 15-18 for insights on designing listening activities that foster comprehension and critical thinking, and pages
22-25 for techniques on integrating these activities with speaking and writing exercises.)
● https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=drmg3NBNKoE ( The video "A Sea of Talk" highlights the integral connection between listening/speaking and
writing/representing. It emphasizes how effective communication through listening and speaking activities can significantly enhance learners' writing
and representing skills by fostering critical thinking, idea organization, and expressive abilities.)
● (Edutopia) (Education Victoria) (Share My Lesson). These sites provide practical strategies and activities to enhance speaking and listening skills in the
classroom, promoting literacy integration through interactive and engaging methods.
54
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
● https://www.bing.com/videos/riverview/relatedvideo?q=resources+for+listening+and+speaking+for+teachers&mid=1E1473372B46DC7DAAF71
E1473372B46DC7DAAF7&FORM
Developing Critical thinking skills in learners. Teachers can use the following video to plan activities. It offers various strategies for teachers to develop learners'
critical thinking abilities during speaking exercises. It underscores the significance of interactive methods like debates, discussions, and problem-solving
assignments that prompt learners to express their ideas, challenge assumptions, and assess evidence critically. The video also emphasizes the value of fostering a
welcoming classroom atmosphere where learners are encouraged to share their thoughts and participate in meaningful conversations.
● https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4rXptKkXIDQ
● The following video provides practical advice for educators to improve critical thinking in the classroom through techniques like asking open-ended
questions, fostering debate, using real-world problems, and encouraging reflective thinking. It stresses the significance of establishing a supportive
environment for learners to question assumptions and consider diverse viewpoints. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xRkBIcrU1a4
Listening Comprehension crucial for this level
Strategies include: Predicting, Connecting, Visualising, Determining Importance, Analysing, Synthesising, and Inferring. Note: Listening Comprehension
Strategies are the same as reading comprehension strategies and are applied in all subject areas. By developing this skill in learners, they are better able to
function and excel in areas across the curriculum.
● Retelling: learners retelling information or a story they have listened to.
● Connecting - When learners preview text, they tap into what they already know (Funds of Knowledge), which will help them to understand the text they are about
to read. This provides a framework for any new information they listen to and read.
● Visualising - learners who visualize while reading often have better listening comprehension. Readers can take advantage of illustrations that
are embedded in the text or create their mental images or drawings when reading text without illustrations.
● Predicting - When learners make predictions about the text they are about to read, it sets up expectations based on their prior knowledge about similar topics.
As they read, they may mentally revise their prediction as they gain more information.
● Recognizing Literal Meaning: Questions about facts, details or information explicitly stated in the audio story (or other genre).
55
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
● Making Inferences: Questions asking learners to make inferences as they listen to audio stories, interpreting what is said by going beyond the literal meaning.
● Identifying Main Idea: Questions asking learners to identify the central idea or gist of an audio story (or other genre).
● Drawing Conclusions: Questions asking learners to conclude by synthesizing information in an audio story (or other genre).
● Analysing Reasoning: Questions asking learners to analyse reasoning supporting a claim in an audio story (or other genre).
● Finding Evidence: Questions asking learners to identify statements or details in an audio story that provide evidence to support claims.
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Engaging in listening and speaking across various subjects necessitates blending speaking and listening with reading, writing, and observing. Within each
subject, this entails:
1. Employing terminology specific to the subject.
2. Transitioning from everyday language to the nuanced language that embodies the grammatical and conceptual frameworks of the discipline.
3. Utilising language during social interactions is essential for tasks aimed at enhancing both content knowledge and skills development.
56
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 4: Students will develop their understanding of how an author’s choice of vocabulary, language, genre,
text form, text features and style influence the meaning of text and define the author’s craft.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learner will be expected to:
R ead and view to develop Assessment of students’ reading and viewing enables ELO 4 focuses on the development of learners’
understanding of how author’s the teacher to monitor the learner’s u n d e r s t a n d i n g o f author’s purpose (to persuade, inform,
growth and development over time and to identify and entertain) and style (persuasive, narrative, expository,
purpose and style influence meaning
their strengths and needs. Formative assessment descriptive) of writing. It is important for learners to be
provides opportunities for the teacher to gather exposed to all genres both in print and digital format in
4.1 Continue to develop the skills to information through COP: Conversation, order to understand the author’s intention, hidden
compare and contrast various formats of messages, and unique styles.
Observation, and Product. It allows teachers to
fiction, nonfiction, poetry, and drama
determine learning prior to instruction and observe Genre often influences an author’s purpose. Begin the
4.2 Demonstrate growing awareness that learner progress during and after instruction. year by reviewing the genres and subgenres.
fiction, nonfiction, and poetry reflect a
CONVERSATION R ead and view to develop understanding of how
purpose and a point of view
author’s purpose and style influence meaning
Peer Assessment: Card Exchange
4.3 Identify different purposes for reading
from selected passages
Provide peers with the same material to read or view. Compare and Contrast Venn Diagram (SCO 4.1, 4.2,
Then give each learner a card to write their choice of a 4.3) Provide learners with examples of various subgenres
4.4 Describe the author’s theme/purpose
reflection, illustration, summary, report, or questions of fiction and nonfiction texts.
and cite supporting evidence
for the author about a story, character, advertisement,
- nonfiction: history, biography, autobiography, self-help,
4.5 Respond critically to text by or point of view from an article. Learners will
textbook, etc.
identifying instances where language is complete the card then exchange it with peers to
57
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
being used to manipulate, persuade or discuss individual responses to the reading and - fiction: science-fiction, mystery, folk tales, etc.
control discover similarities, differences, opinions, views, and
Review and discuss the overall purpose of both genres,
other perspectives. Teachers collect these responses
4.6 Discuss text with reference to using model texts to guide the discussion.
and make note of the quality and depth of the
purpose and style of a variety of
response.
Present learners with copies of Venn diagrams or guide
illustrators of fiction, nonfiction, and
them into creating their own, one for fiction and one for
poetry Timeline Gallery Walk
nonfiction. Each Venn diagram should have a centre
- to inform Learners walk the classroom gallery of reading and viewing circle with circles for each subgenre connected to it.
and read and or view segments of content that have
- to entertain
been placed in an out of sequence array.
- to persuade
Learners work together to discuss all the pieces read
4.7 Demonstrate understanding of an and determine the correct order or sequence of the
author’s style of plot development of events or text and arrange them in the correct order.
fiction: fables, folk tales, fairy tales, and Once placed in ordered, they self-check the teacher key
adventure stories. for accuracy. Teacher observes and makes note of
collaborative behaviours and understanding of
- use of time sequence
sequence. https://guides.lib.wayne.edu/c.php?g=174739&p=1152
https://guides.lib.wayne.edu/c.php?g=174739&p=1152
- use of descriptive language 006655
OBSERVATION
https://www.yourdictionary.com/articles/childrens-
- use of dialogue hbottopks:-/ty/pwews w.yourdictionary.com/articles/childrens-
Mock News Room
b ook-types
Read and view to develop
Set up a “newsroom desk” for learners to present what
understanding and recognise use of LLeeaarrnneerrss w woorrkk i nin p paairirss o orr g grroouuppss t too w wrrititee ssimimilialarrititieiess a anndd
genres and text features influence
they have learned through reading the news, sports, or
ddiiffffeerreenncceess ooff ssuubbggeennrreess oonn tthheeiirr VVeennnn ddiiaaggrraammss..
weather. Other learners (who have also read the same
meaning
news reports) observe, ask questions, or provide WWhhaatt’’ss tthhee ppuurrppoossee ooff tthhiiss?? ((SSCCOO 44..33 –– 44..66))
feedback on numerous aspects: (accuracy, tone, eye
4.8 Identify different genres of texts such RReemmiinndd lleeaarrnneerrss ooff ddiissccuussssiioonnss iinn pprreevviioouuss ggrraaddeess aabboouutt
contact, pronunciation, phrasing, confidence, facial
as fiction, nonfiction, poetry, and drama aauutthhoorr’’ss ppuurrppoossee bbyy vviieewwiinngg aa vviiddeeoo ssuucchh aass together.
Pause after each description of a purpose (inform,
58
persuade, entertain) style (persuasive, narrative,
expository, descriptive) Learners find a book or passage
that reflects each purpose and or style and share with
peers. Groups of peers work together to create a purpose
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
and explain how each genre influences the expression, and body language). Teacher observes and https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=enm4afX-izA
reader's understanding and interpretation braids reading and speaking strands by observing together. Pause after each description of a purpose
of the text. learner’s oral language skills and overall reading (inform, persuade, entertain) style (persuasive, narrative,
comprehension. expository, descriptive) Learners find a book or passage
4.9 Recognize and analyse text features
that reflects each purpose and or style and share with
such as headings, subheadings, Four Corners
peers. Groups of peers work together to create a purpose
illustrations, and captions to understand
library.
Post short pieces of text in the four corners of the
their influence on the meaning and
room. Individual learners move around the room and
comprehension of the text. NOTE: Learners repeat this activity with digital texts (
read the texts then stick them in the correct column of
see below)
4.10 Compare and contrast the use of a chart with headings reflecting various purposes for
paragraphing in fiction and nonfiction writing. (To inform, to entertain or to persuade). Once Websites are created with a purpose in mind (4.3-
texts to understand how it impacts the complete, learners share their results with peers, 4.6)
organization and clarity of ideas. compare, and then check with the teacher.
Collect a variety of learner appropriate websites and
4.11 Analyse stanzas and rhyme schemes Teachers makes note of overall and individual schedule opportunities for learners to visit the websites
in poetry to comprehend how they understanding of the concept of author’s purpose and to determine its purpose. Examples include:
contribute to the overall meaning and uses this information to inform further teaching on the
Inform:
mood of the poem. topic.
https://kids.nationalgeographic.com/
4.12 Examine dialogue markers (e.g., Example of chart
said, shouted, nodded, exclaimed, etc.), Entertain:
scenes, and stage directions in drama to Purpose https://www.ducksters.com/jokes/food.php
understand their role in shaping Persuade: use online ads for popular products
characters, conflicts, and plot
To Inform To Entertain To Persuade
development
As learners review each site, they ask critical questions of
self and peers, such as:
- what am I learning?
- how do I know this is true?
59
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4.13 Generate questions based on PRODUCT - where can I find information to prove it is true?
graphical representations e.g., charts, - is this funny? Why?
Reading Response Journals
diagrams, posters, billboards, videos, etc. - could this hurt someone’s feelings? Why?
- what is this ad trying to sell me?
A Reading Response Journal is a place for learners to
R ead and view to develop
- do I need this or do I want this?
write, draw, and share their opinions, ideas, or respond
understanding of how vocabulary and - does this look like a good value?
to text that was read in class.
language use influence the meaning - what is the impact of this product on the environment?
a nd mood of the text How to use Reading Response Journal
4.14 Recognise how authors use imagery, 1. For quick writes – a place for learners to jot Time Sequence as a style of writing (SCO 4.7)
descriptive language, and vocabulary to down their thoughts quickly. Learners make
create the tone and mood within the text predictions before reading.
Engage the learners in reading activities that consist of
texts written in a style that employs time sequencing
4.15 Analyse the purpose of messages 2. To respond to text – as learners read text, they words (recipe, directions, narrative, etc.) or time
relayed through social media platforms as record their impressions, questions, observations in transition words. This will help them to recognize the
agents to inform, influence, misinform, their journal order of events and make connections between the
bully, entertain, etc. sequence of events. Provide opportunities for learners
3. For retelling - Reading Response Journals are the
to keep a bank of time sequencing words so that they
4.16 Identify examples of how an author perfect place for learners to retell a story in their own
will be familiar with these and recognize them in texts
uses and develops characters through: words. Learners can self-assess using the following
easily. To begin, refer to known time sequencing words.
questions:
- descriptive language To build vocabulary and the subtleties of language, add
Retelling checklist words such as occasionally, frequently, afterwards, preceding, etc.
- informal and formal language
Were the main details clear and sequential?
- Home Language(s) and Standard English
Did you use your own words to relate the story?
- dialogue
Did you give reference to the title and author whose work
you are retelling?
Source: GWickham
60
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4.17 Recognize and interpret authors’ Did you provide an opinion or a recommendation? Examples of Time Sequencing Words
viewpoints through critical lens to https://tinyurl.com/y7xfuurp
Reading Portfolios
determine the implied and explicit messages https://tinyurl.com/bddt8ufn
A reading portfolio can be as simple as a file folder of
in all genres
information about reading progress for each learner in the
in advertisements classroom. It can include a variety of sources of
information about learners as readers. These include: BRAIDING THE STRANDS
in product labels
1. Samples of learners’ work Incorporate speaking and writing activities which utilize
4.18 Further develop understanding of an
the use of time sequence words.
illustrator’s use of implied and explicit - Reading logs
messages
- Book reports Read and view to develop understanding and
4.19 Recognize how vocabulary usage recognise use of genres and text features influence
- Reading Tests Samples ( class IRI)
creates imagery and aids interpretation and meaning
understanding of text
2. Learners’ self-evaluations
E- Text Features Scavenger Hunt (SCO 4.9)
- Questions/checklists
- Response journals - Present learners with e-texts that contain various text
features.
3. Anecdotal/progress notes by teacher and learners.
(arrows, back buttons, links to other sources, tabs, etc.)
- Reading conference notes
-Working in pairs or small groups, learners will read the
4. Teacher’s observation notes
e-texts, use the e-text features and describe their purpose
for this e-text.
- Checklists
-Learners complete the “Let’s Examine our E-Text”
- Reading attitude interview
worksheet.
61
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The portfolio is designed to give a profile of the learner as -Conclude by asking learners to discuss the differences
a reader and is helpful for conferencing with the child, and similarities of text features used for the paper based
parents, or special needs educator. on e-text genres and share how each feature aided in
their understanding of the texts. For a checklist of paper
Home Language/Standard English Broadcast
based and digital text features, visit:
Provide opportunities for learners to create very short https://www.readingrockets.org/sites/default/files/202
videos consisting of content with the Home Language 3-07/Print-and-Digital-Text-Features.pdf
and the Standard English form to match. The content
can be in varying formats- example song, poem, and
story. Teacher reviews the broadcast and the learner’s use
Paragraph Bridge (SCO 4.10, 4.11)
of both forms of language.
Aid learners to compare and contrast the types of
SELF-ASSESSMENT
paragraphs or stanzas used in fiction and nonfiction texts
Vocabulary challenge and poetry.
Post vocabulary challenge activities in an envelope on -Highlight the format of paragraphs used in fiction e.g.,
word wall, learner take a challenge sheet from the beginning, middle and end.
envelope and complete the questions. Include challenges
-Draw attention to the format of paragraphs used in
such as:
non-fiction e.g., introduction, body, and conclusion.
- find the root word, prefix and suffix
- search for the meaning of the root word, prefix and -Encourage learners to analyse the similarities and
suffix differences between both formats
- use the word in a sentence
- find a synonym, antonym, or rhyming word -Build on this prior knowledge by discussion what is
- search for word’s country of origin
included in each paragraph (detail, description, sequence,
- etc.
etc.) and compare fiction and nonfiction
62
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
When complete, teacher provides the learner with the
answer key. The learner creates a new vocabulary
challenge and answer key to add to the vocabulary
challenge envelope.
PEER ASSESSMENT
Supporting Evidence Chart
Source: GWickham
Learners will complete a chart following reading or
viewing by recording supporting details for given topic -Model how the differences and similarities in format can
sentence(s), or in determining answers to questions be used to understand both fiction and nonfiction text.
asked. Learners will exchange their charts with peers to
review and evaluate the information recorded. -Model how learners can use such knowledge to aid the
understanding of texts.
Guiding Questions (SCO 4.13)
Encourage learners to create questions to use as peers
interact with paper based and e-content content from
charts, diagrams, posters, billboards, videos, Tik Tok etc.
that you have collected and filed. Create the
opportunities for both teacher and learners to
demonstrate the process in order to develop
competency.
- What is the main message or theme?
- Who was this information written for?
- What is being represented on the
chart/graph/poster?
- What is the most popular ____?
63
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.twinkl.com.au/resource/us-l-157-main- - What is the video promoting?
idea-graphic-organizer-activity-sheet - Which information is fact?
- Which information is opinion?
- According to the video, what are the benefits of
. . . ?
- Do you think enough information was provided
for you to decide if you agree or disagree?
- Do you agree with the information shared?
Why? Why Not?
Read and view to develop understanding of how
v ocabulary and language use influence the meaning
and mood of the text
Identifying meaning and mood (SCO 4.1, 4.18, 4.19)
Begin a lesson on mood by sharing a variety of photos
from local sources such as newspapers, billboards,
advertisements, community notices, etc. With each
photo, ask,
- “What information was the photographer planning to
give you? How do you know?”
- “How does this make you feel? Why?” Engage learners
in a discussion of the meaning and mood ensuring that
they understand that mood refers to the reader’s feelings,
while meaning refers to the writer’s photographer’s
purpose.
64
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Then, present learners with a series of short passages,
and repeat the steps below using each passage:
1. Have learners read each passage individually,
with a peer or in small groups.
2. Ask learners to provide adjectives to describe
how the text made them feel. Create an anchor
chart of adjectives generated by learners.
3. Ask learners to highlight or underline the words
or phrases in the text that made them feel the
way they did about the text.
4. Discuss with learners, using evidence from the
texts, how the author used words to create
mood.
Repeat the steps for the teaching of tone. Video clips
may be used initially to add interest and cement
understanding of the concepts.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS
Learners draw emojis at the top of their writing paper,
and then write short stories or scenes that are in keeping
with the chosen emojis.
Reverse the process: Learners share their writing with a
peers and the peers draw or use an emoji representing
what they feel is the mood and tone.
65
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Analyzing Point of View (SCO 4.17)
Visit:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NUZDL5AbES0
for information to introduce first and third person point
of view. This video connects point of view with the
pronouns in each point of view, providing learners with
an easy way to determine the author’s perspective.
Conduct a conversation with learners on point of view of
various narratives you’ve chosen. Sitting in a circle or
with a small group, pose questions about various points
of view. Learners read and analyze the text, and respond
to questions such as:
● What is the narrative’s point of view?
● How does this point of view influence your
interpretation of the story?
● How does the author develop the point of view
through the narrator?
● Who told the story? Was the narrator a character
in the story? How did the narrator affect your
reading of the story?
● How would the text have changed if a different
character told the story?
● Why do you think the author chose the narrator
he/she did to tell the story?
66
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Suggestions for books to teach point of view are
available at: https://teachingmadepractical.com/books-
point-of-view/ (note, while this is a commercial site,
many of these books are available on YouTube).
Question Answer Relationship (QAR) (SCOs 4.17,
4.18)
● Introduce the QAR strategy (see below)by
explaining the four types of question/answer
relationships.
● Model the strategy using a short passage, and
then engage learners in a shared practice activity.
● Provide opportunities for independent practice,
ensuring that the length and complexity of
reading texts are gradually increased.
● Facilitate a discussion among learners about how
thinking about the relationships between
questions and answers can help in understanding
explicit and implied messages.
67
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.readingrockets.org/classroom/classroom-
strategies/question-answer-relationship-qar
Creating Sensory Experiences (SCO 4.19)
❖ Model the reading of the poem “The River” out
loud.
❖ Have learners take turns reading the poem out
loud, and then silently.
68
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
❖ They will highlight or underline the words that
relate to their senses - sight, hearing, smell, taste,
or touch.
❖ Once senses are identified, review the meaning
and purpose of simile and metaphor and which
is used in The River.
Learners share their choice of sensory words and discuss
how these words aided in their understanding of the
poem.
The River by Valerie Bloom
The River's a wanderer.
A nomad, a tramp,
He doesn't choose one place
To set up his camp.
The River's a winder,
Through valley and hill
He twists and he turns,
He just cannot be still.
The River's a hoarder,
And he buries down deep
Those little treasures
That he wants to keep.
The River's a baby,
He gurgles and hums,
And sounds like he's happily
Sucking his thumbs.
69
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The River's a singer,
As he dances along,
The countryside echoes
The notes of his song.
The River's a monster
Hungry and vexed,
He's gobbled up trees
And he'll swallow you next.
https://www.ststephensce.lbhf.sch.uk/wp-
content/uploads/2022/09/The-RiverPoem-by-Valerie-
Bloom.pdf
Braiding the Strand
Learners add the sensory words to their personal word
banks and use them in poetry writing focussed on
creating similes and metaphors.
INTEGRATING THE SUBJECTS: Utilize
content from different subject areas, both written and
digital to create poems, expository, descriptive, narrative,
and persuasive pieces, posters, songs, etc.
70
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials:
ELO 4 focuses on allowing learners to develop their understanding of how an author’s choice of vocabulary, language, genre, text form, text features and
style influence the meaning of text and define the author’s craft. The following suggested resources and materials would assist the teacher in accomplishing the
ELO.
● Readers’ Theatre: https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLg5_HJO86d4fp_r-GhStIJ0XturZaEAtS&si=0fi4jkfUBaPD_yJM (These videos
provide useful tips and steps to help teachers implement Readers Theatre in their classroom. Have students view the video then discuss
each component with them.)
● https://www.commonlit.org/ (This site provides a wide range of reading passages for students from grade 3 upwards. The passages are
accompanied by questions designed to assist students in grasping the author's language usage, text features, and styles.
● https://newsela.com/ (Newsela offers free articles from various genres, adapted to different reading levels. The articles are accompanied by questions
and activities that prompt students to analyse vocabulary and text features.)
● https://www.readwritethink.org/ (This site provides free interactive reading lessons and activities, along with tools for analysing texts and
comprehending various literary
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
ELO 4 focuses on allowing learners to develop their understanding of how an author’s choice of vocabulary, language, genre, text form, text features and
style influence the meaning of text and define the author’s craft. The following suggested content would assist the teacher in accomplishing the ELO.
● https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R_bgo8j6jxc (Explaining the author’s purpose)
● https://www.voyagersopris.com/vsl/blog/what-are-text-features-and-how-to-teach-them (This blog post explains the importance of text features and
how they can be taught.)
● https://www.readingrockets.org/topics/comprehension/articles/guiding-learners-through-expository-text-text-feature-walks (This article introduces
the concept of “Text Feature Walk”. It explains how this strategy can be used along with common text features.)
● https://whatihavelearnedteaching.com/text-features/ (The link provides information on text features and suggestions for teaching them in groups
according to their purpose.)
71
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
The provided links serve as valuable resources for the entire academic year. As they are integrated into lessons, feel free to revisit them as often as necessary to
ensure student understanding and mastery.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Project-Based Learning: Design interdisciplinary projects that require students to use their background knowledge and interests to engage with diverse texts.
For example, a project on global climate change could include scientific research, statistical analysis, and historical perspectives.
Reading Across the Curriculum: Encourage reading and critical engagement with culturally diverse texts across all subjects. This can include fiction, non-
fiction, and digital media relevant to each subject area.
Collaborative Learning: Foster collaboration among students from diverse backgrounds to share their perspectives and knowledge. Group projects and
discussions can help students appreciate different cultural viewpoints and develop critical thinking skills.
72
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Writing and Representing
Introduction
Language is the foundation of communication and the primary instrument of thought. The study of Language Arts provides access to multiple and interrelated oral,
aural, written, and visual ways of representing, exploring, problem solving, communicating and sharing meaning. Through listening, speaking, writing, representing,
reading and viewing a wide range of text and text form, the student continues to develop an awareness of culture, personal identity, and the strategies needed to
participate, communicate and reflect critically on thought and action.
Introduction to the Strand
Writing and Representing strategies and skills provide opportunities for learners to communicate with their peers and other meaningful audiences within and beyond
their community using paper and digital formats. The process of writing includes planning, organizing, revising, refining, and sharing feedback. Throughout this
process, ongoing problem solving and critical thinking strategies, applicable to subject areas and to life develop.
Grade Level Expectations
Write for pleasure and personal growth
understand that writing provides a way to recognize and share their culture, thinking and demonstrations of learning
discuss the quality of what is written and relate it to the principles of author’s craft
reflect on and identify their strengths as writers, areas of improvement and the strategies they found most useful at different stages of the writing process
Engage in the writing process
generate, gather and organize ideas and information to write for an intended purpose and audience
draft and revise their writing, using a variety of informational, literary and graphic forms and stylistic elements appropriate for the purpose and audience
use editing, proofreading and publishing skills and strategies and knowledge of language
73
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Uses a range of presentation style elements including print, script, fonts, graphics and layout
Explore language structures
Monitor language use for intended and unintended messages
Use complex punctuation meaningfully
Broaden vocabulary and vary their writing to suit the purpose and the reader
Use a clear structure to organize their writing, sequence events and recount them in appropriate detail
Explore word solving
Use most conventions to correct errors, refine expression and present their work effectively
Explore similarities and differences in how affixes affect meaning
74
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 5: Learners will generate, gather, and organize thoughts to explore, clarify and reflect on thoughts, feelings, and
experiences as they create a written or representative draft, independently and collaboratively, for a range of audiences and purposes.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learner will be expected to:
W rite and represent to generate and The focus of formative assessment throughout the ELO 5 provides opportunities for learners to engage in the
gather thoughts to explore ideas, writing process shifts according to the stage of processes of brainstorming and creating a first draft. Learners
writing: will be provided with a versatile and expressive framework for
feelings and experiences
generation, gathering, and exploring thoughts, ideas, feelings,
ELO 5:
and experiences, ultimately fostering self-discovery,
5.1 Generate, gather and organize ideas and communication, and personal growth.
Brainstorming and prewriting: focus on the
information to write for an intended purpose
exploration and generation of ideas and details
As the writing process begins, you may wish to share sections
and audience.
of this video as a reminder of how the process unfolds.
ELO 5:
5.2 Reflect on and identify their strengths as
The Writing Process
writers, areas of improvement and the Drafting: focus on organization of ideas and details
strategies they found most useful at different to match the genre of writing
W rite and represent to generate and gather thoughts to
stages of the writing process.
ELO 6: explore ideas, feelings and experiences
5.3 Brainstorm content for short research
Revising: Focus on sentence fluency, word choice and
projects that build knowledge about a topic. Graphic Organizers: (SCO 5.1, 5.3, 5.13)
grammar
5.4 Continue to use personal interests or Remind students of why brainstorming and prewriting activities
ELO 7:
community experiences, music, are the beginning of the writing cycle.
books, documentaries, videos, pictures as
Editing and Presentation: Focus on Spelling, Tidiness
Then, demonstrate the process by writing an idea on the board
writing prompts
and Presentation
(or software such as WordCloud) and think aloud as you
75
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
5.5 Maintain writing portfolios - drafts, CONVERSATIONS AND OBSERVATIONS generate words, phrases, additional ideas related to the idea. To
revisions, personal writing prompts, etc. demonstrate the benefit of peer sharing, encourage learners to
ELO 5 provides teachers with an opportunity to focus
share their ideas. They can in a given time frame. This helps
W rite and represent, using their observations and feedback on the generation of students expand their vocabulary and generate diverse ideas.
organisational strategies to arrange ideas and the initial organizing of those ideas into a
draft. As such, feedback provides questions that lead
thoughts to explore, clarify and reflect
learners to think of more possibilities.
o n ideas, feelings and experiences to
generate and gather thoughts to Begin the year with a general sense of how writing
explore ideas, feelings and progresses from Grade 3 to senior high, visit
e xperiences https://educationnorthwest.org/sites/default/files/5- Once this demonstration has been completed. Learners work
pointwriters-rubric.pdf for a comprehensive rubric. individually or in pairs to create their own brainstorm.
5.6 Use a variety of paper-based and digital
resources to gather information to support and For more specific genre based information about Next, provide learners with a choice of graphic organizers to
enhance the brainstorming process learner progress from grades 3-5, visit: visually map out their ideas
https://tb2cdn.schoolwebmasters.com/accnt_586545
5.7 Examine samples of different genres as
/site_586546/Documents/5th-Grade-Formative-
models for organizing a sequence of events,
Writing-Evaluation-Guide.pdf
changes in setting, and character development
Products
5.8 Develop competence in organizing and
arranging ideas and information to write for Reflection Journals:
an intended purpose and audience.
Learners document their thoughts, feelings, and
5.9 Organize and strengthen writing during experiences throughout the drafting and prewriting
drafting stage process. Ongoing communication with the teacher
and peers provides opportunities for anecdotal
5.10 Create and use simple paper based or
notes about learner progress and a foundation for
digital graphic organizers to aid the
feedback. Free Graphic Organizer Templates | Houghton Mifflin
organization of ideas (e.g., five-finger plan,
Harcourt (hmhco.com)
76
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
story map, web, list, five Ws, and graphic Genre Knowledge: Use of Mentor Text (SCO 5.7)
organizers for specific forms of writing.)
By Grade 5, learners are developing more Remind learners of the genre and subgenre of the writing
W rite and represent to create a confidence in distinguishing the format and content assignment by reading aloud an excerpt of a mentor text that
written or representative draft of various genres. reviews the purpose and format of the genre / subgenre.
Engages learners in a discussion of how the mentor text
reflects the genre / subgenre.
5.11 Continue to explore and experiment
with various ways to express their thoughts Braid the strands of Reading and Writing by
Learners then explore various digital and paper based texts
and ideas in various text forms (e.g., encouraging discussions about the writing of style
that demonstrate the genre / subgenre.
Narrative, Descriptive, Expository, of authors encountered during Teacher Read Aloud
Persuasive) and Learner Independent Reading. Ask questions Peer Modelling: (SCO 5.2)
such as:
5.12 Continue to utilize strategies to organize Pair learners with varying skill levels and have them observe
ideas into a draft that supports the topic, Which genre is this? each other's prewriting and drafting. This will support
enhances clarity, and sequences logically learning from their peers and promote inclusivity and
- biography
collaboration in the classroom.
5.13 Demonstrate understanding by using
-science fiction
linking words and phrases to develop a OR,
logical progression of ideas and thoughts
-mystery
Encourage learners to interview each other about their
(e.g., linking/connecting words for emphasis,
thoughts, experiences, or opinions about a writing topic.
contrast, reasoning, illustration, etc.) Why do you think that?
Learners take notes that may be useful as they begin their idea
5.14 Continue to explore and represent in Find another text that is the same genre. generation or drafting.
written pieces:
During the drafting stage, make anecdotal notes Independent Writing (SCO 5.5): Schedule time (10
- introductory/topic sentences about the learner’s understanding of the genre being minutes, 2-3 times a week) for learners to write in their private
studied. e-journals or paper based journals. This writing is not for
- concluding sentences
marking; simply an opportunity for learners to explore their
Peer and Self-Assessment: Learners evaluate their
ideas and thoughts. For example, a learner may wish to write
- paragraphs
own work and provide feedback to their peers. This
a letter to themselves, someone else, or even an abstract
77
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
- a range of vocabulary to match the genre simple checklist provides learners with a series of concept (e.g., fear, hope) to express thoughts, feelings, and
and purpose of the writing statements that allow for check-ins throughout all experience the power of shower thoughts in writing.
stages of the writing process.
5.15 Continue to develop purpose and use of Portfolios (SCO 5.4, 5.5) Use a portfolio to keep track and
https://www.readingrockets.org/topics/assessment
the form of simple, compound, and complex authentically capture the progress of students’ writing.
-and-evaluation/articles/simple-ways-assess-
sentences. Throughout the year, Learners will create an inventory of
writing-skills-students-learning
topics/ideas/writing prompts to begin writing as well as
5.16 Build on existing knowledge of the
drafts, revisions and final copies. Visit:
various genres:
https://jenniferfindley.com/writing-portfolios/
- narrative writing
-expository writing
-descriptive writing
Write and represent, using organisational strategies to
arrange thoughts to explore, clarify and reflect on ideas,
-persuasive writing
feelings and experiences to generate and gather thoughts
-poetry - (rhyme, limerick, shape) to explore ideas, feelings and experiences
-book reports
G allery Walk: (SCO 5.4, 5.7) Display examples of ideas and
drafts around the classroom. Learners observe different
approaches to idea generation, drafting and prewriting, and
gather inspiration for their own writing. NOTE: Before
posting learner work, ask for permission from the learner and
ensure the class realizes that posted ideas and drafts are
intended to share ideas, not to assess by peers.
78
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Online mind mapping tools: (SCO 5.10)
Once brainstorms and prewriting activities are complete,
demonstrate how to use an online mind mapping tool and
encourage students to map out their ideas.
INTEGRATING THE SUBJECTS: Mind mapping
provides an opportunity for learners to maintain
written records of content learned and explored in
other subject areas.
Storyboarding: (SCO 5.10)
Demonstrate or provide examples storyboards and provide
opportunities for Learners create paper based or digital
storyboards or visual outlines of their writing ideas using
drawings, images, or symbols.
79
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners can also use a website in creating a story:
https://www.imagineforest.com/story/creator
Learners use this website to create newspaper articles,(variety
of genres)
https://www.fodey.com/generators/newspaper/snippet.asp
Learners use this website to create and expand on their
persuasive writing.
https://interactives.readwritethink.org/persuasion-
map?_gl=1*101av7y*_ga*MzQ5NTIxMzA5LjE3MTMyND
QzOTg.*_ga_PPJBE9BR3H*MTcxNjgzMTM1My40LjAuM
TcxNjgzMTM1My42MC4wLjA
Write and represent to create a written or
r epresentative draft
Anchor Texts and Mentor Texts (SCO 5.11): Throughout
the writing process for each assignment, refer to anchor texts
and mentor texts by author to remind learners of the purpose
and format of each genre and subgenre.
INTEGRATING THE SUBJECTS: Choose anchor texts
from social studies, science, health and wellness, or the arts to
remind learners that writing and genre study encompasses all
learning experiences.
80
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Becoming familiar with drafting digital tools: (SCO 5.12)
Text Expansion Tools: Use text expansion software like Text
Expander or Phrase Expander to create shortcuts for
frequently used phrases, prompts, or templates. This can save
time and streamline your writing process, especially for
repetitive tasks.
Timeline Tools: Use timeline software such as Tik-Tok or
Timelines to visually represent chronological sequences of
events, experiences, or ideas. Timelines help see patterns,
progressions, and relationships over time.
The following links provide a variety of story organizers
that can be used throughout the year and with learners
requiring varying degrees of support.
• This link is designed to help learners outline the key
elements of a story, including the setting, main
characters, and sequence of events
https://www.readingrockets.org/sites/default/f
iles/2023-11/graphic-organizer-story-frame.pdf
● This link provides help for learners detail the main
characters, setting, problem, and solution of a story
https://www.readingrockets.org/sites/default/f
iles/migrated/pdfs/storymap_complex3.pdf
Scan codes to download the supportive templates:
81
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Event Pyramid Story Map
• On this webpage, you can find a range of storyboard
templates that will assist your learners in effectively
structuring and arranging their writing digital stories.
Storyboard Template - Search Images
(bing.com)
82
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
ELO 5 focuses on learners' generating, gathering, and organizing their thoughts to explore, clarify and reflect on thoughts, feelings, and experiences as they
create a written or representative draft, independently and collaboratively, for a range of audiences and purposes. The following suggested resources and materials
would assist the teacher in accomplishing the ELO
Videos: Story Elements
● This can be a writing project of shared writing. Teachers can create videos with their learners and use them as a resource for lower-graders.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1M0pFLXegG0
Editing & Revision Tools
● Google Scholar
● OneLook Thesaurus
● QuillBot proofreading Tool
The following links offer visual aids and templates to help young learners organise ideas and enhance storytelling skills.
● fdd5e0f7353e6fcbdeb9daca0d716453.jpg (736×952) (pinimg.com)
● 3d4afec2a13c36b8880ba10657384acc.png (247×640) (pinimg.com)
● d9f7a63b9b9aba1133df717c15000394.jpg (564×818) (pinimg.com)
83
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
ELO 5 focuses on learners' generating, gathering, and organizing their thoughts to explore, clarify and reflect on thoughts, feelings, and experiences as they
create a written or representative draft, independently and collaboratively, for a range of audiences and purposes. The following suggested content would assist the
teacher in accomplishing the ELO.
● The video offers strategies for teachers to improve student engagement and learning through technology integration (2:10-4:05), interactive activities(5:20-
7:15), and differentiated instruction(9:30-11:25). https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bGjm2nau9SI
● This website helps Grade 5 teachers and learners by giving tips on how to improve writing skills across different subject areas, enhancing the learning
experience: https://www.hmhco.com/blog/how-to-integrate-writing-across-the-curriculum
● This platform provides valuable guidance for Grade 5 educators and students, offering practical advice on integrating writing across various subjects. By
doing so, it aims to enhance literacy skills and foster critical thinking abilities. https://www.readingrockets.org/classroom/classroom-
strategies/transition-words
● A comprehensive collection of writing prompts is available from this site, to support Grade 5 teachers and learners, inspiring students and enhancing their
creative and expository writing skills. https://www.bhamcityschools.org/cms/lib5/AL01001646/Centricity/Domain/131/Writing%20Prompts.pdf
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
● https://theliteracyloft.com/2018/07/how-to-integrate-writing-across-content-areas/
● Bing Videos
84
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 6: Learners will revise the organization and language use in drafted writing or representation, collaboratively
and independently, for a variety of purposes and audiences.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to:
Write and represent to revise
Formative is an ongoing cycle of observation, ELO 6 highlights the importance of both collaborative and
reflection, and feedback promotes a growth independent revisions of organization, word choice, sentence
organisation styles of draft writing
mindset and enables students to critically analyse fluency, grammar and voice recognizing the value of applying
and representation
and improve their work, ensuring it effectively new learning, feedback, and ongoing self-assessment.
serves various audiences and purposes. Ultimately, it prepares learners to adapt their work for various
6.1 Analyse and identify different organization Throughout ELO 6, formative assessments focus purposes and audiences, ensuring clear, coherent, and
s tyles used in written drafts and on revision: improving organization, sentence effective communication.
representations, including narrative, fluency, word choice, and grammar. (ELO 7
descriptive, expository, persuasive structures focusses on spelling, capitalization, presentation W rite and represent to revise organisation styles of
and tidiness.)
draft writing and representation
6.2 Evaluate the effectiveness of organization CONVERSATIONS
styles within various subgenres.
Writing Conference: Treasure Hunt (SCO 6.1, 6.2)
6.3 Revise written drafts to improve
Schedule individual or small group conferences to
P rovide learners with short sections of written drafts.
organization by selecting and applying
discuss specific organization, vocabulary,
Learners review, name the subgenre represented and form
appropriate organization styles based on the
grammar, and sentence fluency progress and next
explanations of how they know it is this subgenre by making
purpose, audience, and content of the writing.
steps in students' drafts. Use anecdotal notes to
reference to knowledge of their different organization styles.
record progress and the next steps of instruction.
6.4 Demonstrate proficiency in using graphic
Always share your notes with the learner as you Graphic Organizers: (SCO 6.2, 6.4, 6.5)
organizers, outlines, and other planning tools
peruse the learner’s revisions together. Begin with
to structure and organize ideas effectively in
Referring to the drafts created during the drafting stages of
statements about what’s been accomplished,
written drafts.
ELO 5, demonstrate how to use various graphic organizers to
followed by a heads up about the next stage of
help learners structure their writing and visually represent
learning and expectations.
85
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6.5 Communicate ideas clearly and coherently their ideas (e.g., mind maps, flowcharts, Venn diagrams, and
through written drafts, employing transitions, OBSERVATION story maps). Once demonstrated, learners choose a graphic
topic sentences, and logical sequencing to
organizer to further develop their draft and guide their
enhance organization and flow. Reflection Journal
revisions.
6.6 Reflect on their own writing process and The Learner’s Observation Journal helps learners
make strategic decisions to refine organization evaluate their development and receive targeted
styles based on feedback from peers and
feedback from the teacher and peers.
teachers.
6.7 Apply organization principles learned in
writing drafts to other forms of representation,
such as presentations, posters, and multimedia
projects, to effectively communicate
information and ideas.
W rite and represent to develop
language use when revising written
drafts (vocabulary)
etsy.com
6.8 Expand their vocabulary repertoire by SELF ASSESSMENT
identifying and incorporating a variety of
Use the 6 +1 Traits of Writing to help learners
precise and descriptive vocabulary words into
understand the process in writing their drafts.
their written drafts.
By self-monitoring each step of the writing
6.9 Demonstrate the ability to select
process, learners will develop proficiency in
appropriate synonyms and antonyms to
Think-Pair-Share (SCO 6.6, 6.7):
generating, gathering, and organizing ideas and
enhance the clarity, depth, and richness of
information while writing for an intended purpose
their vocabulary choices in written Share a think aloud as you read aloud your writing and
and audience to complete writing up to their final
compositions consider revisions to the organisation. For paper based
draft. ELO 5: Ideas and Organization
example, use arrows to show movement of text or strikeout
to remove text. For digital examples, demonstrate how to use
86
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6.10 Apply context clues and word analysis ELO 6: Organizations, Word Choice, Sentence revision tools. Once demonstrated learners work together or
strategies to infer the meanings of unfamiliar Fluency, Grammar in pairs to revise the organization of their drafts.
vocabulary words encountered in written drafts
Write and represent to develop language use when
ELO 7 Conventions and presentation
and effectively incorporate them into their
revising written drafts (vocabulary)
writing.
At the beginning of the year, co-create a class rubric
with learners using learning friendly language. V isual Supports (SCO: 6.8, 6.11:)
6.11 Revise and refine their written drafts by
Provide a copy for learners to place in their
replacing generic or repetitive vocabulary with I NTEGRATING THE SUBJECTS: Collect words of interest
portfolio as a self check. Visit
more specific and nuanced language to convey throughout all subject areas. Discuss their use and meaning
precise meanings and evoke vivid imagery. https://www.smekenseducation.com/use-a-six- and place on a word wall. Learners will make use of words
traits-rubric-for-efficient-assessment/ for an from the word wall to reinforce vocabulary usage for writing.
6.12 Analyse the impact of word choice on the
interesting video of how this process unfolds.
tone, mood, and overall effectiveness of their Vocabulary Portfolio: (SCO 6.8-6.11)
written compositions, making deliberate
decisions to select vocabulary that aligns with Insert a “Vocabulary I’ve Learned” page in each learner’s
the intended rhetorical purpose and audience. writing portfolio. Learners will be provided with a tangible
record of their vocabulary growth and serves as a valuable
6.13 Reflect on their vocabulary learning resource for self-assessment, reflection, and goal-setting.
process, identifying strengths and areas for
growth, and setting goals for further expanding
and diversifying their vocabulary skills in future
writing endeavours.
6.14 Engage in peer collaboration and
feedback sessions to receive input on their
vocabulary usage in written drafts, providing
constructive suggestions for improvement and
liveworksheets.com
implementing revisions based on peer and
teacher feedback.
87
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
W rite and represent to develop Word Wall Jeopardy (SCO: 6.10)
language use when revising written
Learners will solve riddles from clues related to the words on
drafts (grammar and sentence
the wall to find the correct word based on the clue and use it
f luency)
in a sentence.
Vocabulary Words Jeopardy
6.15 Identify and correct grammatical errors in
written drafts, including errors related to verb
tense, subject-verb agreement, punctuation,
and sentence structure.
PEER ASSESSMENT
6.16 Revise written drafts to enhance sentence
Learning Centres for Writing: (SCO: 6.20, 6.21, 6.22)
fluency, ensuring that sentences are varied in Learners will use a variety of assessment tools to
length and structure, and flow smoothly from engage in independent and peer revision of their Remember that writers may proceed through the various
one to the next. drafts. Using the revision column only (editing stages of the writing process at different rates. Create learning
occurs in. ELO 7), peers will facilitate the revision centres to support the different stages of the writing process.
6.17 Apply knowledge of sentence-level
process by providing feedback highlighting what Offer tiered assignments, flexible grouping, and scaffolding
grammar rules and conventions to improve the
has been accomplished. strategies to support students who may require additional
clarity, coherence, and readability of written
assistance or challenge.
compositions.
For example:
6.18 Demonstrate mastery of transitional
devices and cohesive elements to connect ideas Brainstorm centre: Provide various brainstorming
within and between sentences, paragraphs, and techniques such as mind mapping, freewriting, or listing.
sections of written drafts. Offer prompts related to personal experiences, fictional
scenarios, or current events to inspire story ideas.
6.19 Analyse the impact of different sentence
structures and stylistic choices on the overall Writing centre: Offer a quiet space for students to focus on
writing their composition. Provide resources such as writing
88
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
effectiveness and tone of written prompts, graphic organizers, or sentence starters for students
compositions. who need additional support.
6.20 Collaborate with peers to provide and Peer review centre: Set up a station where students can
receive constructive feedback on grammar and exchange their drafts with peers for feedback. Provide
sentence fluency in written drafts, guidelines or rubrics to guide peer reviews and constructive
incorporating feedback to revise and improve criticism.
the quality of writing.
Multimedia centre: Offer multimedia resources for students
6.21 Reflect on personal growth and to explore visual storytelling techniques, such as photography,
development in language use, identifying areas video clips, or artwork. Provide inspiration for incorporating
of strength and areas for improvement in modelteaching.com visuals into their compositions.
grammar and sentence fluency skills.
Two Stars and a Wish: This strategy is a simple Reflection Center: Create a reflective space where students
6.22 Apply revision strategies and techniques and effective feedback method often used in can assess their progress, identify strengths and areas for
learned in the writing process to independently educational settings to help students improve their growth, and set goals for future writing tasks.
revise and polish written drafts for grammar work. This strategy involves providing two
Write and represent to develop language use when
and sentence fluency prior to final submission. positive comments (the "stars") and one
revising written drafts (grammar and sentence fluency)
suggestion for improvement (the "wish").
W rite and represent to develop
Star 1: "Your characters are very well-developed,
language use Grammar Workshop: (SCO: 6.20, 6.21, 6.22)
and their dialogues feel realistic and engaging."
Offer short, focused mini-lessons on common grammar
Star 2: "The plot is well-structured, with a clear
issues such as subject-verb agreement, punctuation, verb
beginning, middle, and end that keeps the reader
tenses, and sentence structure. Begin each mini lesson by
interested."
viewing pieces of writing that demonstrate the concept.
Wish: "I wish you would add more sensory details
These specific mini-lessons activities assist learners as they
in the setting descriptions to help the reader
revise their draft to improve writing.
visualize the scenes more vividly."
89
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6.23 Demonstrate an enhanced ability to https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8uPemctju5
effectively express ideas and convey meaning g
BRAIDING THE STRANDS: During oral language
through written and visual representations,
Gallery Walks Continue the Gallery Walks started activities, reinforce the concepts mentioned above.
employing appropriate language use, clarity,
during ELO 5 for learner supplied examples of
and coherence. Write and represent to develop language use
the revision process. Gallery Walk
6.24 Understand and use formal, informal,
Let’s Explore (SCO: 6.24, 6.26)
Home Language and Standard English as
appropriate to the purpose, topic, setting, plot Schedule 2 minutes transition time opportunities for learners
line and characters in writing. use their digital dictionaries and thesauri to explore
characteristics of new words in Standard English or Home
6.25 Continue to engage in individual and peer
Language that have appeared in news items, teacher read
revision opportunities to share drafts and
Alouds, Independent Reading, etc. (definitions, synonyms,
provide/ receive feedback on elements of
antonyms, word origins etc.)
grammar and sentence fluency such as:
Collaborative Writing and visual projects: (SCO 6.25)
-use of simple verb tenses (e.g., I walked; I
CONVERSATIONS
walk; I will walk) During Independent Writing Time (2-3 times weekly for 5-10
minutes) learners may write independently or work in groups
Examples of teacher learner conversations
-comparative and superlative adjectives and
to create their choice of story books or posters, integrating
include:
adverbs,
written and visual elements.
Teacher-student conferences
- form and use possessives.
Game On (SCO 6.27)
Student feedback/free talk
Small group discussion and feedback
-subject and verb and pronoun-antecedent
Learners participate in various games which encourage them
agreement
to practice the use of figurative language. After each correct
Padlet: or incorrect response, the learners explain why.
-use of simple, compound and complex
sentence patterns
Padlet is an online bulletin board platform where Figurative language game - Teaching resources
students create digital portfolios by adding text,
images, links, and documents. Students can
90
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
-determining complete and incomplete organize their vocabulary entries into The language of lyrics (SCO 6.27)
sentences customizable columns or categories, making it
Listen to popular songs and make note figurative language
easy to navigate and update their portfolios.
6.26 Make use of reference material (e.g., used. Learners choose phrases or expressions from the song
https://padlet.com/
dictionaries, glossaries, thesauruses), both print to enhance their writing. Remember that an author’s unique
and digital, to find the pronunciation and phrases and expressions must be attributed.
determine or clarify the precise meaning of key
Grammar and Sentence Fluency Checklists:
words and phrases for use in their writing.
Choose samples of drafts and final copies to
6.27 Make use of figurative language to revise
display in writing stations. Learners will move
and enhance their writing (e.g., similes,
through each station and focus on a specific
metaphors, onomatopoeia, hyperbole, idioms,
aspect of grammar or sentence fluency (e.g.,
alliteration, etc.)
sentence variety, transition words, descriptive
language, etc.) to review.
Additional Resources and Materials
ELO 6 focuses on allowing learners to revise the organization and language use in drafted writing or representation, collaboratively and independently, for a variety
of purposes and audiences. The following suggested resources and materials would assist the teacher in accomplishing the ELO.
Here are some additional Online Writing & Revision Resources:
● Khan Academy - Contains free grammar lessons and exercises to enhance learners’ writing and revision skills. Please remove these links as they require
eventual payment. Provide support by directing the learners to the grammar and language tabs found in Word ( or other such writing tools)
● Grammarly - Have learners use this online tool to check their grammar, punctuation, and writing styles during the revision and editing stages.
● Sadlier Vocabulary Workshop - Provides structured vocabulary lessons and practice to reinforce learning.
● Writing - The Curriculum Corner 4-5-6 - Offers a variety of free grade-appropriate rubrics, checklists, and templates.
● Easy Teacher Worksheets - Provides printable worksheets with proofreading marks to help learners learn how to mark and correct errors in their writing.
91
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Storyboarding:
Learners can create storyboards or visual outlines of their writing ideas using drawings, images, or symbols.
Learners can also use a website in creating a story:
https://www.imagineforest.com/story/creator
Learners can use this website to create newspaper articles,(variety of genres)
https://www.fodey.com/generators/newspaper/snippet.asp
Learners can use this website to create and expand on their persuasive writing.
https://interactives.readwritethink.org/persuasion-
map?_gl=1*101av7y*_ga*MzQ5NTIxMzA5LjE3MTMyNDQzOTg.*_ga_PPJBE9BR3H*MTcxNjgzMTM1My40LjAuMTcxNjgzMTM1My42MC4wLjA.
Dictionary cube (SCO6.26)
Learners will engage in a Dictionary cube activity. identifying the meaning of words and word related information using the dictionary and thesaurus such as
meaning, synonyms, antonyms, word origins etc.
Sample Dictionary Cube
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
ELO 6 focuses on allowing learners to revise the organization and language use in drafted writing or representation, collaboratively and independently, for a
variety of purposes and audiences. The following suggested content would assist the teacher in accomplishing the ELO.
What is the Writer’s Purpose? https://www.twinkl.com.au/teaching-wiki/writers-purpose
Six Traits for Middle Schools - The 6+1 Writing Traits are explained individually.
https://ademaio.weebly.com/uploads/1/3/7/6/13760533/sixtraitsofwritinghandbook.pdf A comprehensive resource.
What is the Author’s Craft? https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GnyE6NtqiJI Connect each component to a lesson and practice.
92
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Accessibility Content Principles - Presentation guidelines for teachers and learners when typing stories, paragraphs, and other materials.
https://www.bdadyslexia.org.uk/advice/employers/creating-a-dyslexia-friendly-workplace/dyslexia-friendly-style-guide Since dyslexia presents in many
different ways, add a note of caution that this guide provides information to consider that cannot be applied to all learners.
Reflective Writing Journals: What is it? https://www.teachervision.com/writing/reflective-journals
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Here are some suggestions for the Grade 5 teacher, to encourage subject integration across the curriculum:
Socratic Seminar Strategy - Use this democratic, learner-centred approach for learners to discuss a text from a content area critically. Have them use the discussion
points to begin their writing assignment. See the Ten Steps of Socratic Seminars for Writing -
https://westmore.wusd.k12.ca.us/documents/Programs/Avid/AVID%20Locker/Socratic%20Seminar%20Introduction.pdf
93
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome 7: Learners will use their knowledge of spoken language, written language and writing conventions to refine
the precision and enhance the meaning and clarity of their written work.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to:
Develop and make use of the writing ELO 7 requires the learners to use their The following suggestions for learning strategies will assist
conventions to enhance the meaning knowledge of the conventions of spoken and learners to refine the precision and enhance the meaning and
written language to enhance their written work. clarity of their written work.
and clarity of their written work with
increased attention to develop
The assessment strategies which follow are a few D evelop and make use of the writing conventions to
spelling conventions
suggestions to assess progress in the conventions enhance the meaning and clarity of their written work
(spelling and punctuation), tidiness and
with increased attention to develop spelling
7.1 Continue to apply learning and further presentation.
c onventions
develop proficiency in spelling, contributing to
CONVERSATIONS
the overall quality of written work (affixes, W ord Walls (SCO 7.1, 7.2, 7.3)
synonyms, antonyms, root words)
Teacher-student conference - Learners will
INTEGRATING THE STRANDS Engage learners in the
enhance their writing with ideas focused on
7.2 Transfer understanding of spelling development of Word Walls throughout the year by
conventions generated from the conference with
conventions across various subjects suggesting words encountered in all subject areas.
the teacher. Learners are encouraged to review
7.3 Further develop self-monitoring their own writing before the conference and find 5 As words are entered on the Word Wall, take time point out
strategies to notice and correct spelling examples of correct conventions and 2-3 interesting features of the words that may help learners to
errors conventions of which they are unsure. connect meaningfully with the spelling
- a suffix or prefix that can be removed to change the meaning
94
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
- an ending that may rhyme with other words
Write and represent to develop
punctuation conventions to enhance
- an unusual combination of letters
the meaning and clarity of their
- words from other languages
written work
Peer Editing- Help A Friend - Learners will To build independence, encourage learners to refer to word
engage in peer editing to edit and review the walls, digital dictionaries, and Word editing tools before asking
7.4 develop proficiency in the use of
writing of their peers. for spelling assistance from their peers and teacher.
punctuation conventions, including:
full stops
- commas
- apostrophes
- other punctuation marks as needed to
accurately convey meaning and enhance the
https://sharemylesson.com/teaching-
clarity of written work. Spelling Instruction that makes sense
resource/peer-editing-narratives-278168
7.5 Begin to make decision about the strategic (7.1, 7.2,7.3) Ensure spelling instruction is always connected
OBSERVATION
use of punctuation, considering the potential to words and texts that are authentic to classroom learning.
impact on sentence structure and overall Teachers spend a LOT of time correcting errors in Using a site such as
coherence of the passage learners’ writing. Here’s a way to save some time https://www.nightzookeeper.com/language-
ad build student independence. Rather than arts/spelling/grade-5 as a guide, gather words from all
7.6 Connect punctuation choice to decisions
correcting all errors in a learner’s writing, put a dot subject areas that connect to one of the common spelling
about style and format
in the margin of the line with a spelling error and a patterns taught in Grade 5. Provide time to read the words in
Write and represent to develop
dash in the margin for a punctuation error. This sentences, deconstruct each word in to roots, prefixes,
presentation formats to enhance the
signals the student to find the error and use the suffixes, etc. and practice writing the words in the context of a
meaning and clarity of their written work sentence. Rather than weekly word lists, provide regular
95
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
7.7 Develop the ability to choose a variety strategies and resources they’ve been taught to opportunities for learners to demonstrate their knowledge of
presentation formats throughout the year correct the error. spelling in the context of sentences and paragraphs.
based on the nature of the content and the Additional suggestions for spelling instruction that makes
NOTE: For learners who make frequent errors,
intended audience sense are available at https://www.edutopia.org/article/11-
choose only the most “important” errors that
ways-to-boost-elementary-students-spelling-skills/
7.8 Integrate visual elements, including images, provide the learner with a chance to self-correct.
charts, graphs, and other graphics, into written This provides the learner with success and a sense Let’s Edit (SCO 7.3) Introduce learners to common editing
work to enhance overall clarity and appeal to of confidence. marks used in revising writing and their meanings (see below).
the reader. Then provide writing samples to practice editing using the
Tools Make it Better -
editing marks which they learnt
7.9 Publish written work for varying audiences
Learners will make use of a variety of tools
using various tools
(checklists, rubrics, peer review forms, etc.) to
7.10 Engage in collaborative projects to create refine and publish their work in suitable formats
and present written content using various (written, digital). This example, used in ELO 6 for
formats. revision, may be revisited for the editing process.
7.11 Add titles, cover images, tables of content,
glossaries, book blurbs, information about the
author, etc. as needed
https://clipart- library.com/clipart/2069843.htm
96
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
I’m a Reviewer W rite and represent to develop presentation formats to
enhance the meaning and clarity of their written work
Learners use punctuation checklists to review and
improve their writing.
Patrol Your Writing (Call the Cops) (SCO: 7.4, 7.5, 7.6)
Engage learners in an exploration of various punctuation
marks and how they affect and enhance writing. Read
individual sentences aloud without and with punctuation
and discuss the difference.
They will then use them to improve their writing. For some
examples, visit:
https://digitalsynopsis.com/tools/punctuation-marks-
importance-rules-usage/
Editing Checklist for Self- and Peer
Editing
TAG Me
As students and teachers read or listen to students’
published work, they may leave a comment or
https://clipart-library.com/clipart/2069843.htm
critique using TAG strategy
97
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
TAG Strategy Punctuation, Who Do You Know (SCO: 7.6) Assign a
punctuation mark to individual students to personify.
T - tell something you like
Engage in a panel discussion where each punctuation
panellist describes their role and why their role is MOST
A - ask a question
important. Observing students decide which punctuation is
G - give a suggestion the most important and justify their choice.
Print out of TAG strategy Punctuation and Social Media (SCO: 7.4)
Schedule time for learners to research how emojis have had an
influence on our use of punctuation marks. They will then
make a presentation to the class on the meaning and uses of
the emoji vs the punctuation mark showing examples.
Write and represent to develop presentation formats to
enhance the meaning and clarity of their written work
Digitize my story (SCO: 7.8, 7.9) - Create ‘publications’ of
their writing pieces using free websites such as Story Jumper,
https://twitter.com/PBLWorks/status/17611766
Bloom Library, these may be printed or kept in digital format.
37276664126/photo/1
Students may add illustrations, audio as well as share their
projects.
SELF-ASSESSMENT
Publishing Party(SCO: 7.10) - Host an author celebration of
Students will conduct a personal reflection of their
the wide range of genres, topics, formats (paper based or
writing experience, highlighting their successes as
digital) and publishing styles learners have accomplished
well as challenges.
within the year. Learner choose the piece of writing they wish
to share.
98
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
PRODUCTS Teacher may wish to create an inexpensive red carpet (a
piece of red fabric or strip of craft paper with stars painted
on it) students may dress up, take turns walking the red
Podcasts Interview the author -
carpet while photos are taken; they share their writing
questions may be asked of the writers centred on
with the audience. Make use of the various presentation
their writing experience - for example, how they
styles:
decided on this particular story, challenges in
creating ideas for their story, etc. Interviews are • Use of Microsoft (PowerPoint, Word) and Google
recorded and published in Google Classroom and (Slides) tools to present their writing pieces.
other acceptable digital platforms. • Use of Google Classroom - students may place their
writing in a shared drive which can be shared with
Creating Podcasts with your Students
others to access and leave comments after reading their
Anchor charts writing pieces.
In groups, create a classroom punctuation poster Schedule time for an audience Q and A.
which highlights the punctuation marks and their
Writing Portfolios (SCO: 7.9)
functions.
Use writing portfolios to make a compilation of published
https://www.literacyworldwide.org/docs/default-
pieces of writing. Learners will use folders to create their
source/member-benefits/e-ssentials/ila-e-
ssentials-8065.pdf writing portfolios.
As an assessment, provide learners will be given a
piece of writing missing punctuation marks to
punctuate.
99
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
The focus of ELO 7 is to allow students to use their knowledge of spoken language, written language and writing conventions to refine the precision and
enhance the meaning and clarity of their written work. The following suggested resources and materials would assist the teacher in accomplishing the ELO.
Human Resources
Local Authors: Use of local authors as facilitators at writing workshops for students and teachers alike. Some
authors include:
Grenada - Kamille John, David Ambrose, Paul Keens-Douglas, Amy Jones, Jervis DaBreo
SVG - Cecil Browne, Jazey Wallace Samuel, Shefflon Ballantyne
Ant/Bar. - Jamaica Kincaid, Joanne C. Hillhouse, Kariam Christian, Barbara A. Arrindell
SLU - Sadier Verneuil, Cheri Alphonse Haye
N.B. This list is not exhaustive, but teachers can use other authors they may know, to host workshops with the children.
Writing and Publishing Websites
● The read Write Think website provides free interactive tools and resources to help elementary teachers enhance their students' reading and writing skills:
Read Write Think
● Teachers can also use Microsoft Word, to create and publish writings.
● Microsoft tools help students improve their writing skills and work together by allowing them to create, edit, and share their work easily.
100
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
Scan the QR Code to view the picture.
Videos
YouTube provides a wealth of educational videos that elementary teachers can use to supplement their lessons and engage students. To use these videos as
resources, teachers can use specific parts and integrate them into lessons. Here are some videos that grade 5 teachers may find useful:
● https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZG09WmwrTr4
● https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w7oGNyHX81I
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
The focus of ELO 7 is to allow students to use their knowledge of spoken language, written language and writing conventions to refine the precision and
enhance the meaning and clarity of their written work. The following suggested content would assist the teacher in accomplishing the ELO
- This resource gives an overview of the importance of spelling in reading instruction and provides teachers with practical strategies to improve students'
spelling skills: https://www.readnaturally.com/research/5-components-of-reading/spelling
- Here are some helpful resources that provide examples and strategies for integrating writing across different curriculum areas to enhance student learning:
https://learningfocused.com/writing-across-the-curriculum-examples-and-strategy-review/
- The following resource offers a guide on implementing the writing process in the classroom, including detailed strategies and activities:
https://www.readwritethink.org/professional-development/strategy-guides/implementing-writing-process
101
Grade 5 Language Arts Curriculum
- This website provides grade 5 teachers with valuable strategies and resources to help their students become effective writers. It provides opportunities for
exposure to writing models, providing regular writing practice, and incorporating peer review sessions to enhance students' writing skills.
.https://www.readingrockets.org/topics/writing/articles/teaching-elementary-school-students-be-effective-writers
- this resource provides a plethora of digital and printed resources that offer guidance and tips for educators on how to publish and celebrate student
writing, fostering a greater appreciation for student work.
https://cdn.ncte.org/nctefiles/about/awards/resources%20for%20publishing%20student%20writing.pdf
The primary school teacher provides instruction, and hence assessment activities across the curriculum. The following video provides teachers with
ideas to share with students to empower them to own their assessments.
● Empowering Students to Own the Assessment Process https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8WxvVgXC_NY
Checklists: Checklists are used for many academic tasks and writing is a common one. How to Improve Student Writing With Writing Checklists - Rockin
Resources
Rubrics: A scoring rubric is a tool teachers use to assess students’ performance. It is an assessment guide that describes evaluation criteria (or grading
standards) based on students’ expected outcomes and performances.
3 Examples of Scoring Rubric for English Writing | Tenrycolle.com
Read the importance of spelling as it relates to improved student reading How Spelling Supports Reading
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Throughout the Inclusive Learning Strategies Section, opportunities to integrate subjects or braid the strands of Language Arts are provided.
102
