March 2024
OHCP GRADE 3 MATHEMATICS
Overview of the Grade 3 OHPC
The standards at the grade 3 level are designed considering the preceding grades. In light of this, teachers again emphasize the importance of ensuring
students' proficiency in prerequisites before introducing new concepts or skills. The expected outcomes in terms of knowledge, skills, values, and
mathematical processes for Grade 3 are outlined within six content strands: Number Sense (N), Operation with numbers (O), Patterns and relationships(P),
Geometric Thinking (G), Measurement(M) and Data Handling (D). This section further offers guidance on the recommended activities that teachers should
employ to facilitate students' mastery of content within these strands.
• In Operations and Pattern Relationships, students grasp multiplication and division meanings using equal-sized groups, arrays, and area models.
They employ operation properties to calculate whole number products, comparing strategies to understand the relationship between multiplication
and division.
• In Number Sense and Operations—Fractions, students understand unit fractions, view fractions as built from unit fractions, and use visual models
to represent equal parts of a whole. They comprehend that the size of a fractional part is relative to the size of the whole, using fractions to represent
numbers greater than, less than, or equal to one and solving fraction comparison problems.
• In Measurement and Data, students recognize perimeter and area as two-dimensional region attributes. They measure area by counting same-size
units, with a square of unit length as the standard. Students understand decomposing rectangular arrays, connecting the area to multiplication, and
justifying the use of multiplication for rectangle areas.
• In Geometry, students classify polygons based on sides and vertices. They link fraction work to geometry, expressing part of a shape's area as a unit
fraction of the whole.
While not all standards are explicitly outlined in this summary, all standards are expected to be incorporated into the instruction.
Number Sense ELO N1.1
Introduction to the Subject:
Number Sense is an important skill in Mathematics. Learners are expected to develop it gradually over time as they are provided opportunities to explore
and play with numbers. As learners' experiences are nurtured, they will further understand numbers and show improvement in Mental Mathematics
performance. Moreover, as they are exposed to the strategies within this Essential Learning Outcome, learners are expected to better understand numbers
(good number sense) as opportunities are given to visualize numbers in various contexts, identify relationships, and predict patterns.
Strand (Topic): Number Sense
Essential Learning Outcomes:
- Whole Number – Saying Number Sequence, Meaningful Counting and Skip Counting
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
- Understand that the three digits of a three-digit number represent amounts of hundreds, tens, and ones, e.g., 706 equals 7 hundreds, 0 tens, and 6
ones. Count by 1s within 1000; Skip-count by 2s, 5s, 10s, and 100s to 1000 using any starting point.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Key Skills: counting in sequence, skip counting Product: Game Provide learners with opportunities to read
forward and backward) Provide learners with number cards and listen as numbers and identify the digits in the numbers.
they identify the digits. Learners will have the cards For example: Pick a card from a bowl/ bag which
Learners will be expected to: face down, select a card, and then read the digits contains a number and say the digits in the
after they find a card with similar digits written on number.
Knowledge: it.
1. Identify the digits within a three-digit Allow learners to provide the Place Value for the
number. Think – Pair – Share digits identified in a given number. Provide
2. Identify the place value of the digits in a Allow learners to work in pairs. Using the place learners with pocket charts labelled with the Place
three-digit number, e.g. hundreds, tens, value charts, learners place digits accordingly and Values. Learners use the charts to place the digits
ones. indicate the place value by saying or writing. of a number and state the place values.
3. Say number sequence by 1s, 2s, 5s, 10s, Observe and listen as partners choose the numbers
and 100s forward, backward, and by any and discuss the place values for the digits. Use soft balls or bean bags and allow learners to
given number up to 1000. count by a given number aloud. As learners catch
the ball or bean bag, they must say the following
OR number in the sequence.
Skills:
4. Count by 1s, 2s, 5s, 10s, and 100s forward Observation Give learners opportunities to complete a number
and backward up to 1000. Learners can be provided with individual Place sequence by counting forward, backward and from
5. Skip count from any given point using Value charts and a set of numbers to identify and any given starting point.
multiples of 2, 5, 10 and 100. record the Place Value. For example:
6. Model skip counting by 2s, 5s, 10s, and
100s using number lines and games. Observational Checklist:
100 130 140
Behaviour: Can
Values: If I make 4 hops on the blocks from 140, I will be
Numbe identify place Comments
7. Create and solve situations involving skip at _______
r value
counting by 2s, 5s, 10s, and 100s.
Can you tell which number comes next?
385 380 375 ____ 365 360
362
_
Product: Game
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Allow learners to form small groups of four or five Allow learners to describe the rule in determining
students. Each group is given a ball/bean bag and the terms in the sequence.
a number sequence to count by. Listen and
observe learners as they count out. Listen for Use number lines and number cards and allow
fluency and accuracy. learners to insert the numbers as they count
(Note: This can be done with individual learners) forward or backward or from any given point.
(image)
Product: Exit Cards Provide learners with opportunities to identify
Distribute skip counting cards, which learners will errors and omissions in counting or given
complete individually. sequence/
For example: 620 622 624 _____ 628
Encourage learners to use counters or illustrations
628 625 626 to depict quantities while skip counting by twos,
fives, and tens. Examples include items like
marbles, sticks, 10-cent coins, and 5-cent coins.
Observation:
Provide learners with open and closed number Allow learners to use materials such as cutouts or
lines, pictorial or concrete. Observe as they make handprints and cut them out. Learners label
demonstrate counting. the hands and take turns to skip count by 5s.
Observation:
Provide learners with materials such as counters,
sticks, or other materials to build sets to model
skip counting by 2s, 5s, and 10s. Use stories or problems that emphasize number
Product: sequences for 2s, 5s, and 10s from different points
in the sequence. An example of a storybook that
Provide learners with situations or allow learners
to create situations or stories and allow them to can be used.
listen as the teacher or peers read. Learners can be
provided with materials to assist with solutions.
For example: May buys 10 pencils each day. How
many pencils will she have by Thursday?
Useful Content Knowledge:
As students in Grade 3 begin to expand their experiences with numbers to 1000, it is important that teachers provide experiences that will help them combat
difficulties that they may experience with the increase of numbers. Students should be given opportunities to explore numbers beyond 100 to 1000 so that
they can recognize that there is a pattern within our number system which helps us to predict numbers, e.g. 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 205 etc., or 505,
510, 515, 520, 525, etc.
Teachers should also engage students in activities that require them to:
- recognize and explain errors and omissions in a given skip-counting sequence. This will help to reinforce the development of counting, number
relationships, and place value. When skip-counting with students, the focus should be on looking for patterns.
- count on and count back by 5s, 10s, and 100s are important mental math strategies for addition and subtraction.
Images below were retrieved from https://www.didax.com/rekenrek-demonstration-bead-string-to-100.html.
For skip counting retrieved from https://www.alamy.com/stock-photo-variety-of-eastern-caribbean-dollar-coins-in-various-cent-denominations-
32842377.html
Retrieved from https://www.snappyjack.co.uk/set-of-french-counting-balloons and https://www.mathswithmum.com/skip-counting-by-10/.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
As students in Grade 3 begin to expand their experiences with numbers to 1000, teachers must provide experiences that will help them combat difficulties
that they may experience with the increase of numbers. Students should be given opportunities to explore numbers beyond 100 to 1000 so that they can
recognize that there is a pattern within our number system which helps us to predict numbers, e.g. 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 205 etc., or 505, 510,
515, 520, 525, etc.
Teachers should also engage students in activities that require them to:
8. recognize and explain errors and omissions in a given skip-counting sequence. This will help to reinforce the development of counting, number
relationships, and place value. When skip-counting with students, the focus should be on looking for patterns.
Teachers should provide experiences and opportunities for learners to recognize the pattern with the number system. The pattern helps in predicting
numbers.
The focus of skip counting is looking for number patterns. Reinforce the development of counting, number relationships and place value.
Counting on and backward are Mental Mathematics strategies for addition and subtraction.
Use various materials, both in concrete and pictorial forms, to explore numbers, e.g. Number lines, Five and Ten frames and Money - coins/notes.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics: All topics require counting
Money: Counting amounts, Making combinations
Data Handling: Representing data - Tally marks for the tally charts, numbers for labelling the axis.
Language Arts:
Writing: Learners can write brief descriptions of numbers, including names and place values.
Comprehension: Use clues and allow learners to read and make inferences/ draw conclusions based on the clues to determine the answer.
Social Studies:
(Data Handling)
General Science:
Body Systems: Skeletal System: Number of bones in the body
Body Parts: Fingers/Toes - five on one hand/foot, ten in all; some parts come in pairs - nostrils, eyes, ears, hands, legs, breasts.
Arts and Crafts: Draw shapes and pictures to use for skip counting and for representing numbers.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers in checking the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the discretion of the Team Leads and
PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, and Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Number Sense and Pattern and Relationship ELO N1.2
Introduction to the Subject:
Strand (Topic): Number Sense
Essential Learning Outcomes:
- Whole Number - Whole Number – Representing and Partitioning Quantities
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
- Read, represent, compose, and decompose whole numbers up to and including 1000, using various tools and strategies (concretely, pictorially, and
symbolically), and describe various ways they are used in everyday life.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Key Skills: counting in sequence, skip counting Product: Allow opportunities for learners to use numbers in
forward and backward) Have the learners complete simple information everyday situations. For example, they can tell the
cards, such as forms, that allow them to write year they were born, the cost of bus fare to a
Learners will be expected to: numbers in various forms. nearby town, the time school begins, or the area
code for their country.
Knowledge
- Read and write numbers up to 1000 in Provide learners with experiences to read and write
FORM
figures and words. numbers up to 1000 in figures and words. For
Date of Birth: _____ /
example, using number cards with matching pairs.
Skills _____ / _____
- Express a three-digit number in different Give learners opportunities to represent numbers
ways e.g. Age: up to 1000 in various ways. For example:
Word form: two hundred and six _________________
Standard form: 203
Place value: 2 hundreds, 3 ones. O A b d s d e r r e v s e s: l _ e _ a _ r _ n _ e _ r _ s _ u _ s _ i _ n _ g the template to represent
Concretely using base ten blocks anPyo sttharl eCeo-ddei:g it number they choose in at least 5
Pictorially di
_
ff
_
e
_
r
_
e
_
n
_
t
_ _
w
_
a
_
y
_
s . E.g.
(Google image)
- Express three-digit numbers up to 1000 in
Area Code:
expanded form
_____________ Allow learners to represent/model numbers using
base ten blocks, counters, drawings, tallies, or other
- Estimate the values of expanded notation
Time you got up: materials.
for numbers up to 1000.
_____________
Values
Weekly Allowance:
- Recognise the use and importance of three-
digit numbers in everyday living (real
____________
situations)
Give learners opportunities to expand three–digit
numbers up to 1000 in different ways, which will
help them understand each digit's values and
representations.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
For example:
Product: Game 547 = 5 hundreds + 4 tens + 7 ones
Allow learners to use number cards which contain = 500 + 40 + 7
numbers in words and figures. Learners can take = (5 × 100) + (4 × 10) + (7 × 1)
turns choosing a card and reading the
corresponding numbers, and the pair with the
matching number will also indicate the match and
read the number. Provide experiences for learners to use various
materials to create three–digit numbers.
Learners work in groups where they roll three dice For example, learners can use dice, number cards,
together, and using the values that are rolled out, and base ten blocks to write numbers for
they will read and write the numbers formed. expanding.
Observation:
Provide learners with templates that they can use to
represent any three–digit number. Observe learners
as they use and complete the template for various
numbers.
For example: (insert image)
Product: Puzzle (Game)
Prepare a puzzle (Tarsia puzzle) where numbers are
(Google images)
expanded and presented in various forms. Learners
must match the cords correctly to complete the
puzzle. With Tarsia puzzles, matching the puzzle
Provide learners with opportunities to use stories
pieces correctly reveals a unique shape. Learners
and situations to make estimates. For example:
can complete the puzzle individually or in groups.
1. Sara has 175 plums. Sam has 50 more than
They can be observed as they complete.
her. How many marbles does Sam have?
Estimate: _____ Calculated solution:
______
Product: Game
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Allow learners to work in groups of 3’s. Learners
take turns rolling a die and using the results to
form three–digit numbers that they expand in
various ways. Observe learners as they engage in
the game.
Product: Exit Cards
Prepare story cards for learners to read and
represent. From these, learners will make estimates.
Observe learners as they work, check for errors,
and allow corrections.
Allow learners to create stories or situations which
they can give to partners or peers to complete.
Additional Resources and Materials
Base ten blocks, number cards, Tarsia puzzles: Math puzzle maker, place value charts, hundred charts, dice
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Good number sense can be developed by learning about numbers and their relationships. Teachers can achieve this using several concrete materials such as
hundred charts, base-ten blocks, place value charts and money. These should be used during instruction to help learners make connections between the
concrete, pictorial and symbolic representations.
Provide opportunities for the learners to represent numbers in a variety of ways:
346 = 346 is 1 less than 347, 10 more than 336, 300 + 40 + 6, 340 + 6, 200 + 146, etc.
The number should be read correctly. For example, the number 527 is read as “five hundred forty - seven.” Note that the word “and” denotes the decimal.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics: All topics require counting
Money: Counting amounts, Making combinations
Data Handling: Representing data - Tally marks for the tally charts and numbers for labelling the axis.
Language Arts:
Writing: Learners can write brief descriptions about numbers, including names, place values, and expanded forms.
Comprehension: Use clues and allow learners to read and make inferences/ draw conclusions based on the clues to determine the answer.
Social Studies:
(Data Handling)
General Science:
Body Systems: Skeletal System: Number of bones in the body
Body Parts: Fingers/Toes - five on one hand/foot, ten in all; some parts come in pairs - nostrils, eyes, ears, hands, legs, breasts.
Arts and Crafts: Draw shapes and pictures to expand and represent numbers.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers in checking the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the discretion of the Team Leads and
PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, and Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Number Sense ELO N1.3
Introduction to the Subject:
Strand (Topic): Number Sense
Essential Learning Outcomes:
- Whole Number – Comparing and Ordering Quantities
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
- Estimate the size of sets (up to 1000) using referents;
- Compare two three-digit numbers using a variety of strategies (including place value based on meanings of the hundreds, tens, and ones digits);
Use >, =, and < symbols to record the results of comparisons;
- Apply strategies to contextual situations and create story problems involving the comparison of whole numbers;
- Round numbers to determine estimates; Tell the number that is 100 or 1000 more or less than a given number.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Key Skills: Comparing and Ordering
Product: Provide learners with experiences where the
Learners will be expected to: Have learners use number cards with the terms ‘ascending order’ and ‘descending order’
number written in either ascending order or are used.
Knowledge descending order and determine the specific
1. Differentiate the terms ‘ascending order’ order for the numbers. For example, give learners a set of values, and
and ‘descending order.’ they describe the order and justify their
Observation: responses.
2. Read the signs and symbols for Give learners symbols on cards, flash the symbol
comparing (<, > and =) card, and listen as learners read each symbol
756 757 759 801
correctly.
802
Skills
3. Compare three-digit numbers up to 999 Product: Work Cards:
using >, < and =
421 438 389 301
Set up different workstations in the classroom
299
4. Order numbers up to 1000 in ascending using 10s and 100s as referents. Give learners a
and descending order. card that can be used to record the estimates at
each station. Observe learners as they work
5. Round three-digit numbers to 1000 to through each station. Let learners use the symbols >, <, = and replace
determine estimates. them using words of phrases greater than or
Work card: more than, fewer than or less than and the same
6. Estimate numbers up to 1000 using as.
referents.
Station Estimates Actual
Amount Amoun
Values Get learners involved in activities that allow
t
7. Create and solve story problems them to estimate the number of groups of tens
involving comparing whole numbers.
1. counters
and hundreds as a referent.
For example:
2. dry
pasta
3. marbles
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Think - Pair - Share:
Provide learners with exercises to insert symbols
or to make statements true. Learners will discuss
the best option among themselves.
Observe and listen as learners complete activities
(Google image)
and engage in discussion about the best choice
among the symbols.
Allow learners to use symbols <, >. and = when
comparing two or more three-digit numbers.
Example:
For example:
197 _____ 821 459 < ______
314 _____ 341 ____ > 702
247 > 174
500 _____ 200 + 300 ____= _____
801 < 810
400 = 300 + 100
Observation:
Provide learners with opportunities to arrange a
Allow learners to use number card cut-outs and
set of three-digit numbers in ascending or
place them in ascending or descending order.
descending order and use the various number
Learners work in groups and take turns to
charts and number lines to verify answers.
choose number cards. Observe as the learners
Examples of number charts: 200, 300, 400
place cards in ascending or descending order.
Think - Pair - Share
Observe and listen to learners as they round
three-digit numbers up to 1000 with the use or
aid of number lines.
For example:
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Let learners gain experience in rounding three-
digit numbers when making estimates. Make use
of poems or rhymes and number lines to help
learners round the numbers to the nearest 10’s
and 100’s.
For example:
(Google image) Round the number to the nearest 100
Product:
Allow learners to use drawings to create and
(Google image)
represent story problems. Learners will discuss
the best solution for the problem with peers and
Provide opportunities where learners can create
justify their choices. Teachers will observe and
story problems, role play, estimate, and discuss
listen as learners share responses.
solutions as they compare three-digit numbers,
objects, or sets.
For example:
Tim has 642 marbles. Shorn has 254 marbles.
How many fewer marbles does Shorn have than
Tim?
Additional Resources and Materials:
Hundreds charts, number lines, ten frames, dice, cards, concrete materials
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Estimation is a math skill which allows learners to determine an appropriate value or quantity by usually referring to referents.
Reasoning skills help with estimating. Referents are essential to use when estimating.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics: All topics require counting
Money: Counting amounts, Making combinations
Data Handling: Representing data - Tally marks for the tally charts, numbers for labelling the axis.
Language Arts:
Writing: Learners can write their own story problems to be used for assessment or in subsequent lessons.
Comprehension: Use clues and allow learners to read and make inferences/ draw conclusions based on the clues to determine the answer.
Social Studies:
(Data Handling)
General Science:
Body Systems: Skeletal System: Number of bones in the body
Body Parts: Fingers/Toes - five on one hand/foot, ten in all; some parts come in pairs - nostril, eyes, ears, hands, legs, breasts.
Arts and Crafts:
Draw shapes and pictures to represent numbers.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers in checking the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the discretion of the Team
Leads and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, and Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Number Sense ELO N1.4
Introduction to the Subject: Identifies the purpose and goals of the subject area with links to the Vision and the Essential Education Competencies.
Strand (Topic): Number Sense
Essential Learning Outcomes: Whole Number – Understanding Place Value
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
- Understands 100 can be thought of as a bundle of ten tens―called one “hundred” or a bundle of 100 ones;
- Understands that the numbers 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, 600, 700, 800, and 900 refer to one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, or nine hundred
(and 0 tens and 0 ones);
- Can represent the place value of numbers in base-ten groupings;
- Can explain the pattern regularity of the place value system;
- Can identify the value of a digit as determined by its position;
- Use place value understanding to round whole numbers to the nearest 10 or 100;
- Represent the place value of numbers in various groupings concretely, pictorially, contextually, verbally and symbolically;
- Explain the pattern regularity of the positional structure of the place value system;
- Identify the value of a digit as determined by its position.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Knowledge SCO 2 SCO 2
1. Determine the place value of each Think Pair Share Learners can use play money (Notes- $1, $10,
digit in the numbers 100 and 200. …, $100, $1000) to identify the place value of given
900 Provide learners with cards with varying amounts of digits in a number. They can bundle and count to
2. Identify the place value of any digit in money written on them. Allow them to use play represent various amounts.
a 3 or 4-digit number money to represent the amount on each card. This
3. State the value of any digit in a 3 or 4- can be done in pairs or groups of three or four.
digit number based on its position Observe them as they work together. Allow them to
4. Round whole numbers to the nearest discuss and present to the class.
10 or 100
Skills Use a checklist to assess them.
5. Use concrete materials to represent a
bundle of ten tens (100 ones)
Learner can represent: Yes No
6. Use concrete and pictorial materials to
represent the place value of a given
1. Thousands using bundles
number
of $100 notes.
Values
2. Hundreds using bundles
7. Create patterns involving the place
of $10 notes.
value system using real-life situations
and concrete materials.
3. Tens using bundles of $1
notes.
4. 2-digit numbers using
play money.
5. 3-digit numbers using
play money.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
SCO 4
6. 4-digit numbers using
play money.
● Use number lines to allow learners to
visualize the concept of rounding off.
Have them highlight and write out all the
SCO 4 numbers that round to 10, 20, 30, etc.
Discover and discuss patterns involved
Product-Exit Tickets: when identifying these numbers.
● Distribute rounding-off cards and observe
learners as they work in pairs to identify the
numbers that are rounded off incorrectly.
Allow them to use error analysis techniques Source:
and make corrections for cards with errors. https://mrelementarymath.com/rounding-
101-number-lines-games-and-more/
● Product- Playing Games
Play Bingo and allow learners to have fun
consolidating the concept of rounding off. SCO 5
Encourage them to engage in the process of
making Math games by allowing them to use Learners will use base ten rods, popsicle sticks,
numbers of their choice to write the number play money or any other suitable countable
cards (see the pink card in the picture material to represent a bundle of ten tens (100
below) ones)
They can use this model to find out how many
bundles of ten tens make 100, 200, 300, 400, etc.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
SCO #5 - Class Presentation
SCO 1, 2, 5 & 6
Each pair of learners will use their base ten rods (or
other material) to represent a multiple of 100, as Provide each pair of learners with dienes blocks
written on cards. (base ten blocks). Allow them to engage in peer
Learners will then use their materials to present their tutoring by using those blocks to represent given
representations of numbers identified by the teacher numbers and identify place values.
or their peers to the class.
SCO 1, 2, 5 & 6 - Rating Scale
Assess each learner by asking them to represent a
given number using dienes blocks. Use a rating scale
such as the one below.
Learner can: 1 2 3
1. Use the correct number of
blocks to represent
a) tens
b) hundreds
c) thousands
2. Represent any number
correctly using dienes blocks.
3. Provide a reasonable
explanation for the number
SCO 3 & 6
of blocks used to represent
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Provide students with number discs and place
each digit in a number.
value cards or mats. Numbers written on the
board or cards will be represented on place value
cards or mats.
1- No understanding
2- Little understanding Ask students to write and represent a number on
3- Moderate understanding the place value mat using number discs. Engage
4-Complete mastery them in reversible thinking by placing discs on
the place value mat and having them identify the
Use the results from the rating scale to categorize number represented.
learners according to the following:
UNDERSTANDING -The learner provides the
highest level of response and accuracy in
explanation. Can represent any given number
(including zeros) using dienes blocks.
CONSTRUCTION - Evidence of understanding
but lacks consistency.
EMERGENT - The Learner can represent numbers
using dienes blocks but cannot provide meaningful
explanation.
Use of Technology
Allow learners to manipulate objects to enhance
understanding of concept. Use websites such as
www.geogebra.org
Introducing Place Value Using Number
Disks
https://www.geogebra.org/m/NvD9GjVA#ma
Place Value Number Disc - Math tutorial
terial/a6PFKp8s
video - Place value for kids - YouDo
STEM Videos
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
SCO # 3, 6
Whole Group Class Discussion
SCO # 7
Place discs on place value cards or mats. Use
questioning techniques to assist in developing Use number lines to develop an understanding of
conceptual understanding. the patterns involved in the place value system.
Examples of questions: Have students count by tens and hundreds using
1. How many discs are there in the tens number lines. Have them follow the patterns to
column? fill in the blank spaces.
2. What digit is in the tens column?”
3. If I remove one disc in the hundreds Allow them to represent numbers on the number
column, what will my new number be? line on a place value chart. Form connections
4. Is it possible to have twelve discs in the ones between various number lines and place value
column? Why? or Why not? charts.
Use of Technology
Use interactive worksheets or games to assess
learners understanding of the concept in a fun and
exciting way.
Example:
https://www.geogebra.org/m/awS83JcY
SCO # 7 - Class Discussion
Using teacher-made number lines of various
groupings, learners will count, and individual
learners will come up to insert the missing numbers
after observing the patterns. They will give reasons
for their answers. Ensure that the number lines
presented are of increasing difficulty so as to
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
identify each student’s level of mastery of the
concept.
For each number line, allow learners to represent
numbers on a blank place value chart. Allow them
to discuss and share observations regarding
connections between number lines and place value
charts.
123987Additional Resources and Materials
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ961655.pdf
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher, such as reading material
at a lower or higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the
curriculum)
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the discretion of the Team
Leads and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, and Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/101331060341321979/
Number Sense ELO N2.1
Introduction to the Subject:
Fractions form a part of learners’ daily lives. They occur naturally whenever they want to consider sharing a portion of an object or quantity. A child
recognizes that it is not always possible to get a whole object, collection or quantity but can get a part of it. Hence, it is a good idea to connect the teaching
of fractions to something they already know. For example, their favourite foods or snacks. The use of these real-world manipulatives (area or set models)
offers a simple, visual and concrete way for learners to begin to conceptualize fractions. However, it is of utmost importance that students understand that
a fraction is not only a part of a whole or set but it is a number which always specifies how much of a unit amount or set there is. The use of the linear
model (number line) helps students to visualize that this part of a whole or set is a number which is more/less than 1 but more than 0. It also allows
students to be able to see the magnitude or size of fractions as they build up by adding unit fractions.
At the grade level 3, the focus of teaching fractions is to help learners conceptualize fractions, not only as a part of a whole but as a number which lies
between the point 0 and 1 when represented on a number line.
Strand (Topic): Number Sense
Essential Learning Outcomes: Fractions, Decimals and Rational Numbers– Representing Fractions
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
- Represent proper fractions as equal parts of one-whole region, set or measure concretely, pictorially (including number lines), and symbolically.
- Understand a fraction as a number o n the number line; represent fractions on a number line diagram. (a. Represent a fraction 1/b on a number
line diagram by defining the interval from 0 to 1 as the whole and partitioning it into b equal parts.
- Recognize that each part has size 1/b and that the endpoint of the part based at 0 locates the number 1/b on the number line.
- Represent a fraction a/b on a number line diagram by marking off a length 1/b from 0.
- Recognize that the resulting interval has size a/b and that its endpoint locates the number a/b on the number line
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Knowledge SCO 1 & 4 SCO 1, 2 & 7
1. Recognize a whole or unit amount or set Observation: Group Work: Sleepover Pizza Sharing Segment
can be partitioned into B equal parts, then
1/B of the whole is the amount formed Use the following observational checklist below Provide learners with all the necessities for
by one part. to monitor learners as they engage in pizza pretense pizza making exercise using playdough.
2. Generalizes the fraction a/b of the whole making and sharing activity. Allow each group to engage in making three
pizzas. Give each group a card instructing them
as the amount formed by A parts, each of
1/B of the whole or set. on how the pizza should be shared. Emphasize
3. Recognize that a fraction 3/4 on a
Behavioural Criteria E S NI the need for equal sizes while sharing each pizza.
number line consists of a 3-part line Instruct learners to label the pizzas: Pizza 1, 2 and
1. Creates pizza 3.
segment where its left endpoint is at 0
models
and its right endpoint locates the number
For example:
3/4 on the number line.
2. Pay attention to
equal partitioning while
Skill
cutting each pizza.
4. Depict concretely, pictorially (including
3. Identifies the
number lines) and symbolically a proper
denominator of the
fraction which denotes a fraction A/B
fraction as the number
(which tells us how many (A) of what size
of parts the pizza was
parts 1/B there are in a whole or set).
divided into.
5. Represent the fraction A/B with equal
lengths on a number line between the line
4. Identifies the
segment 0 to 1, (where A/B is located to
numerator as the total
the right of zero at a distance of A/B Retrieved from:
number of each part
units from 0). https://www.charter.coventry.sch.uk/blog-12b-
given away
6. Identify segments between 0 and point 201920/2020/6/5/playdough-maths-j66ws
1/B on a number line (to show that the
E -Excellent, S- Satisfactory, NI- Needs Improving
segment between 0 and 1/B consists of 1
piece, which is 1/B of a unit long)
Example of Questions:
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Value
1. How many equal sizes did you make out of
7. Display the willingness to explain the pizza 1?
pictorial, concrete or symbolic
representation of proper fractions during 2. If you removed one piece of pizza from pizza
class discussions. SCO 4 & 8 1, what fraction of the whole pizza would this
8. Create a poster chart of things in the represent?
immediate environment that can be Think Pair Share: Fraction Poster
3. If you removed two pieces out of the pizza,
represented as a fraction of its whole
Provide each pair of learners with a paper and what fraction of the whole does this represent?
crayons to draw a pictorial representation of a set
of items. Instruct them to colour the number of Instruct learners to answer these questions for
items they wish to give away and represent their pizza 2 and 3 respectively.
diagram symbolically as a fraction.
SCO 1, 2 & 7
Allow each pair of learners the opportunity to
display their work by sticking it on a fraction Guided Discovery: How many items form my
sharing poster. whole?
In pairs, provide learners with a packet of food
items or a set of items. For example; skittles.
Individual or Group: Show and Tell biscuit, M and M, gummy worms. Ensure that
learners have clean paper plates to pour and
Allow pairs of students to dip for a fraction. count the number of items in the packet. Use
Have students represent their fraction on a guided questions to help learners understand the
number line. Ensure that students colour the concept of a whole as a set.
segment from 0 to their fraction a/b.
Example of Questions:
Provide students with the opportunity to present
their fraction and explain their pictorial 1.What item do you have?
representation.
2. Is it a whole packet or some from the packet?
Example; 3/8
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Have learners open the packet of snacks and pour
the contents on the plate.
Example:
Retrieved From: https://helpingwithmath.com/fractions-
on-a-number-line/
Retrieved from:
https://westcoastconfection.com/product/thugs
-in-harmony-classic-cookie-collection/
3. How many items are in the whole packet?
4. If you give your partner one out of your set of
items, what fraction of the whole did you give
them?
Instruct students to represent this fraction
symbolically on the paper.
6. If you take one as well, what fraction of the
whole did you take?
7. If you give your partner another one out of the
set of items, what fraction of the whole does he
now have?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Provide each pair of learners the opportunity to
present and explain their answers to the class.
After each pair of learners make their
presentation, use the following questions to guide
them to make generalizations about the
denominator as the number of parts in the set
and the numerator as the total number of each
part given away.
Example of Questions:
1. How many items were in Peter and Paul’s
packet?
2. What fraction does each item represent?
3. What is the denominator of Paul and
Peter’s fraction?
4. Is it the same as the number of items in
the packet?
Number line Fraction Show
In pairs, provide learners with a paper with two
number lines. Explain to students that a number
line has points representing whole numbers
starting from 0 to 1, and 1 to 2. Explain to
students that each number segment represents a
whole.
Revert to previous lessons and associate the
whole 0 to 1 with a pizza. Which can be cut into
equal parts, where each part represents one
segment of the whole pizza.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Begin by cutting the whole (pizza) in two equal
parts. Allow students to colour one segment of
that pizza. By colouring from 0 to the point in
the middle.
Question students to find out:
1. What part of the whole is represented by the
segment shaded?
2. What part of the whole is represented by the
unshaded segment?
Have students represent symbolically the line
which shows ½ on the number line.
Repeat this activity using the whole as a set of 4
items. Question students to find out how many
equal segments should be placed between 0 to 1.
Provide guidance to each pair of students as they
draw their lines. Place emphasis on point one as
the end of the last segment. Have students
colour each segment a different colour to show
that each segment represents ¼. Allow students
to represent each segment with the correct
fractions to show, ¼, 2/4/, ¾.,4/4
For example:
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved From:
https://www.splashlearn.com/math-
vocabulary/fractions/fraction-number-line
Additional Resources and Materials
Scissors, rulers, pattern blocks, paper, paper plates
Books/Literature
Fraction fun by David Adler and Nancy Tobin
Full House: An Invitation to Fractions by Dale Ann Dodds
Fraction action by Loreen Leedy
Polar Bear Math: Learning About Fractions from Klondike and Snow by Ann Nagd
The Lion’s Share by Mathew McElligott
Whole-y Cow! Fractions are Fun by Taryn Souders
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher such as reading material at a
lower or higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Art and Craft
create collages
creating picture or patterns
creating models of fractions on sidewalks with chalk
Creating board and floor games
Making paper plate cutouts
Science and Technology
Make use of fractional paper or plates to create scientific models
Experimental skills: Sharing Resources, grouping
Creating and Interpreting Flow Charts
Social Studies
Collaboration and communication skills to complete a given chore
Group and Functions: Task sharing
Civic responsibility: equity and equality
Language Arts
Compose poems riddles about fractional parts.
Create story problem booklets
Create flip books explaining fraction of a whole or set
Oral Communication: Question and Answer sessions on fractions
Making video to explain process of sharing a whole into fractional parts
Music
Compose songs and jingles
Use music notes to demonstrate sharing
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the discretion of the Team Leads
and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Number Sense ELO N2.2
Introduction to the Subject: Identifies the purpose and goals of the subject area with links to the Vision and the Essential Education Competencies.
Strand (Topic): Number Sense
Essential Learning Outcomes: Fractions, Decimals and Rational Numbers – Comparing and Ordering Fractions
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
- Compare two fractions with the same numerator or the same denominator by reasoning about their size.
- Explain that comparisons of fractions are only valid when the two fractions refer to the same one whole.
- Record the results of comparisons with the symbols >, =, or <, and justify the conclusions, e.g., by using a visual fraction model.
- Compare and order a set of fractions by identifying the approximate position of those fractions on a number line;
- estimate the fraction represented by a given model;
- apply strategies to contextual situations involving the comparison of fractions;
- create story problems involving the comparison of fractions;
- name a fraction that is greater than or less than a given fraction or between two given fractions.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Knowledge SCO 1, 2, 3 & 4
SCO 1
1. Compare fractions with the same Group work: Designing Pizzas
numerators or same denominators by
reasoning about their size (using a Worksheet Learners will create pizza models using cardboard
number line, concrete and pictorial or bristol board and paper plates. The pizzas will be
fraction representations). Compare each pair of fractions. Write <, >, or = divided into equal slices to represent fractions. For
2. Arrange a set of fractions in ascending or to show a comparison. example, the pizzas can be divided into equal parts
descending order of 2, 3, 4, 6, 8
3. Determine which fractions are greater, Describe one strategy you used to solve each
equal to or less than the other comparison problem.
(Use symbols >, < or = to compare
fractions)
Skills
4. Represent fractions using concrete and
pictorial models and use the models to
compare fractions visually.
Values Retrieved from:
https://www.vecteezy.com/vector-art/27512003-
SCO 2
5. Use fractions to solve real-life problems. vector-drawing-of-fractions-worksheet
- Apply knowledge of fractions to
Portfolio Assessment
solve problems, e.g. sharing Learners will discuss and compare the fractions in
items and food. relation to the number of pizza slices.
Draw and colour shapes to show the different
fractions.
-Create story problems that Learners should be able to reason that the more
Give learners diagrams partitioned into equal
involve comparison of fractions slices a pizza is divided into, the smaller the size of
pieces and ask them to colour a particular
the slices.
fraction.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Allow students to create or compile a portfolio For example, if a pizza is divided into 2 equal slices,
to show the different colourful fractions in each slice represents ½; if a pizza is divided into 4
ascending or descending order. equal slices, each slice is ¼, etc.
SCO 3
Fill in the Blanks
Place the correct fraction next to the shape.
½, ⅓, ¼, ⅕.
Retrieved from:
https://stock.adobe.com/images/fraction-pizzas-
whole-one-half-semi-halves-quarter-third-sixth-
pieces-slices-pizza-equal-rate-cut-pizza-fractions-
broken-numbers-examples-chart-graphic-
_____________ illustration-vector/468327550
Demonstration Charts
________________
____________
Teacher will observe that the learners place the
correct fraction next to the shade circles.
Teacher questions the learners about each
fraction placed next to the diagram.
Insert >, = or < in the box provided
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
SCO 2 & 3
Large group instruction/whole
(reinforcement/wrap-up)
The teacher observes as learners place the signs Learners will be shown fractions on a number line
as well as on a fraction wall/ chart.
and asks students to give reasons why they chose
The number line or fraction wall can be used to
the particular sign.
show that the fraction is part of a whole.
Learners will be shown how fractions can get
smaller by dividing the whole into smaller parts.
SCO 3 The number line or fraction wall/chart can be used
to compare fractions and demonstrate fractions in
Game ascending or descending order.
Fraction Matching Bingo Number line
Develop bingo cards with fractions and shaded
diagrams written on them. The teacher calls out
statements, e.g. a fraction larger than ½, a
diagram that shows a shaded area of ⅓. Learner
identifies the corresponding value on the card
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
with a counter. Learner who gets all in a straight
line wins the bingo game.
SCO #4
Game
Learner will match the fraction cards with
corresponding shapes.
Retrieved from:
https://www.free-math-handwriting-and-reading-
worksheets.com/fraction-number-line.html
Fraction Wall
The teacher observes that the fraction cards are
matched to the correct shaded shape.
Retrieved from:
https://www.teacharesources.com/product/fractio
n-wall/
SCO 5
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
The teacher will observe learners as they share
the items using the appropriate fraction, e.g. ½, SCO 3 & 4
¼, etc. and as they use the appropriate
vocabulary, bigger, smaller. Small Groups (three or four students)
Comparing fractions using the equal, greater than
and less than vocabulary.
Checklist Learners will create a balance using a clothes
hanger, strings and plastic cups.
Learners will place the fraction parts from the
The learner: Yes No fraction stax or fraction tiles in the cups of the
balance scales and compare the fractions using the
vocabulary - equal, greater than and less than.
Learners will record their answers on paper.
Shared the food items
using appropriate
fractions
Used vocabulary to
describe the sizes of the
fractions correctly.
https://www.wikihow.com/Make-a-Balance-Scale-
for-Kids
SCO 4
Working in Pairs
Learners working in pairs will arrange fractions
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
stax to show different unit fractions. By placing the
fraction parts next to each other, learners will be
able to compare fractions. For example, ½ is bigger
than 1/3
Retrieved
from:https://www.lakeshorelearning.com/products
/math/fractions-decimals-percents/fraction-
staxsup-sup/p/FR774/
SCO 5
Group Work
Food Sharing:
Have learners cut up sandwiches or share food
items into different fractions and then compare the
slices or pieces.
Discuss which fraction is bigger or smaller.
Food Preparation:
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Give learners ingredients to prepare simple food
items. For example, making a glass of juice using: ½
a teaspoon of sugar, one cup of water, ¼ teaspoon
of powdered juice mix etc.
Additional Resources and Materials
Cuisenaire rods, 1 squared cm grid paper, uni-fix cubes
Books
Working with Fractions by David Adler
The Wishing Club: A Story about Fractions by Donna Jo Napoli
A Fractions Goal - Parts of A Whole by Brian Cleary
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher, such as reading material at
a lower or higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Science
Use of fractions in measuring components/reagents for experiments.
Social Studies
Fractions of the districts in the country are towns and villages.
Sports
Distance a cricket ball is thrown
Time taken to complete a race
Distance jumped
Music
Musical whole note can be divided into parts (halves, quarters, eighths, sixteenths)
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the discretion of the Team Leads
and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, and Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Number Sense ELO N2.3
Introduction to the Subject:
Decimals are used to express a number on the scale of tens. It uses a point to separate the whole part of a number from the fractional part of a number.
The use of decimals allows quantities to be expressed more accurately.
In this unit, learners will learn to read and write decimals, represent fractions as decimals, and explore real-life situations.
Strand (Topic): Number Sense
Essential Learning Outcomes: Fractions, Decimals and Rational Numbers – Representing Decimals
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
- Represent decimals using concrete materials and pictorials (1/2, 1/3 and 1/4);
- Describe decimals in context, verbally and symbolically
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
SCO 1
Knowledge
Learners will place the missing information in a SCO 1
1. Describe decimals as a way to table, as shown below. Learners will be given either
represent parts of the whole models, fractions, decimals or words, and they are Demonstration
to complete the missing sections of the table.
Working in Pairs
Skills
2. Represent fractions (½, ⅓, ¼, ⅕) as
Use of visual aid by the teacher.
decimals using concrete materials/
visual aids
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Working in pairs, learners will divide a rectangle,
Values which represents a whole, into ten equal parts.
3. Use decimal notation in different
contexts, such as money,
measurement, etc.
Each part represents the fraction, 1/10
Learners will be informed that 1/10 as a decimal is
0.1.
Learners will shade two parts of the rectangles and
represent the fraction 2/10, which would be
written as 0.2 as a decimal.
SCO 2
Product
Working Individually
Teacher places a Fraction/ Decimal chart on the
board or wall.
Decimals will be demonstrated using a number line.
Learners will be given fraction and decimal cards
Learners will be given cut outs of a number line.
and will be required to place them in the appropriate
Teacher will demonstrate how the decimals
section.
obtained above are placed on a number line and
students will complete their individual number lines
in a similar fashion.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
SCO 1
Base 10 blocks to show Decimals
One rod is made of 10 unit blocks to represent a
whole.
Blocks can be divided into 10 parts to show
decimals for tenths.
Use the table below to place images of blocks.
Retrieved from
Teacher observes as the learners place the cards in
https://mathcurious.com/2020/09/28/representin
the appropriate section.
g-decimal-numbers-using-base-10-blocks-printable-
and-digital-activity-cards/
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
SCO 2
Criterion for Yes No
Fraction/Decimal Field Trip
Matching
Learner’s Name:
Learners will visit the local bakery, pizza shop,
supermarket, etc. Allow learners to purchase slices
Matches the correct
of pizza, etc., and pay for their items.
fraction to its decimal
and correct decimal
Allow learners to share items using fractions, e.g., a
to its fraction
quarter of a slice of pizza, half of a chocolate, 0.3
of the cake, etc.
SCO 3
SCO #3
Learners will be shown the association between
money and decimals, how dollars can be divided
Learners will visit a local shop and write the prices
into cents, and how to use coins to represent
of four items. The items should include items that
decimal values.
are less than a dollar and more than a dollar.
Complete the table below.
Items Price per unit
($)
Sweets 0.25
Water 2.25
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Checklist
Criteria
Learners identified four items
Learners had items that were
more and less than a dollar
Learners wrote the prices of the
items to relate to decimal
Prices are written with decimal
point to show the whole and
parts of the whole
https://www.google.com/search?q=eastern+carib
bean+coinssymbol&tbm=isch&ved=2ahUKEwiDj
5-a6KCCAxWxoIQIHZs-Dj4Q2-
cCegQIABAA&oq=eastern+caribbean+coinssymb
ol&gs_lcp=CgNpbWcQAzoHCAAQGBCABFCs
F1iUIWDeJmgAcAB4AIAB3gGIAcYGkgEFMC4
0LjGYAQCgAQGqAQtnd3Mtd2l6LWltZ8ABAQ
&sclient=img&ei=vTlBZcO8DrHBkvQPm_248A
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
M&rlz=1C1CHBF_enLC1036LC1042#imgrc=WY
EozPD7wxRDoM
Additional Resources and Materials
Fraction and decimal dominoes
Decimal tiles
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher, such as reading material at
a lower or higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
English
- Included in various genres of writing
-
Science
- weights
- lengths
Social Studies
- measurement of rainfall
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, and Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Operation With Numbers ELO 1.1
Introduction to the Subject:
Identifies the purpose and goals of the subject area with links to the Vision and the Essential Education Competencies.
In grade 3, students embark on a crucial stage of their mathematical journey, delving into the world of operations with numbers. This foundational subject
area plays a pivotal role in shaping young minds to think logically, problem-solve, and build a strong mathematical foundation. The purpose and goals of
operations with numbers in grade 3 align closely with the broader vision of education and the essential competencies we aim to cultivate in our students.
Numerical Fluency: The primary purpose of operations with numbers in grade 3 is to foster numerical fluency. Students are introduced to essential
mathematical operations like addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. They learn to perform these operations confidently and accurately, setting
the stage for more complex math concepts in the future.
Problem-Solving Skills: Operations with numbers provide a framework for developing critical problem-solving skills. Students learn to analyze situations,
discern which operation is most appropriate, and apply it to real-world scenarios. This enhances their mathematical abilities and equips them with valuable
problem-solving skills that extend beyond the classroom.
Logical Thinking: Students cultivate logical thinking and reasoning through operations with numbers. They understand the underlying principles of these
operations, such as the commutative and associative properties, and use them to manipulate numbers effectively.
Mathematical Communication: Another essential goal is to enhance students' ability to communicate their mathematical thinking. They learn to articulate
their steps, strategies, and solutions clearly, fostering practical communication skills essential in various life aspects.
Connecting Concepts: Operations with numbers serve as a bridge, connecting various mathematical concepts. Students begin to see how addition and
subtraction relate to multiplication and division. This interconnectedness deepens their understanding of mathematics as a whole.
Preparation for Advanced Math: Grade 3 lays the groundwork for more advanced mathematical concepts in subsequent grades. A solid understanding of
operations with numbers is crucial for success in areas like fractions, decimals, and algebra.
The vision for education is to empower students with the knowledge, skills, and attitudes they need to thrive in an ever-changing world. Operations with
numbers align with this vision by:
● Promoting Lifelong Learning: By equipping students with foundational math skills, we prepare them for a lifetime of learning, problem-solving, and
adapting to new challenges.
● Fostering Critical Thinking: Operations with numbers nurture critical thinking abilities, teaching students to approach problems with curiosity and
analytical thinking.
● Cultivating Effective Communication: Through math, students learn to communicate their ideas effectively, a skill that transcends mathematics and
benefits them in all areas of life.
Links to Essential Education Competencies:
Operations with numbers directly contribute to the development of essential competencies, including:
Numeracy: By mastering operations with numbers, students build strong numeracy skills that are essential for understanding quantitative information in
various contexts.
Problem-Solving: Operations with numbers are a fundamental platform for honing problem-solving skills, which are valuable in academic, professional, and
personal spheres.
Communication: Articulating mathematical thinking requires effective communication, aligning with clear and concise communication competency.
Critical Thinking: Analyzing mathematical problems and selecting appropriate operations foster critical thinking skills, an indispensable competency in today's
complex world.
Operations with numbers in grade 3 serve as a cornerstone of mathematical education, contributing to the broader vision of education and equipping
students with essential competencies that will benefit them throughout their lives.
Strand (Topic): Operations with Numbers
Essential Learning Outcomes:
1.1 Additive Thinking – Understanding the Meaning of Addition and Subtraction and how they Related
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Use the properties of operations and the relationships between multiplication and division
to solve problems and check calculations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
1. Recall the basic facts for addition and SCO1 and 2 SCO 1 and 2
subtraction.
2. Create and solve problems involving whole Open-Ended Questions: Ask open-ended Reflection and Self-Assessment: students reflect
number addition and subtraction problems questions that require students to explain their on their problem-solving processes and assess their
with and without regrouping with results thinking and justify their answers. own understanding.
not exceeding 999.
3. Use several strategies to perform Example: Explain how you solved 48+25. What Example: Apply patterns: students recognize patterns
multiplication and division of one and two- strategy did you use, and why did you choose that strategy? in addition and subtraction problems. Identifying patterns can
digit numbers by 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. If you had to teach someone how to subtract 37 from 64, simplify problem-solving and enhance their understanding of
4. Create and solve problems involving what steps would you tell them to take? mathematical relationships.
multiplication of a two-digit number by 2, Solve 59-29 in more than one way. Can you think of a
3, 4, 5, 6, 10, and 100, without and with different strategy to find the answer?
regrouping
5. Use repeated addition and subtraction to Multiple Representations: students represent
multiply and divide a two-digit number by a problems using different methods such as
one-digit number, without and with diagrams, tables, or charts. This allows them to
remainders. choose the representation that works best for their
6. Estimate answers to computations understanding.
involving the four basic operations on
whole numbers; https://images.app.goo.gl/8zUsxYbeCq7ob9tL6
7. Use estimations to determine the
reasonableness of answers obtained from Hands-On Manipulatives: Use physical objects
carrying out a given computation like counters, cubes, or base-ten blocks to represent
addition and subtraction problems. This provides a
concrete, visual way for students to understand the
https://smarterlearningguide.com/strip-diagrams/ o perations and their relationships.
SCO 3 and 4
Problems with Real-Life Contexts: Create
problems that involve multiplication and division
in real-life scenarios.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Pizza Party: Sarah is having a pizza party. Each pizza https://study.com/academy/lesson/methods-for-
is divided into 8 slices. If she has 15 pizzas, how many teaching-math-operations.html
slices of pizza does she have in total for her friends?
Toy Sharing: Jake has 24 toy cars, and he wants to SCO 3 and 4
share them equally among 6 friends. How many toy cars will
each friend get? Visual Models: Utilize visual aids such as arrays,
area models, and number lines to illustrate
SCO5 multiplication and division concepts.
Number Lines:
Use number lines to illustrate repeated addition in a
multiplication context. Ask students to mark jumps on the
number line to represent repeated addition steps.
https://roomtodiscover.com/visual-models/
https://www.2nd-grade-math-salamanders.com/beginning-
multiplication-worksheets.html
Use number lines to demonstrate repeated subtraction in a
division context. For instance, for 15 ÷3, students can
mark jumps on the number line until they reach zero.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v
=sr45yLXUQ9E
SCO 5
http://kornmath.weebly.com/multiplication-
Reinforce Patterns: Students identify patterns on
3rd.html
the number line. Discuss how each jump represents
one group, and notice how the numbers on the line
SCO6
increase by the same amount.
Word Problems:
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Include word problems in assessments that require Students identify patterns on the number line.
students to estimate before solving. Ask questions Discuss how each backward jump represents one
like "Estimate the division, and notice how the numbers on the line
sum/difference/product/quotient of these two decrease by the same amount.
numbers."
Ensure the word problems are relatable to the SCO 6
students' experiences to make the context Questioning Techniques
meaningful. Model how to ask estimation questions during class
discussions. For instance, ask open-ended questions
like, "Can you estimate the sum of these two numbers? How
did you arrive at your estimate?"
Encourage students to use question stems such as
"What is a reasonable estimate for..." or "About how much
would be the sum/difference/product/quotient of..."
Additional Resources and Materials
Manipulatives(counters), Number Lines, Maths Worksheets, Maths Story Books, Educational Games (card games, board games, Multiplication Bingo, Math
War, Online Math Games
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
There are 4 basic operations in Mathematics: Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication and Division.
Addition is the inverse operation for Subtraction. 120 + 30 =150 ( 150– 120 =30 ) ( 150 – 30 =120)
Subtraction is the inverse operation for Addition. 187 –54=133 133+54= 187
Multiplication is the inverse operation for Division 5x4=20 20÷5=4 20÷4=5
Division is the inverse operation for Multiplication. 27÷3=9 9x3=27 3x9=27
Multiplication is repeated Addition. 6x4 is the same as 6 +6+6+6
Multiplication and Addition are Commutative. This means that the order in which you perform the operation does not change the answer.
Example: 8x7=56 7x8=56… 3+7+9=19 7+9+3=19
(Sum means to Add). (Difference means to Subtract). (Product means to Multiply). (Quotient means to Divide)
Multiplicand x Multiplier=Product Dividend ÷ Divisor= Quotient
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts:
● Reading word problems that involve math operations.
● Writing word problems to reinforce understanding.
● Practicing mathematical vocabulary.
● Mathematics Storybooks
Science:
● Measuring and recording data, then performing basic calculations.
● Studying patterns and sequences in nature that involve math concepts.
● Using math in science experiments and data analysis.
Social Studies:
● Calculating distances on maps.
● Analysing population data using basic math operations.
● Understanding historical events and timelines through math
Physical Education:
● Measuring distances, time, and scores in sports activities.
Art:
● Creating geometric patterns and designs.
● Using shapes and measurements in art projects.
Health Education:
● Calculating nutrition facts, serving sizes, and daily intake.
● Analysing growth charts and health statistics.
● Understanding the importance of math in making healthy choices.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the
discretion of the Team Leads and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Critical Thinking:
Problem-Solving Skills
Language and Communication
Measurement and Units:
Environmental Science:
Technology Integration
Visualization
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, and Environment that are integrated:
Counting Games (Hop Scotch, Pick Pick, Marble playing)
Singing Multiplication Tables.
Sou Sou.
Schools Saving Union.
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Operation with number ELO O1.2
Introduction to the Subject:
Strand (Topic): Operations with Numbers
Essential Learning Outcomes: O 1.2 Additive Thinking – Compute Fluently using Operations (+, –)
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
using place value and the properties of operations; Fluently add and subtract within 1000 using strategies based on place value, properties of operations,
and/or the relationship between addition and subtraction.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1. Explain relationship between the places (ones, SCO1 SCO1
tens, hundreds).
Visual Representations: Place Value Charts:
2.Use the commutative property of addition and Strategy: Create visual representations like charts or
the associative property to solve problems. diagrams. Strategy: Use visual aids like place value charts.
Implementation: Display large place value charts in the
3.Understand the properties of zero in addition Assessment: Provide a chart with a number written in classroom. Guide students in reading and interpreting
and subtraction expanded form (e.g., 300 + 40 + 5) and ask students to numbers on the chart, emphasizing the position and value
identify the value of each place. of each digit.
4.Subtract and Add three-digit numbers fluently
using strategies based on place value.
Describe the relationship between addition
and subtraction, using one operation to check the
other. https://study.com/academy/lesson/how-to-write-
numbers-in-expanded-form.html
https://www.twinkl.co.uk/teaching-wiki/expanded-form
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
SCO2
Real-Life Applications:
Strategy: Integrate real-life scenarios.
Assessment: Provide real-world situations where the
order of adding numbers makes a difference or where
grouping numbers differently yields the same result. Ask
students to explain how the commutative and associative
properties apply. For example:
https://hotcore.info/babki/Place-Value-Standard-
Scenario: Baking Cookies Form.htm
Commutative Property: Ask students to consider a
recipe that calls for adding 2 cups of flour and 3 cups of SCO2
sugar. Discuss how the order of adding these ingredients Commutative property (3 + 7 = 7 + 3
doesn't affect the total amount of dry ingredients. Associative property (2 + 5) + 8 = 2 + (5 + 8))
Associative Property: Present a scenario where the
recipe involves combining 2 cups of flour and 3 cups of
sugar first, and then adding an additional 4 cups of
chocolate chips. Discuss how grouping the first two
ingredients and adding the third yields the same result.
SCO3
Open-Ended Questions:
Strategy: Pose open-ended questions.
Assessment: Ask questions that require students to https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=djq
explain the properties of zero in their own words. For E15l6Nm0
example, "Why does adding zero not change the
quantity?" or "How does subtracting zero affect the SCO3
number?" Real-Life Scenarios:
Example: Share a scenario where a student has zero
SCO4 pencils and receives 6 more. Ask students to visualize and
Place Value Manipulatives:
understand that the total number of pencils is 6. Similarly,
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Strategy: Provide base-ten blocks or other place value discuss a scenario where a student has 9 cookies and gives
manipulatives. away zero, leaving them with 9.
Assessment: Ask students to physically represent three-
digit numbers using the manipulatives and then perform Addition (6 + 0 = 6) subtraction (9 - 0 = 9).
addition and subtraction. Observe their ability to regroup
or decompose numbers based on place value. SCO4
https://www.nagwa.com/en/videos/316125638136/
SCO5
https://study.com/academy/lesson/using-models-to-
represent-numbers-operations.html
Manipulating Equations:
Strategy: Manipulate equations to show relationships.
SCO5
Implementation: Given an equation like 15 + 8 =
Real-Life Application:
23, students can rearrange it to 23 - 8 = 15,
Strategy: Incorporate everyday situations.
demonstrating how one operation can be used to verify the
Example: "Mark has $50. He spent $28 on a new
other.
toy. Use subtraction to find out how much money he has
left. Now, use addition to check if Mark's spending and
SCO6
remaining money add up to the original $50."
Additional Resources and Materials
Manipulatives(counters) Number Line, Maths Worksheets, Maths Story Books, Educational Games (card games, board games, Multiplication Bingo, Math
War, Online Math Games
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
There are 4 basic operations in Mathematics : Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication and Division .
Addition is the inverse operation for Subtraction. 120 + 30 =150 ( 150– 120 =30 ) ( 150 – 30 =120)
Subtraction is the inverse operation for Addition. 187 –54=133 133+54= 187
Multiplication is the inverse operation for Division 5x4=20 20÷5=4 20÷4=5
Division is the inverse operation for Multiplication. 27÷3=9 9x3=27 3x9=27
Multiplication is repeated Addition. 6x4 is the same as 6 +6+6+6
Multiplication and Addition are Commutative. This means that the order in which you perform the operation does not change the answer.
Example: 8x7=56 7x8=56… 3+7+9=19 7+9+3=19
(Sum means to Add). (Difference means to Subtract). (Product means to Multiply). (Quotient means to Divide)
Multiplicand x Multiplier=Product Dividend ÷ Divisor= Quotient
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Counting Games (Hop Scotch, Pick Pick, Marble playing)
Singing Multiplication Tables.
Sou Sou.
Schools Saving Union.
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Operation with number ELO O 1.3
Introduction to the Subject: Identifies purpose and goals of the subject area with links to the Vision and the Essential Education Competencies.
Strand (Topic): Operation with numbers
Essential Learning Outcomes: O 1.3: Additive Thinking – Make a Reasonable Estimation When Using Operations
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Apply estimation strategies to predict sums and differences of 1-, 2-,and 3-digit numerals
in a problem-solving context.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1. Round numbers with up to 3 digits
to the nearest 10 and 100. SCO 1 SCO 1
2. Estimate sums and differences Written Assessments: Concrete Manipulatives:
quickly and efficiently, using Provide a written assessment with a mix of Use physical objects or number lines to demonstrate
rounding off. rounding problems to the nearest 10 and 100. rounding. For example, provide students with physical base-
3. Apply estimation strategies (number Accommodate students with different abilities by 10 blocks and show them how to round by physically moving
lines, rounding, compatible including both straightforward and more challenging the blocks.
numbers) to real-world problems questions.
(shopping, measuring) that require Rounding to the Nearest 10: https://youtu.be/zu6UKldmk7A?si=7zvCkexcBgMIgZxG
the prediction of sums and Round 74 to the nearest 10.
differences. Rounding to the Nearest 100: https://youtu.be/bx-XKcgKqzc?si=ctZkrgnKsHrC2kDe
4. Explain and justify the chosen Round 697 to the nearest 100.
estimation method when predicting Mixed Rounding Problems: SCO 2
sums and differences. Round 49 to the nearest 10 and then round the Storytelling:
5. Evaluate the reasonableness of result to the nearest 100.
estimates by comparing them to the Round 186 to the nearest 100 and then round the Create stories or word problems that require students to use rounding to
actual sums and differences. result to the nearest 10. estimate sums and differences. This helps connect the concept to a
6. Develop an understanding of the Practical Application: narrative, making it more memorable.
purpose/importance of estimation
Sample Stories
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
of sums and differences in solving There are 348 books in a library. Round this 1. Road Trip Adventure:
real-world problems. number to the nearest 100. How many hundreds The Johnson family is planning a road trip. They estimate that they will
are there? drive 245 miles to their first stop and then 178 miles to their next stop.
You have 473 stickers. Round this number to the Round these distances to the nearest 10 miles to get an approximate
nearest 100. How would you say this number after total driving distance.
rounding?
2. Baking Cookies:
SCO 2 Sarah is baking cookies for a school event. She has 2 bags of chocolate
Choice-Based Assessments: chips, one with 425 grams and the other with 360 grams. To estimate
Offer students the choice of assessment formats (e.g., the total amount of chocolate chips she has, round each bag's weight to
written test, oral presentation, digital quiz) to the nearest 100 grams.
accommodate their preferred learning and
assessment styles. 3. Soccer Game Excitement:
In a football game, the home team scored 48 goals, and the
SCO 3 visiting team scored 52 goals. To estimate the difference in
the number of goals, round both numbers to the nearest ten.
Real World Word Problems About how many more goals did the visiting team score?
Present students with real-world word SCO 3
problems that involve adding or subtracting Role-Playing Scenarios:
1-, 2-, and 3-digit numbers. Ask them to Strategy: Engage in role-playing activities.
estimate the answer before solving the Implementation: Create scenarios where students take on roles in a
problem and explain their estimation shopping or measuring context. They can estimate quantities, negotiate
strategy. For example, “Estimate the total cost of prices, and discuss their decision-making process. For example
buying a toy for $25 and a book for $12. Culinary Creations:
Scenario: Aspiring chefs, students plan a cooking adventure. They
SCO 4 take on the role of shoppers, estimating ingredient quantities for a recipe.
Open-Ended Questions: This involves measuring ingredients like flour, sugar, and spices, as well
Include open-ended questions in assessments that as estimating costs when shopping for the items.
require students to explain the estimation method
they used and justify why they chose it. SCO 4
Sample Questions
Real-World Context:
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1. Explain how you estimated the sum of 58 and
36, and the reason for using such a strategy. Present estimation problems based on real-world scenarios, such as
SCO 5 shopping, where students must not only estimate but also explain why
Real-World Problem Solving: they chose a specific strategy.
Present students with real-world scenarios where
they need to estimate and calculate sums and Sample Scenario
differences. Afterward, ask them to reflect on the
reasonableness of their estimates and compare them Pet Adoption Event:
to the actual results. You're at a pet adoption event, and there are 24 dogs and 15 cats
looking for homes. Estimate the total number of animals at the event,
SCO 6 and explain your rounding strategy.
Class Discussions:
SCO 5
Organize class discussions where students Comparative Tasks:
can share their experiences using estimation Present students with a set of estimation problems, and have them
in everyday life. Encourage them to explain estimate the answers. After which, instruct them to calculate the actual
how estimation helps them to make quick sums and differences, and compare them to their estimates and reflect on
decisions and solve problems efficiently. the reasonableness.
SCO 6
Group Projects:
Assign group projects that require students to apply
estimation in practical scenarios. Ask them to discuss the role
of estimation in solving these problems and present their
findings to the class.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.twinkl.com.au/resource/t-n-6168-sweet-shop-
estimation-activity-sheet
Sample Group Projects
1. Travel Adventure:
Have students plan a pretend family vacation, including
choosing a destination, estimating travel costs, and planning
daily activities. They discuss how estimation influenced their
choices and present their vacation plans to the class
for example:
https://youtu.be/UPpZI-JZMmc
0. Room Redesign Project
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Each group is given a task to put an estimate together to
redesign the classroom. They have to estimate the cost of the
new furniture, paint and decorations. Groups will present
their estimates, explaining how estimation played a role in
planning and budgeting for the room design.
Additional Resources and Materials
(Additional material and resources that are not included in the Inclusive Learning and/or Inclusive Assessment Strategies that may be useful for lesson planning )
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
1. Understanding Place Value:
● Recognizing the value of digits in 1-, 2-, and 3-digit numbers.
● Understanding the relationship between units, tens, and hundreds.
● Knowing how the position of a digit affects its value.
2. Rounding Skills:
● Rounding 2- and 3-digit numbers to the nearest 10 and 100.
● Recognizing the impact of rounding on the magnitude of a number.
3. Addition and Subtraction Fluency:
● Fluently adding and subtracting 1-, 2-, and 3-digit numbers.
● Understanding the properties of addition and subtraction.
4. Estimation Strategies:
● Front-End Estimation: Understanding that estimation can be done by focusing on the leftmost digit in addition or subtraction.
● Example: Estimating 348 + 125 by rounding to 300 + 100 = 400.
● Compatible Numbers: Identifying numbers that are easy to work with mentally.
● Example: Estimating 167 + 89 by rounding to 170 + 90 = 260.
● Number Line Estimation: Using number lines to visually estimate the position of numbers and their sums or differences.
● Example: Estimating the difference between 427 and 318 on a number line.
5. Word Problem Solving:
● Translating real-world scenarios into mathematical expressions.
● Understanding when estimation is appropriate and helpful in problem-solving.
6. Contextual Understanding:
● Applying estimation strategies in various contexts such as shopping, measuring, or planning activities.
● Recognizing situations where estimation can be used to make quick predictions.
7. Critical Thinking:
● Analyzing whether the estimated result is reasonable based on the context.
● Reflecting on the impact of estimation on the accuracy of predictions.
8. Communication Skills:
● Expressing estimation strategies and reasoning clearly.
● Justifying the choice of estimation method in problem-solving.
9. Comparing Estimates:
● Comparing estimated sums or differences to identify the most reasonable prediction.
● Understanding when to adjust estimates based on the problem context.
10. Practical Application:
● Applying estimation skills to real-life situations, such as estimating the total cost of items, predicting travel times, or planning events.
11. Error Analysis:
● Recognizing common errors in estimation and correcting them.
● Learning from mistakes to improve estimation skills.
12. Understanding Limits:
● Recognizing the limitations of estimation and when precise calculations are necessary.
● Developing a sense of when rough estimates are sufficient for a given problem.
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the
curriculum)
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the discretion of the Team Leads
and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Language Arts:
Activity: Write and Solve Word Problems
Integration: Have students write word problems that involve estimating and solving sums or differences. This not only reinforces math skills but also
enhances language arts and critical thinking.
Science:
Activity: Measurement Estimation
Integration: Integrate science by having students estimate and measure lengths, weights, or volumes. They can predict the results of scientific experiments
involving measurements.
Social Studies:
Activity: Budgeting for a Project
Integration: Integrate social studies by having students plan and budget for a class project. They estimate costs, predict the total budget, and analyze the
financial implications of their decisions.
Art:
Activity: Creating Symmetrical Designs
Integration: Combine math and art by having students estimate and create symmetrical designs. They can predict the number of shapes needed on one
side to create a balanced design.
Physical Education:
Activity: Estimating Distance in Sports
Integration: Apply estimation to physical education by having students estimate distances in various sports activities. This promotes spatial awareness and
mathematical reasoning.
Music:
Activity: Rhythmic Estimation
Integration: Integrate music by having students estimate and create rhythmic patterns. They can predict the duration of musical notes and create their
compositions.
Physical Education:
Activity: Estimating Fitness Goals
Integration: Integrate physical education by having students set fitness goals. They estimate the time or distance for activities
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Operation with numbers ELO O2.1
Introduction to the Subject: Identifies purpose and goals of the subject area with links to the Vision and the Essential Education Competencies.
Strand (Topic): Operations with Numbers
Essential Learning Outcomes: O 2.1 Multiplicative Thinking – Understanding the Meaning of Multiplication and Division and How They
Relate
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Represent multiplication using equal groups and arrays; Represent division using equal
sharing and equal grouping, Interpret products of whole numbers,
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Represent Multiplication using Equal Groups SCO 1 and 2 SCO1 and 2
and Arrays:
Manipulatives and Hands-On Activities: Visual Aids and Graphic Organizers:
1. Understand and demonstrate the concept
of multiplication as repeated addition. Strategy: Provide concrete objects (counters, cubes, etc.) Strategy: Provide visual support through charts,
for students to physically group and count. diagrams, and graphic organizers.
2. Represent multiplication using equal
groups. Example Assessment: Ask students to represent Example Activity: Create a multiplication chart
multiplication problems using manipulatives and then together, illustrating the relationship between multiplication
3. Represent multiplication using arrays. explain their process orally or through drawing. and repeated addition. Use visual cues to reinforce the
concept.
4. Solve word problems involving equal Example Activity: Use counters or objects to show 3
groups and arrays. groups of 4 and express it as 3 x 4 = 12.
Represent Division using Equal Sharing and
Equal Grouping
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5. Understand division as sharing into equal
groups.
6. Represent division using equal grouping.
7. Solve word problems involving equal
sharing and grouping.
Interpret Products of Whole Numbers:
8. Interpret products in real-world contexts.
9. Relate multiplication and division.
https://www.splashlearn.com/math-
vocabulary/algebra/repeated-addition
https://www.teacherspayteachers.com/Product/Multiplica
tion-as-Repeated-Addition-Equal-Groups-Worksheets-
5097465
https://www.onlinemathlearning.com/equal-groups-
multiplication.html
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://mathmonks.com/worksheets/equal-groups- SCO3
multiplication-worksheets\
Real-Life Scenarios:
SCO 3 and 4
Strategy: Relate array representation to real-world
Real-World Array Scenarios: scenarios.
Strategy: Frame multiplication as real-life scenarios Example Activity: Pose multiplication problems
requiring arrays. related to real-life situations and ask students to represent
them using arrays.
Example Assessment: Present problems related to
arranging objects in arrays for practical situations, such as Anna has many different types of chocolate in a box.
setting up chairs in a classroom. Students can draw and There are 5 rows with 6 chocolates in each row. How
explain their arrays. many chocolates does Anna have altogether?
Example Activity: Given a problem, create a visual
representation using equal groups or arrays, and then write
a multiplication equation to solve it.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
http://wps123.weebly.com/arrays.html
SCO 5, 6 and 7
Open-Ended Questions:
Strategy: Pose open-ended questions to encourage critical
thinking.
Example Assessment: Ask students to create their
own division problems involving equal sharing and
represent the solutions using various methods.
Drawing: Create a visual representation of the sharing
process.
Manipulatives: Use counters, small objects, or other
manipulatives to physically demonstrate the division.
Written Expression: Write out the division equation http://msmason29.weebly.com/arrays--
and solution. multiplication.html
Technology: Utilize digital tools or educational apps
to represent the division problem.
5 rows of 6=30
5x6=30
SCO8
Interactive Role-Play:
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Strategy: Engage students in interactive role-play
scenarios.
Assessment Activity: Set up role-play stations where
students act out real-world situations that involve
multiplication. Observe their understanding as they
interpret products in the context of the role-play. For
example
Grocery Store Multiplication:
https://www.thoughtco.com/definition-of-arrays-in-
Setup: Create a mini grocery store in the classroom with
mathematics-2312362
play food items and price tags.
Role-play Scenario: Students take turns playing the
roles of shoppers and cashiers. Each item has a price, and SCO 5, 6 and 7
students act out buying multiple items. They calculate the
total cost using multiplication. Open-Ended Questions:
SCO 9 Strategy: Pose open-ended questions to encourage critical
thinking. For example
Story Mapping:
Application of Equal Sharing:
Strategy: Utilize story mapping techniques to connect
multiplication and division in a narrative context. Question: Imagine you have a collection of 20 marbles.
How would you share them equally among 4 friends?
Assessment Activity: Provide a story where What strategies could you use to represent this division?
multiplication is initially used to combine items, followed
by a division scenario where those items are shared or
distributed. Ask students to create a story map or timeline
to illustrate these mathematical connections. For example
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Bake Sale Bonanza: Drawing Equal Groups:
Scenario: A group of students is organizing a bake sale. Question: Draw a picture to represent the division
They want to bake trays of cookies to sell. Each tray can problem: 18 ÷ 3. Explain your drawing and how it
hold 8 cookies, and they plan to make 5 trays. represents equal sharing.
Story Mapping:
Draw a rectangle to represent the baking trays. Exploring Strategies:
Label each tray with the number 5 (5 trays). Question: What are different ways you can group 24
objects into equal groups? How does the method you choose
In each tray, draw 8 cookies to represent the multiplication impact the division equation?
(5 trays × 8 cookies).
Discuss how they might later want to divide the total
number of cookies equally to package them for sale. SCO8
Role-Playing:
Strategy: Engage in role-playing activities
Choose Real-Life Scenarios:
Select scenarios that reflect everyday situations where
multiplication is used in real life. Examples include
shopping, sharing items, or planning events. Ensure the
scenarios are relatable to Grade 3 students.
Provide Clear Instructions:
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Clearly explain the roles, the scenario, and the
multiplication context. Make sure students understand
their objectives and the expected outcomes of the role-
playing activity.
SCO 9
Story Mapping:
Field Trip Fun:
Scenario: A class is going on a field trip, and they need
to arrange transportation. Each minibus can carry 6
students, and they have a total of 4 minibuses.
https://www.onlinemathlearning.com/division-
models.html
Additional Resources and Materials
(Additional material and resources that are not included in the Inclusive Learning and/or Inclusive Assessment Strategies that may be useful for lesson planning )
Manipulatives and Hands-On Materials:
Counters, buttons, small toys, or any small, tangible objects can be used for hands-on division activities. Fraction circles or fraction strips for representing
division involving fractions.
Math Worksheets and Printables:
Educational websites and platforms like Education.com, Super Teacher Worksheets, and K5 Learning offer printable worksheets and division practice
exercises for various grade levels.
Interactive Math Apps and Games:
Educational apps and online games can engage students while reinforcing division concepts. Consider apps like "Math Bingo" or online resources like
Coolmath Games.
Textbooks and Workbooks: Look for math textbooks and workbooks specifically designed for your grade level or curriculum. These often include
division lessons and practice problems.
Visual Aids and Posters:
Create or purchase posters that illustrate division concepts, equal sharing, and equal grouping methods. Visual aids can enhance understanding.
Online Video Tutorials:
Platforms like Khan Academy, YouTube, and LearnZillion offer video tutorials on division concepts, providing step-by-step explanations and examples.
Virtual Manipulatives:
Websites like the National Library of Virtual Manipulatives offer free virtual math manipulatives that can be used for division activities.
Math Apps for Accessibility:
Explore math apps and software designed for accessibility, such as "MathTalk" or "MathType," which provide support for students with disabilities.
Math Storybooks:
Incorporate math-themed storybooks that introduce division concepts in a fun and relatable way. "The Doorbell Rang" by Pat Hutchins is one such book.
Math Board Games:
Board games like "Fraction Bingo," "Math Jeopardy," or "Division War" can make learning division enjoyable for students.
Teacher-Generated Materials:
Create your own division worksheets, flashcards, and teaching materials tailored to your students' needs and curriculum.
Math Software Programs:
Educational software programs like Mathletics, DreamBox, or ST Math often include division modules and adaptive learning features.
Online Problem Solving Platforms:
Platforms like IXL, Math Playground, and Prodigy offer online practice problems and interactive division challenges.
Educational Websites:
Explore educational websites like Illuminations (from the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics) or Math Is Fun for division tutorials, lessons, and
interactive activities.
Math Apps for Special Needs:
Apps like "Mathway" or "ModMath" are designed to support students with dyscalculia and other learning challenges in mastering math concepts, including
division.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher such as reading material at
a lower or higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
When grouping, the quotient represents the amount of groups within the shared quantity
Equal shares refer to dividing the whole or a group of objects into equal parts.
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the
curriculum)
Science:
Measurement and Data Analysis: Use division to analyze and interpret scientific data, such as calculating the average temperature, speed, or density.
Life Sciences: Explore division when studying population growth, genetics, or ecological interactions, as it can help understand rates and proportions in
biology.
Social Studies:
Geography: Apply division to calculate population density, land distribution, and resources per capita in different regions or countries.
History: Use division to analyze historical data, such as population growth over time or economic trends.
Language Arts:
Word Problems: Incorporate division word problems related to literature or historical events, challenging students to apply division concepts in context.
Writing: Have students write explanatory essays or reports that involve division as a supporting mathematical concept.
Art:
Geometry: Explore the geometric aspects of division, such as dividing shapes into equal parts, which can lead to discussions about symmetry and patterns
in art.
Scale: Introduce division when scaling up or down in art projects, like enlarging a drawing or creating a mosaic.
Physical Education:
Statistics: Apply division to analyze sports statistics, such as calculating batting averages, team scores, or the average speed of runners.
Health and Nutrition: Use division to explore topics like portion control and nutrient distribution in meal planning.
Music:
Rhythm and Timing: Incorporate division concepts when discussing musical rhythms, time signatures, and beats per minute in music theory.
Budgeting: Use division to teach financial literacy, including budgeting and managing money.
Civics and Government:
Voting and Representation: Explore the concept of division in terms of voting districts, congressional representation, and fair political representation.
Foreign Languages:
Language Learning: Create division problems that involve dividing foreign currency, measuring time zones, or sharing items among speakers of different
languages.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the discretion of the Team Leads
and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Operation with number ELO O2.2
Introduction to the Subject: Identifies purpose and goals of the subject area with links to the Vision and the Essential Education Competencies.
Strand (Topic): Operations with Numbers
Essential Learning Outcomes: 2.2 Multiplicative Thinking – Compute Fluently with Operations (x&÷)
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Use multiplication and division facts (products within 100) to solve word problems in situations involving equal
groups, arrays, combinations, and measurement quantities,
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
1. Use multiplication and division facts SCO 1 SCO 1
(products within 100) to solve word
problems in situations involving equal Real-World Problem-Solving Stations: Interactive Math Games Station:
groups, arrays, combinations, and
measurement quantities. Strategy: Set up stations with real-world scenarios that Objective: Reinforce multiplication and division
2. Understand division as an unknown-factor
require multiplication and division. concepts through interactive games.
problem.
Assessment Activity: Students rotate through Setup: Provide stations with math games that involve
3. Multiply one-digit whole numbers by
stations where they encounter word problems related to equal groups, arrays, and combinations. Students can play
multiples of 10 in the range 10–90.
equal groups, arrays, combinations, and measurement games that allow them to practice these concepts in a digital
4. Fluently multiply and divide within 100,
quantities. They solve the problems using multiplication and engaging way. For example
using strategies such as the relationship
and division and explain their reasoning. For example
between multiplication and division.
Equal Groups Game Station: "Sharing
Equal Groups Station: Grocery Store Cookies"
Checkout
Objective: Reinforce equal sharing concepts.
Setup: Create a "Grocery Store Checkout" station with
pictures of grocery items and their prices. Each student is
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
given a shopping list with quantities, and they need to
calculate the total cost for different items using Setup: Students play a digital game where they distribute
multiplication (equal groups). cookies equally among characters. The game provides
scenarios where they need to divide a certain number of
Word Problem Example: If apples cost $2 per cookies among a specified number of friends or characters.
pound, and the shopping list says to buy 4 pounds of
apples, how much will they cost in total?
Arrays Station: Building Block Arrays
Setup: Set up a "Building Block Arrays" station with
building blocks or tiles. Students use the blocks to create
arrays and solve multiplication word problems.
Word Problem Example: If there are 3 rows of
building blocks, and each row has 5 blocks, how many
blocks are there in total? https://deceptivelyeducational.blogspot.com/2012/04/sh
aring-cookies-division-by-grouping.html
Measurement Quantities Station: Aquarium
Design Array Builder Station: "Robot Factory"
Setup: Set up an "Aquarium Design" station where Strategy: Game
students design aquariums with different fish tanks. They
calculate the total volume of water needed for each
aquarium using multiplication.
Allow students to build arrays to assemble robots.
Word Problem Example: If each fish tank needs 10
liters of water, and there are 5 tanks, how much water is
needed in total?
Setup: Students play a game where they are in charge of
Equal Sharing Station: Cookie Jar Division building robots using arrays. They need to calculate the
total number of robot parts needed based on the rows and
columns of each array.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Setup: Place a jar of cookies and small plates at the
station. Students read word problems related to equal
sharing and use cookies to physically demonstrate division.
Word Problem Example: If there are 12 cookies in
the jar, and they need to be shared equally among 4
friends, how many cookies will each friend get?
SCO 2
Word Problem Scenarios:
https://www.teacherspayteachers.com/Product/Array-
Multiplication-Activity-3rd-4th-Grades-Math-Center-
Strategy: Present diverse real-life scenarios as word
Array-Bot-Robot-
problems.
321717?st=3a76212b73f8a266725eab7a37b1a219
Assessment Activity: Provide word problems where
students need to figure out an unknown factor in division.
For example: "There are 16 candies. If they are
SCO2
distributed equally into 2 bags, how many candies are in
each bag?"
Real-Life Applications:
Strategy: Connect division to practical situations.
Implementation: Relate division with real-life
scenarios that Grade 3 students can understand, such as
sharing toys, distributing candies, or dividing fruits equally
among family members. For example
Dividing Fruits among Family Members:
Scenario: The Johnson family has 12 apples, and they
want to divide them equally among the 3 family members.
How many apples will each family member get?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.ixl.com/math/grade-3/write-division- Connection: This real-life scenario represents a division
sentences-for-groups problem where the total number of apples (12) is divided
equally among the number of family members (3).
SCO3
Storytelling and Word Problems:
Strategy: Frame multiplication problems within stories.
Assessment Activity: Present multiplication problems
in the form of relatable stories. For instance, "If there are
8 baskets, and each basket has 40 apples, how many
apples are there in total?" This aids in understanding the
context of the problem.
https://www.showme.com/sh?h=MkwbdXk
SCO3
Storytelling Scenarios:
Strategy: Frame multiplication as a story.
Example: Multiply 5 by 80.
Solution: Tell a story like "There are 5 boxes, and each
https://www.teacherspayteachers.com/Product/3NBT3-
box contains 80 chocolates. How many chocolates are there
Task-Cards-Multiply-by-Multiples-of-10-3rd-Grade-
in total?" Students can relate to the story and understand
Math-Centers-2816448
the concept.
SCO4
5x80=400
Real-World Application Problems:
SCO4
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Strategy: Connect to practical situations. Multiplication and Division Fact Families:
Assessment Activity: Present problems related to Strategy: Emphasize fact families.
real-world scenarios where students need to use both
multiplication and division within 100. For example, Activity: Present fact families like 4 x 6 = 24, 6 x 4
calculating the total cost of 8 items if each item costs $12 = 24, 24 ÷ 4 = 6, and 24 ÷ 6 = 4. Discuss how
(8 x 12=96) and finding the cost per item if the total cost multiplication and division are inverse operations.
is $96 (96 ÷ 8=12).
https://www.rocketmath.com/2022/04/06/mult-
division-fact-families-from-21/
Additional Resources and Materials
(Additional material and resources that are not included in the Inclusive Learning and/or Inclusive Assessment Strategies that may be useful for lesson planning )
Apps like "Mathway" or "ModMath" are designed to support students with dyscalculia and other learning challenges in mastering math concepts, including
division.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher such as reading material at a
lower or higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
Multiplication Facts within 100:
Fluency in multiplication facts up to 10 × 10.
Understanding the commutative property of multiplication (e.g., 3 × 4 = 4 × 3).
Division Facts within 100:
Fluency in division facts related to multiplication facts within 100.
Understanding the relationship between multiplication and division.
Equal Groups:
Identifying and forming equal groups in a given context.
Relating equal groups to multiplication (e.g., 3 groups of 4 equals 3 × 4).
Arrays:
Understanding arrays as an arrangement of objects in rows and columns.
Relating arrays to multiplication (e.g., 3 rows of 4 equals 3 × 4).
Combinations:
Recognizing different combinations of numbers.
Understanding how combinations can be represented using multiplication (e.g., 2 × 6 = 12 and 6 × 2 = 12).
Measurement Quantities:
Applying multiplication to solve problems related to measurement quantities.
Understanding units of measurement and how they relate to multiplication (e.g., 5 meters × 4 equals 20 meters).
Problem Solving:
Translating real-world situations into multiplication and division expressions.
Identifying the operation (multiplication or division) needed to solve a specific problem.
Multiplication as Repeated Addition:
Understanding multiplication as a shortcut for repeated addition.
Relating repeated addition to equal groups and arrays.
Division as Sharing into Equal Groups:
Understanding division as a way to share a quantity into equal groups.
Relating division to the concept of fair sharing.
Application of Inverse Operations:
Understanding the inverse relationship between multiplication and division.
Using multiplication to solve division problems and vice versa.
Multi-Step Problem Solving:
Solving multi-step word problems that involve both multiplication and division.
Sequencing steps logically to arrive at a solution.
Estimation Skills:
Estimating products and quotients to check the reasonableness of answers.
Using estimation as a tool for problem-solving.
Mathematical Vocabulary:
Developing and using mathematical vocabulary related to multiplication and division (e.g., product, quotient, factor).
Representation Skills:
Representing multiplication and division problems using models, drawings, or equations.
Interpreting different representations of multiplication and division in word problems.
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the
curriculum)
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the discretion of the Team Leads
and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Operation with number ELO O2.3
Introduction to the Subject: Identifies purpose and goals of the subject area with links to the Vision and the Essential Education Competencies.
Strand (Topic): Identify as a Strand which may have sub-component that will be reflected in the Specific Curriculum Outcomes
Essential Learning Outcomes: O2.3 Multiplicative Thinking-Make Reasonable Estimation When Using the Four Basic Operations
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Solve word problems using the four basic operations.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1. Solve a variety of word problems involving SCO1 & 2 SCO1 & 2
addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division
within a given context. Open-Ended Questions: Strategy : Problem Solving
2. Interpret word problems, identify the Strategy: Allow students to explain their reasoning. Problem: Jack has 35 marbles. He wants to share them
operations required to solve them, and apply the equally among 7 friends. How many marbles will each
appropriate mathematical processes. friend get? Student this problem using two different
strategy.
3. Represent word problems using equations Example: "Tom has 35 marbles. He wants to
with a variable to denote the unknown quantity. distribute them equally into 5 bags. Describe how you Solution: 35÷7=5
would solve this problem and find the number of marbles
4. Assess the reasonableness of their answers in each bag." Answer: Each friend will get 5 marbles.
using mental computation.
SCO3
5. Use estimation strategies, including rounding,
to check the reasonableness of their answers. Peer Teaching and Collaboration:
6. Apply the four operations to solve multi-step Strategy: Promote collaboration and peer teaching.
word problems.
https://www.nagwa.com/en/videos/340104907542/
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Assessment Activity: Assign pairs of students to SCO3
work together. One student creates a word problem, and
the other represents it with an equation. They then switch Peer Collaboration and Discussion:
roles, providing an opportunity for collaboration and
understanding. For example Strategy: Encourage peer collaboration.
Activity: Assign pairs or small groups of students to
"If there are 5 boxes, and each box has x apples, how
many apples in total?" Students can draw five boxes with discuss and represent word problems together. This allows
an 'x' inside each. for collaborative learning and the exchange of different
perspectives.
SCO4 and 5
"In a zoo, there are 6 cages, and each cage has x monkeys.
Estimation by rounding How many monkeys in total?"
Example: Estimate the answer to the problem "There 6 x x=total monkeys
are 37 students in a class. If each student gets 8 pieces of
paper, how many pieces of paper are needed?" by rounding SCO4 AND 5
37 to 40 and 8 to 10.
Estimation by rounding off
Open-Ended Estimation Questions:
Strategy: Use open-ended questions to assess estimation
skills.
Assessment Activity: Pose questions that require
students to estimate and explain their reasoning. For
instance, "Estimate the total cost of three items priced at
$8.75, $6.50, and $4.25. Explain how you rounded to
make your estimate."
https://www.math-only-math.com/estimating-a-sum.html
SCO6
For example, let us estimate the following sums:
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Multi-Step problem 47 + 32
Example: Solve the multi-step problem "A store sells bags We need to round the number to the nearest 10.
of oranges for $5 each. If Sarah buys 3 bags and pays 47 → 50
with a $20 bill, how much change should she receive?" 32 → 30
50 + 30 = 80
Real-Life Scenario Projects:
SCO6
Strategy: Engage students in real-life scenario projects.
Real-Life Context Exploration:
Assessment Activity: Assign a project where students
need to solve multi-step word problems related to everyday Strategy: Explore various real-life contexts.
situations. For example, planning a party or organizing a
school event involves multiple steps that require different Implementation: Introduce multi-step word problems
operations. in different real-life contexts, exposing students to diverse
scenarios. This can include financial situations, scientific
experiments, or daily activities, allowing for a broad
understanding of problem-solving applications.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.math-
salamanders.com/multiplication-word-problem-
worksheets.html
Additional Resources and Materials
(Additional material and resources that are not included in the Inclusive Learning and/or Inclusive Assessment Strategies that may be useful for lesson planning )
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher such as reading material at a
lower or higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the
curriculum)
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the discretion of the Team Leads
and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Geometric Thinking ELO G1.1
Introduction to the Subject: At this level, the experiences of pupils will be broadened to include knowledge of other geometric concepts, such
as line segments, lines of symmetry, and congruent shapes whilst they continue to expand their description and sorting criteria or plane shapes
(2-D shapes/ polygons). Pupils will also identify, name, classify, compare and describe basic solids (3-D) shapes in terms of their features: faces,
edges and vertices. Pupils will be able to construct nets of 3-D shapes and deconstruct these nets to recognize the 2-D shape(s) within. The
skills of describing, observing, extending, and creating geometric patterns using precise language to communicate knowledge about position,
direction and location are fostered.
Taken From (2017 OECS PRIMARY GRADES’ LEARNING STANDARDS FOR MATHEMATICS)
Strand (Topic): Geometrical Thinking
Essential Learning Outcomes: GT: 1.1
Explore and Analyze Geometric shapes and Relationships-Developing a spatial sense.
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
● Explore and analyse 2D and 3D shapes in developing spatial reasoning
● Identify 2D shapes within 3D shapes
● Recognize 3D shapes within the environment and make predictions based oon3D shapes used prior to building models
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to: Colour Activity (Product assessment) Students will be guided into developing a
(SCO 1, 2 & 3) spatial sense of the world regarding 2- 2-
dimensional (2D) and 3-dimensional (3D)
Knowledge Students are given the following worksheet. shapes.
1. find 2D shapes or paths hidden in a
picture or space (2D within 3D Discovery learning (Concrete) - Use of
solids); Household items (outcomes 1 & 2)
2. recognize a shape or object seen
from various points of view and
various distances (2D shapes in Students and teachers can collect household
various positions in space); items and bring them to class. With guidance
3. describe a picture or object in real- from the teacher, students will:
world contexts using 2D shapes; ● observe the properties of each;
4. use positional language ● manipulate the household items by
(prepositions) such as over, under, stacking, rolling, etc. Pupils can put
beside, or beneath to identify 2D objects to stand and draw around the
shapes in a picture. bases to identify the shapes.
● use specific geometric-related language
Skills and gestures to describe what they see
(round ball, straight edges) and feel
5. use language and gestures that (pointy corners, etc.) and
describe 2D shapes, objects, and ● sort the different items according to
space orally and their shape.
6. draw a picture given a description Retrieved from
of a 2-D shape https://www.teacherspayteachers.com/Product/S A row of desks or containers can be
7. Build a model from a picture or hapes-SMART-BOARD-Game-197046 labelled (with cylinder, sphere, cube, etc.)
description of 3D objects in a and used to place the different household
picture of a real-world context. items in for sorting. Different items can be
- Pringles can
Checklist - Tennis Ball
- Soccer ball
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners can identify all the 2D shapes correctly - Marble
by colour-coding them. - Mac and cheese boxes
- Matchbox
Knowledge This activity allows students to complete a calm
- Tin cans
8. Make predictions based on spatial and fun activity while assessing students’
- Rubik’s cube
reasoning about what 2D shapes knowledge of 2D shapes. It checks for some
- Dice
can be created by the footprints of misconceptions and/or misunderstandings that
- Party hat
3D solids and predict what shape is may surround 2D shapes, such as size, orientation,
- Cones
being described prior to building a or position, which are not defining attributes, that
Seeing the visuals will help students
model. squares are rectangles.
discover and understand that colour, size,
and orientation are non-defining attributes.
Values: ‘Mystery Shape’ Activity (Observation
Assessment) (outcomes 5 & 6)
9. appreciate the concept of 3D
objects in the environment by Teacher prepares an opaque bag and places
describing objects in the different mini 3D objects in it..
environment in terms of 3-D Students are given the name of a specific shape
shapes and are asked to close their eyes to retrieve that
shape by feeling around the bag. Once they
Retrieved from:
10. relate the concept of a 2D shape believe they have found it, they pull the shape out
within a 3D objects and say why they selected that shape. They are
http://www.thehappyteacher.co/2021/03/
expected to state properties in their reasoning and
3-activities-for-teaching-3d-shapes.html
identify the 2D faces within the objects.
For example, I selected this shape for the cylinder
Following the previous activity (not
because it has a curved face, 2 flat faces, and no
necessarily the same day or same lesson),
sharp edges/vertices. The flat faces are circles.
students complete an activity as a whole
class or individually.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
(SCO 2)
Images and names of different 3D shapes
(headings) and images of some of the same
household items will be needed. The
teacher places the images in 3D with their
names on the board. Each student is given
an image of a household item and is
required to place the image under the
correct category and say why.
Retrieved from:
http://www.thehappyteacher.co/2021/03/3-
activities-for-teaching-3d-shapes.html
This same activity can be switched where the
teacher puts their hand into the mystery shape Retrieved from
bag, and students draw the faces of the shape that https://images.google.com/
h90pe/she is feeling using its attributes.
As individual activity (outcome 3)
Checklist Similarly, students receive 2 sheets of paper.
Learner can identify at least 1 2-D shape from the One with headings and blank space
faces of items selected from the bag. underneath and another with images of
(yes/ no) household items. They are required to cut
and paste images under the correct
category.
“Scavenger hunt” for Shapes (Product
Assessment) (outcomes 1, 2 & 3)
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Each student receives a scavenger hunt sheet with This activity facilitates an essential step in
different 2D and 3D shapes. transitioning from concrete to pictorial
before including abstract.
Discovery through play - ‘Footprints’ in
the playdough
(outcome 7)
Make ‘footprints’ from 3D shapes in play
dough to observe the 2D faces. Students
should take turns predicting what 2D shape
the different faces will make, pressing the
shape onto the play dough, and observing
the different faces produced. Discussions
should be held after each prediction and
observation pair to address
misunderstandings.
Use a variety of 3D shapes items:
Retrieved from
https://www.123homeschool4me.com/free-
printable-shape-scavenger-hunt-for-kids/
Students will look at their surroundings and find
items corresponding to the grid's shapes. Students
should write the name of the item that matches
each shape as they go.
Checklist
● Learners complete the entire sheet (yes/
no)
● Learners complete an entire row or
column
(yes/ no)
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
“3D Robot Model” (Product Assessment) https://byjus.com/us/math/combining-
(SCO 7) and-taking-apart-3d-shapes/
Students are asked to draw and construct a robot
using 2D and 3D shapes given parameters. Discovery - Building 3-D models
(outcome 7)
Using playdough and skewers or
toothpicks, allow students to attempt to
construct some 3D shapes and identify the
2D face.
Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&
v=qn4nDHa_ENY
Checklist
The robot must include at least 4 different 2D and
3 different 3D shapes. However, they can be used
more than once.
Retrieved from:
“What am I drawing?” (Product Assessment)
https://childhood101.com/hands-on-
(SCO 8)
activities-for-learning-about-2d-3d-shapes/
Students are each given a blank sheet of paper, a
ruler and a pencil. Teacher reads out a list of
This activity can be modified to include
directions, pausing between each to give students
other round shapes with pipe cleaners.
time to complete them. Instructions should be
specific, providing direction, position, etc.
Measurements are not necessary. For example,
1. First, draw a small triangle in the middle of
your paper, with one point at the bottom and the
base at the top.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. Second, draw three horizontal lines below
your triangle.
3. Then, draw one short vertical line below
your triangle. It must touch the bottom of your
triangle and go through the middle of your three
horizontal lines.
4. Next, above your triangle, draw two circles
that are the same size – one on the upper left side
and one on the upper right side.
5. After that, draw a smaller circle inside each
of these circles.
6. Shade each of the smaller circles.
7. Draw a circle around everything.
8. Lastly, draw two triangles on the big circle -
one must be on the upper right side and the other
on the upper left side. The bottom of the triangles
must touch the big circle.
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
What does your drawing look like?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Checklist
● Learner produced image with all shapes
shown
(yes/ no)
● Learner is able to describe the image as a
cat face
(yes/ no)
● Leaner produced an image with at least
four shapes
(yes/ no)
Think, Pair, Share (SCO 8)
Allow students to exchange their drawings with a
neighbour and compare their drawings. They are
expected to observe both drawings and look for
similarities as well as differences.
After they have compared, allow some pairs to
share the differences and similarities with the rest
of the class. The remainder of the class is
responsible for comparing both drawings to the
directions given by the teacher. This is done with
guidance from the teacher.
Now it’s the students’ turn to give the directions.
They can work in small groups or individually.
Teacher gives each group or each student one
image. Students are expected to construct a set of
directions that could be used to draw that image
successfully. The level of complexity comes with
the image given. i.e. a lower achieving group gets a
less complex image, such as:
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Checklist
Learners are able to identify at least 2 similarities
and 1 difference between the drawings.
(yes/ no)
For higher achievers:
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Each group receives a different image. One group
of a similar ability has to attempt drawing the
image of another group using only their
instructions. This will help each group refine their
instructions and adjust them as needed.
This activity can be enhanced for older students
by including measurements (2 cm line), phrases
like parallel and perpendicular lines, 3D shapes,
types of triangles, angles, etc.
This activity forces students to engage in reflective
thinking as well as metacognition. Students reflect
not only on their work but also on the instructions
given. It provides the opportunity for them to
identify and correct their errors as well as errors
made by other students. This activity also aids
with comprehension, ordinal adverbs (first,
second, etc.)_ and transitional words (then, next,
finally, etc.)
Additional Resources and Materials
cereal boxes, matchboxes, plain and coloured paper
(teachers will use discretion in viewing part or full-length videos based on need)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
2- D shapes/ 2 dimensional shapes:
https://byjus.com
For teacher:
In Mathematics, 2D shapes can be defined as plane figures that can be drawn on a flat (or plane) surface or a piece of paper. All the 2d shapes
have various parameters such as area and perimeter. Some 2d shapes contain sides and corners, whereas some have curved boundaries.
The basic types of 2d shapes are a circle, triangle, square, rectangle, pentagon, quadrilateral, hexagon, octagon, etc. Apart from the circle, all the
shapes are considered polygons with sides. A polygon with all sides and angles equal is called a regular polygon. Including the circle, an ellipse is
also a non-polygon shape. Both circles and ellipses are curved, whereas polygons have a closed structure with sides.
Polygons:
A polygon is a two-dimensional geometric figure with a finite number of sides. The sides of a polygon are made of straight line segments
connected to each other end to end. Thus, the line segments of a polygon are called sides or edges. The point where two line segments meet is
called a vertex or corner, and an angle is formed. An example of a polygon is a triangle with three sides. A circle is also a plane figure, but it is
not considered a polygon because it is a curved shape and does not have sides or angles. Therefore, we can say that all the polygons are 2d
shapes, but not all the two-dimensional figures are polygons.
A Polygon is a closed figure comprising line segments (not curves) in a two-dimensional plane. A polygon is the combination of two words, i.e.
poly (means many) and gon (means sides).
3-D shapes:
In geometry, 3D shapes are solid shapes or figures that have three dimensions. Generally, length, width, and height are the dimensions of 3D
(three-dimensional) shapes. The common names of these shapes are cube, cuboid, cone, cylinder and sphere. 3D shapes are defined by their
respective properties, such as edges, faces, vertices, curved surfaces, lateral surfaces and volume.
Positional language:
Positional language words refer to where things are positioned or where they appear about other things.
Understanding position in space and how things are relative to each other is part of a child’s visual perception and cognitive development.
For students
2D Shapes Names
1. Circle - a closed-dimensional (2D) shape with a curved line with no corners or edges.
2. Triangle - a 2-dimensional shape with three sides and three vertices (corners).
3. Square- a 2-dimensional shape with four equal sides, and each angle is equal to 90˚
4. Rectangle- a 2D shape with four sides in which the opposite sides are equal and parallel, and all four angles measure 90˚
5. Pentagon- a 2D shape with five sides
6. Octagon - a 2D shape with eight sides
Retrieved from https://www.cuemath.com/geometry/2d-shapes/
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
-measuring 2D and 3D shapes
-finding missing shapes in sequences
- geometric construction
-sketching for problem-solving
-drawing the next term in a sequence or pattern
-tessellations
-attributes of shapes
-building, stacking and organizing of objects
-comparing and describing objects as well as developing their understanding of tessellations.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, and Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research)
Geometric Thinking ELO G1.2
Introduction to the Subject:
Strand (Topic): Geometric Thinking
Essential Learning Outcomes:
GT 1.2: Explore and analyze Geometric Shapes and Relationships: Sorting, patterning and building 2D and 3D Shapes
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
Recognize, name and construct 2D and 3D objects, as well as compare and sort them based on their characteristics or attributes. They are to build models from
pictures or descriptions of shapes and create patterns using them.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners will be expected to: Observation (SCO 1) Guides students into comparing the
attributes of 2-D and 3-D shapes
2-D shapes Identification of objects that look like shapes
Have students go around the school and make a list Conceptual Understanding - Pictorial
Knowledge of objects that may look like shapes (2-D on diagrams (SCO 1)
or the faces of 3-D objects). Provide students with pictures of musical
1. Identify given shapes as 2-D (3-D, e.g. clock (cylindrical), chalkboard (cuboid), instruments(they will recognize them as
or 3-D globe ( spherical), juice bottle( cylindrical). being instruments from jing ping bands that
2. Compare the characteristics of Have students present their list to the class normally accompany the folk dancers
2-D shapes (number of sides,
congruent sides, number of Checklist (Teacher will use instruments relevant to
corners, reflective symmetry, Students can identify at least three 2-D shapes and culture )
rotational symmetry) three 3-D shapes (yes /no)
3. List shapes that are Have them identify the shapes each
representative of 2-D shapes instrument best looks like (2-D faces and 3-
4. Identify 2D shapes in patterns Naming and sorting of shapes (Product Activity) D shapes)
(outcomes 3, 6,10) Have them say if any instruments do not
3-D Shapes look like any of the shapes discussed in the
5. compare the characteristics of Students are to name the shapes and place them lesson.
3-D shapes (number of edges, where they belong.
number of vertices, shape and
number of faces, congruent
faces)
6. list objects that are
representative of either 3-D
shapes
7. identify 3-D shapes in patterns
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Skills
8. construct models of shapes
based on given descriptions or
from a picture
9. Construct patterns using
shapes
10. Sort 2D or 3D shapes based
on attributes and
characteristics
Values
Retrieved from
Retrieved from
https://www.mathworksheets4kids.com/solid-
11. acknowledge shapes by https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=htt
shapes/compare-2d-3d-shapes/color/basic-shapes-
differentiating between 2D ps%3A%2F%2Fwww.domnitjen.com%2Far
preview.png
and 3D shapes (objects) in ticles%2Fleisure%2Flison-
their environment. kweyol%2Fjingping.html&psig=AOvVaw1J
Checklist
NNJVRYgAjAjMqvMrlZwJ&ust=16980119
Learners are able to complete the worksheet
12. value the part shapes play in 49557000&source=images&cd=vfe&opi=8
(yes/ no)
infrastructure by building 9978449&ved=0CBEQjhxqFwoTCLDJh6u
models using varied shapes. QiIIDFQAAAAAdAAAAABAD
Learners are able to identify correctly at least two 2-D
shapes and two 3-D shapes (yes/ no)
Discovery Learning (SCO 4 and 9)
Meaningful learning - Drawing (SCO 5)
Students will use tangram puzzles to arrange the
shapes to make a pattern. Students will share their
creations with peers.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Students will be asked to draw their
favourite 3D shape and discuss its
attributes ( edges, faces and vertices)
A worksheet will be filled with the
information.
Retrieved from
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/75245305022820810
5/
Checklist
Learners can create puzzles with at least three 2-D
shapes.
Game Activity (SCO)
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Mysterious Musical Shape Box
2-D and 3D Shapes and their attributes
Students will pass a wrapped box around while music
plays. When the music stops, the pupil who is holding
the box will unwrap the paper, and a tag will be there
with the name of a 3D shape written on it. The
student is to give an example of the shape and list the
Discovery Creating Models (SCO 8)
attributes. This continues until the last paper is
unwrapped, and the student discovers the mystery
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
object inside the box and says what shape it most Students will be given sticks and play dough
looks like. and be asked to create a model of a given
shape using them.
Checklist
● Learners can given an example of one 2-D
shape and one 3-D shape from the
environment (yes/ no)
● Learners can list at least one attribute of a cone
specific 2-D shape and one attribute of a
specific 3-D shape (yes/ no)
cylinder
Talking Circles (SCO 5)
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
While sitting in a circle and taking turns, have
students discuss the information from previous
lessons related to the following terms: faces, vertices,
Meaningful learning - Discussion (SCO
vertex, and edges.
5&6)
Checklist
Students will be asked to pick one shape
from a bag and discuss whether it can be
Learners can define, using examples, each of the
stacked, rolled, etc.
attributes listed. For example, learners can pick a
shape of their choice within the classroom or one
Sample Questions:
brought from home. Using the object, learners will
What shape does this object have?
identify the edges or faces, etc.
Can it roll or stack?
Each learner must outline at least 2 attributes.
Are there similar shapes in the classroom?
Does it look like any other shape, you
know?
Think, Pair Share (SCO 5)
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Groups will be asked to select six shapes from a set
and fill in a table to answer questions based on them. Discovery - Building Models (SCO )
Each group will share the information from their Students will be given 4 cubes and asked to
worksheet, use them to make the given models.
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Students will then be given four other
shapes, such as a cone or sphere, and asked
to attempt to create a model as with the
cubes. Have students discuss.
Sample questions:
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/ How would you describe the new shape?
Is it still a cube?
How many edges does the new shape have?
Checklist
● Learners can accurately complete worksheets
(yes/ no)
● Learners can accurately complete at least one
column (yes/ no)
● Learners can accurately complete one row
(yes/ no)
Exit Ticket (SCO 11 & 12)
Helps with understanding the uses of shapes based on their
characteristics
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Use this……, not that.
Students will be asked to think about a given problem
and select the best shape that would solve it.
e.g. Johnny wants to use an object for the wheel of
the toy car he is making. Which object should his
tyres most look like?
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Checklist
Learner identifies a suitable shape (yes/ no)
Exit Ticket (alternative) (SCO 8 & 11)
The odd one out
Distribute cards with a set of shapes and have
students identify the odd one.
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Students will be given sticks and clay dots and be
asked to use the materials to create a shape based on a
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
given description. (Students can be given paper and
asked to draw). E.g.
A shoebox looks like me. I am a solid shape with two
long sides and two short sides. (cuboid)
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
There are lots of me in Egypt. I have a point at the
top. My base is never round. (pyramid)
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Students will go around watching the construction or
drawing of their peers and discuss their shapes.
Checklist
Learner creates shape accurately based on description
(yes/ no)
Additional Resources and Materials
Videos
Riddles on 2D Shapes
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6i7_MRDwURg
3D Shapes Song
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZnZYK83utu0
2D vs 3D Shape - How to differentiate between the two
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gk_u1xr7jQg
Faces, Vertices and Edges
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JYtZK0ruxJQ
Interactive Games
2D Shapes
https://www.education.com/games/2d-shapes/
Matching 3D Shapes
https://www.abcya.com/games/shape_matchhttps://www.abcya.com/games/shape_match
Interactive Worksheets
https://www.liveworksheets.com/worksheets?keys=2d+and+3d+shapes+&age=
(teachers will use discretion in viewing part or full-length videos based on need)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Sorting and patterning are two skills typically taught very early. From sorting toys as children clean up from centers to practicing patterns during calendar time, children are
exposed to sorting and patterning in many natural ways. However, some kids do not pick up on those skills as easily as others.
Retrieved from https://thekindergartenconnection.com/secrets-developing-sorting-patterning-skills/
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
-identifying patterns using shapes
-building, stacking and organizing of objects
-finding the perimeter of shapes
-analyzing statistical data involving 2D and 3d shapes
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, and Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Geometric Thinking ELO G 2.1
Introduction to the Subject:
Strand (Topic): Geometric Thinking
Essential Learning Outcomes GT: 2.1: Recognizing, naming and Describing Shapes- Analysing and Describing Shapes
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
● recognize, describe and justify attributes and characteristics of prisms and pyramids according to their bases, faces, edges and vertices or combining to a point;
● to recognize, sort and describe regular and irregular polygons according to the number of vertices and sides
● describe and identify congruent sides of polygons
● to identify lines of symmetry in 2-D shapes by folding
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Students will be expected to: Entrance Product Slip (outcome 1) Guide students into describing
Students are given a variety of shapes, as seen attributes and characteristics of 2-D
Knowledge below, to manipulate and have random discussions. and 3-D shapes.
1. describe attributes and characteristics
of 3-D shapes (prisms and pyramids) The learners will:
according to their bases, faces, edges Conceptual Understanding - Sorting
and vertices (outcome 1)
2. classify polygons that are regular and Sort the shapes in these three categories
irregular a. has a pointy tip
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/ b. can roll
3. identifying and describing polygons c. has a flat base
according to the number of sides and Checklist
vertices Learners can state at least two similarities and at
least two differences among them.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4. differentiate between similar and
congruent objects
Think and Share (SCO 1 & 7)
Skills
5. create lines of symmetry in 2-D
shapes by folding
6. match congruent 3-D shapes
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Values
Retrieved from
7. Students will develop a greater
Shapes, as shown above, will be given to students. https://images.google.com/
awareness of prisms and pyramids in
Students will think of two differences and share
the environment by describing their
them with the class. The teacher records it.
attributes.
Checklist Conceptual learning - Describing
Learners shared at least 2 differences (yes/ no) Attributes (outcome 1)
Copy and complete the table below.
Group Work/ Observation (SCO 1 & 7)
Students are given a set of pop sticks and
playdough. The students will use the resources
provided to create the shapes seen in the diagram.
Retrieved from
https://images.google.com/
Retrieved from: https://upperglanmirens.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2021/02/Making-3D-shapes.pdf
Students will
1. Count the amount of playdough pieces
needed to join the pop sticks and record it.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. Count and record the number of pop sticks
required to create the above diagram Conceptual Understanding -
3. Discuss with the teacher the number of cut- Concrete (outcome 1)
outs it would require to cover the shape Use the diagram created as shown
below, to define, in their own words,
the terms face, edge and vertices/corner
Checklist of a 3-D shape.
● Learner successfully counted the number of
vertices (play dough pieces for at least 1
shape) (yes/ no)
● Learner stated the correct number of
cutouts required to cover the shape
Retrieved from:
(yes/ no)
https://upperglanmirens.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2021/02/Making-3D-
shapes.pdf
Discovery Learning
(SCO 1 & 7)
Using a variety of resources such as pipe cleaners,
straws, pop sticks and glue, students will create a
variety of shapes and write a sentence or two about
the shapes they created.
Checklist
Learner writes at least one sentence describing the
shape created (yes/ no)
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Conceptual Understanding -
Classifying shapes (SCO 2)
Determine whether the shape is a
Discussion (SCO 2) regular or irregular polygon.
The shapes on the left are considered to be regular,
and those on the right are said to be irregular.
Students will spend two minutes looking at the
shapes and then discuss their thoughts on why
some are considered irregular and others regular
with the teacher.
Checklist Retrieved from
https://images.google.com/
Learners can state at least one difference between
the regular and irregular polygons (yes/ no)
Game/Role play (outcome 3)
Students will be engaged in a game called “Check
my sides.”
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Teacher presents a polygon to the students, and Conceptual Understanding -
they will check the number sides. Identifying polygons (SCO 3)
Students’ response will be “You have ______sides.”
The teacher then says, “I bet you don’t know my Copy and complete the worksheet.
name.
Students have the opportunity to respond.
The teacher will highlight those who are right by
saying: “you are right; my name is ________.
The teacher continues and awaits students’
responses:
“Can you see and count my corners?”
“Is there another name for my
corners?”
As a culminating lesson, students will lead the game
rather than the teacher.
Checklist
Learner can accurately determine the number of
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
sides (yes/ no)
Meaningful learning - Describing
Leaner can accurately name the corresponding
polygons (outcome 3)
shape (yes/ no)
Create a booklet. On each page, a
different shape should be drawn, stating
its name and number of sides. They can
Think, Pair and Share (SCO 5)
also create various booklets; each one in
the actual shape. On each page, they put
a different attribute. So, instead of one
booklet, they actually have booklets
with the actual shape.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
In groups of twos, each student is given a shape to
fold in half so that both sides look the same.
Students will look at their partner folding and share
with the teacher.
*One shape will have lines of symmetry, and the
other will not.
Checklist
Learner successfully folds the heart shape to show Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
lines of symmetry (yes/ no)
Conceptual Understanding Listen
Observation/Discussion and sing along (SCO 5)
(SCO 4 & 6) listen to the video on lines of symmetry,
Students will be involved in probing discussions then state two things you learnt from
that will lead to understanding congruence. the video
Can you spot the differences? Symmetry for Kids | Lines of
Symmetry | Symmetry in Real-life
Objects
Symmetry Song for Kids | A Day at
Symmetry Land | Lines of Symmetry
Can you spot any differences?
Are these the same?
Conceptual Understanding -
Are these the same? State why?
Drawing (outcome 5)
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Complete the drawing
Checklist
● Learner can post at least one similarity and
one difference (yes/ no)
Exit Product
Students will observe the art placed on the
chalkboard or through a projector. In the artwork,
students will seek to identify 2-D shapes, prisms,
pyramids, and congruent shapes through
constructive and well-organized discussion. Draw the lines of symmetry for each of
the diagrams on the sheet.
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Checklist
Learner can identify at least one example of each
type of shape listed (yes/ no)
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from
https://images.google.com/
Identify the shape on the right that is
congruent to the figure on the left.
Retrieved from
https://images.google.com/
Discovery - Using Tangram Puzzles
(SCO 6)
Students can be asked to create a set
and make different objects with the
pieces shown below, then answer the
following questions.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from
https://images.google.com/
1. How many triangles can you
identify?
2. Using the colours, which two
triangles are congruent
3. How many squares can you
identify?
4. What animal does the shape
resemble?
5. Can you draw another animal
using shapes?
Additional Resources and Materials
● pipe cleaners
● construction paper
● 3-D shapes
● worksheets
● glue
(teachers will use discretion in viewing part or full-length videos based on need)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Congruent- Shapes that are exactly the same shape and size
Polygons- 2-Dimensional shapes
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
-identifying patterns using shapes
-finding the area and perimeter of regular and irregular shapes
-analyzing statistical data involving 2D and 3d shapes
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, and Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Geometric Thinking ELO G2.2
Introduction to the Subject:
Strand (Topic): Geometric thinking
Essential Learning Outcomes: GT: 2.2 Recognizing, Naming and Describing Shapes - Naming 2-D and 3-D Shapes
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Recognize, Describe, and compare attributes and characteristics of prisms and
pyramids, namely triangular, rectangular, square, pentagonal and hexagonal. To build specific prisms and pyramids from nets and to construct 2-
D shapes.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Entrance Slip (outcome 1) :
Students will be expected to: Students will spend a minute looking at the
activity pyramid and discuss the activities they Guide students into comparing attributes
Knowledge are involved in with the teacher. of varied prisms and pyramids.
1. identify prisms and pyramids
(namely triangular, rectangular, Working with Pyramids (outcome 1)
square, pentagonal, and
hexagonal) The learners will:
Construct a pyramid activity chart that depicts
2. identify different structures their daily activities as shown below
with the shape of prisms and
pyramids.
3. describe and compare the
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
attributes of prisms and
pyramids (namely triangular,
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
rectangular, square, pentagonal,
and hexagonal)
Checklist
Skills ● Learner can describe at least one
activity. (yes/ no)
4. create prisms and pyramids ● Learner can include at least one 3-D
using simple resources shape in describing an activity (yes/
no)
5. build specific prism and Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
pyramids from nets (namely
triangular, rectangular, square, Conceptual understanding - Identifying
pentagonal, and hexagonal) Movie Time (outcomes 1 & 3) prisms and pyramids (Outcomes 1&2)
Students will look at the video presented and 1. State whether the shape is a prism or a
6. construct pyramids and prisms discuss with the teacher the difference between pyramid
using 2-D shapes (nets) prisms and pyramids, as highlighted in the
video.
7. construct polygons using 3 to Prisms and Pyramids | Grade 3 & 4 Math |
ten lines to build nets. TutWay
8. Name 2-D shapes (faces used Checklist
in the nets of prisms and
pyramids ● Learner is able to state at least one
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
difference between prisms and
9. construct patterns using 2-D pyramids
2. Complete the assigned quiz
shapes
https://quizizz.com/admin/quiz/5b2c25a4f0c
91c00198b98b0/identifying-prisms-and-
10. build and create diagrams with
pyramids
different 3-D shapes Discussion (outcomes 1, 2 & 3)
Students will look at the shape below and
discuss with the teacher what are the
similarities and differences.
Describing prisms and pyramids (outcome
Values
3)
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
11. accept the existence of prisms Use the diagram created as shown below, to
and pyramids by identifying count the number of faces, edges and
and building models vertices/corners of the prism and the pyramid.
Retrieved from:
https://upperglanmirens.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2021/02/Making-3D-
shapes.pdf
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/ Discovery - Identifying prisms and
pyramids in the environment (SCO 3 & 11)
Checklist
Observe the diagram and identify what
Learner can state at least 1 similarity and one type of shape it is and justify their answer
difference (yes/ no)
Observation (SCO 1, 2 & 11)
Items are placed in a box, and each student is
asked to dip one. Students will name their
object, use it, and discuss with teachers if the
object they possess is a pyramid or a prism.
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Discovery - Identifying prisms and
pyramids in the environment (outcome 11)
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Circle all the pyramids in the diagram and draw
a square around the prism.
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Checklist
Learner can identify at least one example of a Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
prism and one example of a pyramid (yes/
no) Matching nets to 3D shapes (outcome 8)
Write the name of the shape under their nets.
Field trip (SCO 11) There is one extra shape without a net.
Students are taken to the playground where
they will identify different prism and pyramids
used to construct the playground
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Checklist
Learner can identify at least one example of a
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
prism and one example of a pyramid
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Discovery learning (SCO 10)
Think and share (SCO 1, 5, 6, 7 & 8) 1. Use the materials provided, such as
popsticks, to create a prism or a
pyramid using any of the following 2-D
shapes below.
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Students will name the 2-D shapes in the
diagram. Students will then think of the shape
that this diagram can make and then share it
with the class.
Checklist
Learner can state the total number of edges
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
and vertices
Learner can name the shape that can be made
from a diagram
2. Using the video as a guide
3D shapes with clay I clay modelling for kids.
Construct a cardboard house with either a
Group work - Product (SCO 5, 6 & 8)
pyramid roof or a prism roof
Teacher will pair students. Each pair will be
given nets of either a pyramid or a prism in
which they will build the shape. At the end of
the lesson, students will present their shape by
name and state whether it is a prism or
pyramid.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Checklist
Learners successfully produce either a prism or
pyramid.
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Group work - Product
How To Make Beautiful House With
Cardboard And Cement | How to make
(SCO 4,5,6,10)
Cardboard House | Cardboard House
In groups of four, the teacher will assign
students the task of building a pyramid or a
prism. Students will first sketch 2-D shapes
(nets) needed to build a prism or pyramid.
Using popsticks or other similar materials,
students will then use the nets to create an
actual pyramid or a prism.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Checklist
Learners successfully sketched nets or
constructed
Exit Slip (SCO 1, 2, 3 & 11)
Students will look at homes from different
Caribbean descendants and discuss whether
the roofs have a pyramid shape, a prism shape,
or both.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Amerindians
Slave Quarters
Plantation Masters
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Checklist
Learners can identify the shape of at least ⅔ of
the roofs above (yes/ no)
Additional Resources and Materials
● glue
● clay
● pipe cleaners
● cardboard
● colours
(teachers will use discretion in viewing part or full-length videos based on need)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Pyramids have a polygonal base and flat triangular faces, which join at a common point called the apex. A pyramid is formed by connecting the bases to an apex.
A prism is a solid shape that is bound on all its sides by plane faces. There are two types of faces in a prism. The top and bottom faces are identical and are called bases. A
prism is named after the shape of these bases. For example, if a prism has a triangular base it is called a triangular prism.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
-completing patterns involving prisms and pyramids
-identifying 2D shapes
-analysing statistical data involving prisms and pyramids
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research)
Geometric Thinking ELO G2.3
Introduction to the Subject:
Strand (Topic): Geometric Thinking
Essential Learning Outcomes GT: 2.3: Recognizing, naming and Describing Shapes- describing relationships between and among
shapes
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Recognize, describe, and compare attributes and characteristics of prisms and
pyramids (faces, edges, vertices, or coming to a point)
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Students will be expected to:
Entrance Slip Guide students into describing
Knowledge Students will look at the shape below and relationships between prisms and
discuss with teacher the following: pyramids
1. identify the face, edges, 1. What is it?
vertices of prisms and 2. What can it be used for?
pyramids 3. Do you use it at home? The learners will:
Other general questions pertaining to just the
2. recognize patterns involving object and not its attributes Conceptual Understanding (outcome 1)
the attributes and 1. Use math boxes from home, students
characteristics of prism and will look at the box and observe the
pyramids different dimensions.
Sample questions: Does it have faces?
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/ How many faces can you see?
Checklist
● Learner can name objects and shape
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Skills
● Learner can outline at least 1 way it is Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
3. use cut-outs to create faces of used (yes/ no)
shapes
2. Look at the picture. Circle the vertices
4. construct objects around them Observation (outcomes 1& 2) and trace over the edges with a red
and count the number faces, crayon.
edges and vertices they Students will count the number lines on the
possess diagram below and the number of areas each
line meets.
Values
5. Students will have a greater
awareness of the intricacies in
prisms and pyramids by
comparing their attributes in
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
object and architectural
designs
Checklist
● Learner can accurately count all lines
(edges) (yes/ no)
● Leaner can accurately count all
vertices (points) (yes/ no)
Group Work - product (outcomes 3 & 4)
Meaningful learning (outcomes 2 & 5)
Analyse the diagram and discuss with the
Using construction paper, scissors and glue
teacher the quantity of tarpaulins that is
students will cover pre-made frames and state
required to cover the entire tent if one
the amount of cut-outs was required to cover
tarpaulin is allocated for each side
each side of the shape in a presentation at the
end of the class.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Checklist
Learners can accurately count the number of
cut-outs (faces) required to cover each side
(yes/ no)
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Stick the cut-outs in the correct area.
Games (outcomes 1, 2 & 5)
Conceptual Understanding (outcomes
Explore & Play with Prisms
1&2)
Students will explore the properties of four
prisms (triangular, rectangular, pentagonal,
hexagonal).
In a box students will choose two items and
discuss with each other the items they have
chosen as well as what they are used for.
Additionally, students will highlight the
numbers of faces (F), vertices (V), and edges
(E) for each prism. This activity will
encourage students to speak freely whilst
learning the characteristics.
Retrieved from
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
https://cdn.topteacher.com.au/wp-
content/uploads/2023/07/Prisms-and-
pyramids-sort-top-teacher.png
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
1. Complete the worksheet below
Checklist
Learners can identity accurately the number of
faces, vertices and edges for at least one
object (yes/ no)
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Think and Share (SCO 2)
Students will look at the information below
Think of a pattern and share with the class
Retrieved from
https://images.app.goo.gl/svgm3apgij3EhMp
D7
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Checklist 2. Listening Activity/ Video
Learner can identify at least one pattern in the Maths | 3D shapes | What are Pyramids? |
from each table Let's count the faces, edges and vertices
together~
Additional Resources and Materials
Gift box, dice, other items that can be found around the students home
(teachers will use discretion in viewing part or full-length videos based on need)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Retrieved from: https://images.app.goo.gl/7Q2RhTqFmsLmcrHr7
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
-completing patterns involving prisms and pyramids
-differentiating between prisms and pyramids
-analysing statistical data involving prisms and pyramids
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Geometric Thinking ELO G3.1
Introduction to the Subject:
Strand (Topic): Geometric Thinking
Essential Learning Outcomes: GT:3.1: Composing , Decomposing and Transforming Shapes- Combining Shapes
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Students should be able to construct objects by building skeletons of specific prisms and pyramids
(triangular, rectangular, square, pentagonal. hexagonal)as well create these from nets. Students will be able to explain what composite shapes and construct composite
3D shapes.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Knowledge Entrance Slip (SCO 1) Guide students into identify parts of
prisms and pyramids, and use them
1. recognize shapes as being Students will be shown a pyramid and prism and to combine shapes
either pyramids or prisms given two descriptions . They will be asked to match
the shape to the description Conceptual Understanding -
2. identify different types of Concrete (SCO 1 & 2)
pyramids and prisms Checklist Students will be given manipulatives of
pyramids and prisms and asked to
Skills Learner can match at least one shape to its identify those with rectangular bases,
description (yes/ no) squared bases, triangular, pentagonal,
3. utilize building skeletons of hexagonal
specific prisms and pyramids
to create objects
4. use nets to construct different
types of pyramids and prisms
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Talking Circles (SCO 2)
Values
Listen to students as they discuss what they learnt in
5. place a greater value on the previous lessons about the triangle, square,
pyramids and prisms by using hexagon, pentagon and rectangle ( these shapes
nets. form the bases of pyramids and prisms)
6. appreciate the complexities of Checklist
prisms and pyramids by
Retrieved from
creating composite shapes. Learner can accurately describe at least one prism or
https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url
pyramid (objects can be used as examples in
=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.amazon.com
description) (yes/ no)
%2FLearning-Advantage-Folding-
GeoFigures-
Geometric%2Fdp%2FB001UG0BRA&
psig=AOvVaw2MjqT2nVcIf1IfxF0DQ
vD5&ust=1698067614128000&source
=images&cd=vfe&opi=89978449&ved
=0CBEQjhxqFwoTCOCCyNffiYIDF
QAAAAAdAAAAABAD
Conceptual Understanding -
Concrete (SCO 1 & 2)
Students will select a type of pyramid or
prism) and discuss its attributes ( base,
vertices, edges face )
Product Assessment (SCO 2)
Discovery (outcome 3)
Students will then use straws/ match
Students will be given a worksheet and asked to
sticks and clay dots to create the
name the pyramids and prisms
skeleton of the object.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Retrieved from
https://images.google.com/
Retrieved from
https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%
2Fwww.studyladder.com%2Fgames%2Factivity%2Fnaming
-prisms-and-pyramids-
4302&psig=AOvVaw2g1KvRDm1fXoRBORtsuf2B&u
st=1698006183372000&source=images&cd=vfe&opi=
89978449&ved=0CBEQjhxqFwoTCPC9-
Conceptual Understanding (SCO 3
ev6h4IDFQAAAAAdAAAAABAD
& 4))
Checklist
Students will be presented with the nets
of different types of prisms and
Learner can correctly identify at least 6/10 shapes as
pyramids.They will be asked to use
either a prism or a pyramid (yes/ no)
different crayons to trace the 2 D
shapes they see.
Product Assessment (SCO 3, 4 & 5)
Have students watch the following video which
explains the nets of prisms and pyramids
Retrieved from https://youtu.be/2MwB0XzhqRQ
Students will then be presented with cut outs of
either one type of pyramid detached.
Have students identify the shapes.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Explain to students that these shapes can be
attached together to build the net of a type of prism
or pyramid.
E.g. Retrieved from
https://www.kristakingmath.com/blog
/nets-volumes-surface-area-of-prisms
http://msroymaths7.weebly.com/surfac
e-area--nets.html
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Student volunteers will be given the opportunity to
Meaningful learning (SCO 4 & 5)
attempt to put the shape together using clay dots/
double sided dots and determine the shape
1. Students will be given card
(rectangular based pyramid)
paper and cut outs of nets .
They will be asked to trace the
Students will then be given the following worksheet
nets on the paper using a ruler
and asked to match the nets to their 3 D
to assist. They will then be given
representation. Students can fold the nets they have
safety scissors to cut out the
created to assist them.
nets they have drawn in order to
fold them ensuring they are bent
properly.
2. Have students look at the
following shape and identify it
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Ask the following question “What if I
wanted to create this shape using two
shapes, what shapes could I use ?”
Have students draw the two shapes that
could be used to create the arrow. Have
students share their answers.
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Checklist
● Learner can build prism using cut-outs Conceptual Understanding
● Learner can match each net to its respective (outcome 6)
3-D presentation
Have students watch the video
Think and Share - Product Retrieved
(SCO 4, 5 & 6) https://youtu.be/98DNidWqI6c
Constructing Composite shapes It demonstrates how some composite
shapes may be formed using different
Students will be given a die roll three times. They combinations of other shapes.
will then collect the number of cutouts /
manipulatives of different shapes based on the Allow students to draw a shape that can
number the die rolled on. They will then use these be created by putting two or more other
to construct a composite shape in their groups. shapes together.
Allow students to view the shapes created by their
peers.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
E.g.
=
Retrieved from
https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A
%2F%2Fwww.pinterest.com%2Fpin%2F45451178
7365841226%2F&psig=AOvVaw2EW0LDG6m4B
R8IsiTonZqP&ust=1698006506945000&source=im
ages&cd=vfe&opi=89978449&ved=0CBEQjhxqF
woTCNjmgoz8h4IDFQAAAAAdAAAAABAJ
Checklist
Learner constructed shape based on the results from
the die roll (yes/ no)
Exit Ticket - Product
Distribute cards to students and observe students as
they identify the composite shape formed by joining
the two shapes on them.
Checklist
Learner successfully joined the shapes to form a
composite shape (yes/ no)
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Additional Resources and Material
Video
More on the Prisms and Pyramids ( includes practice questions)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uRduESW9lk8
Interactive Games
Playing with pyramids
https://www.learner.org/wp-content/interactive/geometry/pyramids/
Playing with Prisms
https://www.learner.org/wp-content/interactive/geometry/prisms/
Composing Objects
https://www.turtlediary.com/game/compose-shapes-using-one-square-three-triangles.html
Working with Pattern Blocks
https://www.coolmath4kids.com/manipulatives/pattern-blocks
(teachers will use discretion in viewing part or full length videos based on need)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
To decompose a shape means to break it apart into other smaller (and sometimes different) shapes.
To compose a figure means to put together shapes to form the new figure.
Understanding how to compose and decompose shapes is especially important because these understandings provide the foundation for understanding other areas of
mathematics.
For students
A net is what a 3D (three-dimensional) shape would look like if it were unfolded or opened out flat.
A composite shape is a shape created from the combination of two or more 2 D basic shapes and polygons . These shapes can be referred to as compound and complex
shapes as well.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
-completing patterns involving composite shapes
-differentiating between prisms and pyramids
-analysing statistical data involving prisms, pyramids, and composite shapes
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Geometric Thinking ELO G3.2
Introduction to the Subject:
Strand (Topic): Geometrical Thinking
Essential Learning Outcomes: GT3.2 Learners will be able to compose, decompose and transform shapes - deconstructing shapes
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: By the end of the grade level students will be able to:
● deconstruct shapes into nets of specific prism and pyramids
● deconstruct nets into 2D shapes found in 3-D objects
● deconstruct objects identifying 2-D shapes that can be found in cubes, cones, cylinders, spheres , prism and pyramids through making,
footprints, shadows or slicing.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Entrance Slip (SCO 1,2,4)
Knowledge Guide students into decompose
Name the 2-D shapes on the nets of these 3-D prisms and pyramids using 2-D
1. .identify the 2-D shapes shapes. shape and nets
(faces) of prisms and pyramids
Conceptual Understanding (SCO 1
2. name 2-D shapes on 3-D nets & 2)
of prisms and pyramids Students identify, unfold, and explore
nets of cubes, rectangular prisms and
pyramids.
Meaningful learning (SCO 1 & 2)
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/ Students in groups or pairs, draw the
Learner can name all the 2-D shapes on 4/6 nets faces when seen when the nets of a 3-
D shape are opened.
Students will name the shape of faces
seen. e.g. squared faces, rectangular
Skills Product Assessment (outcome 2, 3, 5) faces
3. deconstruct shapes into nets 1. What 2-D shape(s) faces are found on each 3D
of specific prisms and shape? Draw it.
pyramids.
4. deconstruct nets into 2D
shapes found in 3-D objects
5. deconstruct objects identifying
2-D shapes that can be found
in cubes, cones, cylinders,
spheres , prism and pyramids
through making, footprints,
shadows or slicing.
2. Which 2-D shapes can be seen on the faces of
each of these 3-D shapes ?
.
Cooperative learning
Whole Class activity (outcomes 1&2)
3. Look at this (desk/tin), name at least two 2-D
shapes that can be found on it.
Students identify by numbering and
name the 2d shape(s) that are
found/seen in a given 3d shape drawn
or solid.
Cooperative learning
Whole Class activity (outcomes 1&2)
Given real life solids/3d shapes such as
matchboxes, erasers, books, things
around the classroom etc. students will
point out and describe the 2d shape
face(s) they see.
Checklist
Cooperative learning
Learner can successfully respond to at least ⅔ Whole Class activity (SCO 3 & 5)
questions above Have students deconstruct the objects
that they are able to and identify the 2d
shapes seen.
Additional Resources and Materials
https://nzmaths.co.nz/resource/2D-3D-shapes-representations
https://handsonmath.blogspot.com/2012/11/deconstructing-3d-shapes-to-2d-shapes.html
(teachers will use discretion in viewing part or full length videos based on need)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
For students
Decomposing (or decomposition) is the process of dividing a geometric figure into smaller (non-overlapping) recognizable shapes.
Composing shapes means combining two or more simple shapes to create a larger shape.
A transformation is a way of changing the size or position of a shape.
Retrieved from https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/topics/z2dqrwx/articles/zcjs97h
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
-completing patterns involving 2D shapes
-differentiating between prisms and pyramids of varied sizes
-analysing statistical data involving 2d shapes, prisms, and pyramids
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Allow students to use material in their surroundings
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Geometric Thinking ELO G3.3
Introduction to the Subject:
Strand (Topic): Geometrical Thinking
Essential Learning Outcomes: GT: 3.3 Composing, Decomposing and Transforming Shapes-Transforming Shapes
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Transform 3D objects using concrete materials(straws, pipe cleaners, toothpicks, marshmallows, etc.)
to represent prisms and pyramids
Specific Curriculum Outcome Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Knowledge
Entry activity: Matching (outcome 1)
1. recall and describe the Guide students into transforming prisms
characteristics of 2D and 3d ● given shape cards/worksheet or on and pyramids using 2-D shape and nets
shapes (prisms or pyramids). the board.(2-D and 3-D shapes)
Students match descriptions to shapes Conceptual Understanding (outcomes 1, 2
& 3)
2. identify faces which make(s) a Checklist ● Students cut along dotted lines of the
specific 3-D shape (prisms or nets of 3-D shapes to get the 2-D
pyramids) Leaner can match at least one description to shapes. Students identify which 2-D
its shape shapes it is.
● students glue on matchsticks, card
Skills paper or toothpicks to cover the cut
3. decompose/ Dissect prism outs.
and pyramids to reveal the Individual work/Observation/Product
component parts. Assessment
Specific Curriculum Outcome Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
(outcomes 3,4 & 5) ● Students are given pictures of 3-D
4. manipulate 2-D shapes and shapes and using the solidified net cut
transform into prisms and ● Each student identifies the 2-D shapes outs attempt to construct the 3d
pyramids seen in given 3-D shapes (pictures and shapes.
manipulative/solids). Students may
Values also draw what they see. Meaningful learning (outcomes 5)
5. appreciate the value of 2-D Students complete the table below
shapes (faces) in transforming Checklist
them into prisms and
Name of 3- Made up of My sketch
pyramids. Learner produces a sketch or actual prism or
D shape
pyramid using toothpicks and marshmallows
1)eg: Square 1 square face
Base and 4
Product Assessment (SCO 2 & 3)
Pyramid triangular
faces
● Students complete a worksheet.
2)
1. Four triangu;ar faces make up a
_____________ 3)
2. Six squared faces make up a
_________
3. The shape below is made up
Meaningful learning (SCO 3 & 4)
Students are directed to
a) construct a 3-D shape using cut outs
of________ faces (b) to break it up into its parts
4. What 2-Dshape (faces) make up a (c) to change/ transform it into another 3d
rectangular prism?______ shape by adding or removing parts.
5. What shape will I get if I replace
the triangul;ar face in question 4,
with a square?_________
Specific Curriculum Outcome Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Additional Resources and Materials:
sites/internet:
https://splashlearn.com
https://mathmonks.com
https://liveworksheet.com
youtube videos:
Prisms and Pyramids | Grade 3 & 4 Math | TutWay - YouTube
Identifying Prisms and Pyramids | Grade 2 & 3 | Math | 3d Shapes
At home items;( small boxes, paper cylinder( container)
Human resource
Construction specialist/engineer/carpenter
(teachers will use discretion in viewing part or full length videos based on need)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Prism:
https://www.spalshlearn.com
A prism is a solid shape/3-Dimensional that is bound on all its sides by plane faces. They are identified as prisms because the top face is flat.There are two types of faces in a
prism. The top and bottom faces are identical and are called bases. A prism is named after the shape of these bases.
For example, if a prism has a triangular base it is called a triangular prism.
Pyramid:
A pyramid is a 3-dimensional shape. It has a flat polygon base. all the other faces are triangles and are called lateral faces. the number of lateral faces equals the number of
sides of its base. The vertex is the common point where three or more of the edges meet. except for the base, all the faces connect at the vertex at the top called the Apex.
https://iCoachMath.com
Composing shapes Composing shapes means combining two or more simple shapes to create a larger shape. Simple shapes in geometry include triangles, circles, squares,
rectangles, etc. While composing shapes, you can combine any of these shapes. You can use the same or different shapes to construct a new shape.
To decompose is to separate into two or more parts. To decompose figures can mean the separation of a shape into two or more non overlapping shapes.
https://mathmonks.com
Edge: A straight line that connects any two adjacent vertices of a prism is called its edge.
Vertex: The corners of a prism where any two edges meet are called vertices.
Face: It is a closed, flat surface surrounded by vertices and edges.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics:
-measuring 2D and 3D shapes,
-finding missing shapes in sequences
-geometric construction
-Sketching for problem solving
-drawing the next term in a sequence or pattern
–tessellating
Learning about shapes and their attributes help with mathematical reasoning and assists students to help predict the building, stacking and organizing of objects.. It will help
students to be able to compare and describe objects as well to develop their understanding of tessellations.
A knowledge of shapes is the basis for understanding and developing an appreciation of architecture and engineering.
The concepts of composing and decomposing shapes can help students better understand the part-whole relationships and the concept of equivalent fractions.
The concepts of composing and decomposing shapes can help students better understand the part-whole relationships and the concept of equivalent fractions.
By learning how to compose and decompose, students will be better able to take a step-by-step approach to solve questions related to area, perimeter, and volume .
Construction of 3-d shapes from 2-d shapes, colouring. Draw, colour, and cut out 2d shapes that make special size 3d shapes.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
1. Discussions
2. Observations
3. Checklist
4. Worksheets
5. Portfolio
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Language
● Creative Writing: Students can write a shape poem . Where students write a poem inside a shape about that shape or
students write the lines of the poem at certain lengths to form the shape they are writing about
● Writing/write a paragraph describing: How to make a 3d shape(Prism or Pyramid shape) from 2d shapes……… (material)
● Free/Oral Expression..speak about your shape
● Vocabulary: words and meanings/synonyms. ( corner = vertex)
● Story telling involving shapes
● Comprehension- understanding and following directions;
● Ordinal adverbs – first, second, third, … ;
● Transitional words –next, then, after, finally, etc.
● composition : writing descriptive sentences/paragraph
● vocabulary/ sight word expansion
Art and craft: drawing, building , creating shapes with useful resources around them, observing architectural structures using 3-D shapes
Social Studies : The flags of many Caribbean Countries feature various shapes.
Various types of houses feature different shapes, discussion on pyramids and their origins, homes used by our ancestors,
observing the environment around us
Science: Instruments used for various experiments and measurements have different shapes eg. barometer , wind
sock, test tubes,beaker, funnel
VPA: Musical Instruments can be made using various 3D Shapes
Items of different shapes can be used to create craft ( toilet paper tube unicorn, a snail made from a CD), the creation of composite shapes using
basic shapes in drawing as well as constructing models using papier mache, clay, etc
e.g.
https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.yourdictionary.com%2Farticles%2Fshape-poems-kids-
examples&psig=AOvVaw0YBIkgAHEulVH1F4ky1U3m&ust=1698018453768000&source=images&cd=vfe&opi=89978449&ved=0CBE
QjhxqFwoTCIDL5d6oiIIDFQAAAAAdAAAAABAD
https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.brookside.leics.sch.uk%2Fattachments%2Fdownload.asp%3Ffile%3D
1046%26type%3Dpdf&psig=AOvVaw0YBIkgAHEulVH1F4ky1U3m&ust=1698018453768000&source=images&cd=vfe&opi=89978449&
ved=0CBEQjhxqFwoTCIDL5d6oiIIDFQAAAAAdAAAAABA
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
● Building and construction
● Manufacturing of packaging boxes, barrels etc.
● Carpentry
● Creation of local craft items using shapes
Items of Inspiration
You see, it's never the environment; it's never the events of our lives, but the meaning we attach to the events - how we interpret them - that shapes
who we are today and who we'll become tomorrow.
Tony Robbins
Love comes in all different shapes, sizes, and shades.
Tayshia Adams
Teaching is a very noble profession that shapes the character , calibre and future of an individual.-A.P.J Abdul Kalam
I have found that I could say things with colour and shapes that I couldn’t say in any other way- Things I had
no words for -Georgia O’ Keefe
Measurement Grade 3 ELO MI.1
Introduction to the Subject:
Learning is centered on the development of skills that allow students to perform tasks of estimating,comparing,measuring and recording different attributes of
measurement. Pupils first learn to measure attributes using non-standard units; then through focused discussion of differences in results obtained, pupils explain
reasons for standard units of measurement. Pupils choose appropriate instruments and units relative to the measurement of length, area, perimeter, and time. These
are fundamental concepts in mathematics.
Length, area, and perimeter are used to measure characteristics of geometric shapes. These measurements/concepts play a crucial role in everyday life and having an
understanding of these concepts are essential for problem solving involving shapes and their properties.
Time is a fundamental concept in education and involves reading and interpreting clocks, having an understanding of the measurement of a period and developing
skills in managing their time effectively. Having an understanding of time helps children make sense of their world.
Strand (Topic): Measurement
Essential Learning Outcomes:
M1.1 Understanding what and how we are measure-Developing an understanding of measurable attributes.
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
Students will be able to develop and apply language relating to the varied measurement terms, recognise their attributes and understand
the different concepts of measurement
specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Perimeter Pair Activity (SCO 1 & 2)
Knowledge Have students in pairs compare two similar Guide students into applying language
objects in the school environment in terms of relating to length, area, perimeter, and time
1. Use appropriate Vocabulary and apply height and width using non-standard units of by making comparisons.
language to the measurement of measure such as handspan, foot span, finger
Perimeter width, palms, a thread, or a rope (examples Review the concept measuring - Length
2. recognize perimeter as a measurement plants, their pencils, books shown below)
of length Allow learners to compare objects using
3. recognise perimeter as a measurement non-standard units of measure such as
attribute of plane figure handspan, foot span, finger width, palms, a
4. use language relating to measurement thread or a rope. For example students can
of area in pairs measure the length of their desktop
5. recognise area as a measurement using the handspan. Another example
attribute could have each student measure the length
6. recognize area as an attribute of plane of the classroom floor using the footspan.
figures (2D shapes) Teacher will record the measurements on
the board for comparison.
Skill:
Guide learners into recognising that The
length of an object can be found by
7. partition a rectangle into rows and
Retrieved from determining the number of units, laid end
columns of the same squares and
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/7220537527491446 to end, that make up the distance from one
count to find the total area.
86/ point to another. For example:
Checklist 1. How tall are you?
2. How far is the teacher’s desk from
● Picked two objects (1 per learner) the door?
(yes/ no) 3. How long is your shoelace or
● Used appropriate unit of length ribbon?
(yes / no)
specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Have two students stand back to back and
Whole Group activity (outcomes 3 & 4)
compare their height.
Have students identify objects (chalkboard, door,
Consider How: long/wide/high/deep/far is
plants, furniture, floor) in their immediate
it?
environment that are measurable in terms of
perimeter
Length, Width, Height, Depth, Distance
Checklist
(Refer to Additional Useful Content for more
examples)
● Learner identified at least one object. (yes/
no)
Pair Activity: (SCO 3)
Discovering Perimeter (SCO 1, 2 &3 )
Students will use a dictionary and find the meaning
Provide students with square tiles and Ask
of the terms perimeter Each pair will explain their
students to make a rectangle with their four
definitions to the rest of the class using physical
square tiles. (Some will make a 2×2 array,
objects around the classroom.
while others will make a 1×4 or 4×1).
Checklist
● Each pair successfully defined the perimeter
(yes/ no)
● Each pair used appropriate objects to explain
definition yes /no
Retrieved from https://youtu.be/e9va8MBvYR4”
Entrance Slip - Product (SCO 5,6&7)
Retrieved: https://youtu.be/e9va8MBvYR4
a) Find the number of whole squares in each
Have students walk one round around the
shape below.
classroom, playing field or school building
b) Calculate the total area of each shape below
to lead them to the concept of perimeter. It
specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
is measurement of the distance all around a
shape
Use guide questions to help students
discover the meaning of the term Perimeter,
for example, Ask students, some of your
rectangles have a perimeter of 8, but others
of you have a perimeter of 10. Why do you
think that is?” give students time to think
and discuss together and write their ideas
Retrieved from
on the board or in their books. Refine and
restate students think to lead them to define
https://mrslongs3rd.weebly.com/uploads/2/0/
perimeter as a distance around the outside
9/8/20984166/ch-19-review-p1_orig.png
of a figure.
Checklist
Have students describe measurable
attributes of objects in terms of perimeter
● Learner accurately counted all the whole
(A perimeter measurement is a length
squares in at least 2 shapes (yes/ no)
measurement). Describe several measurable
● Learner accurately calculated the area of each
attributes of a single object (length and
shape (yes/ no)
width).
Exit Slip - Product (SCO 5 & 6)
(A) Have Students use the terms
Complete the model by placing the missing perimeter in sentences of their own.
values eg. …..The perimeter of the court below is
less than the perimeter of the classroom.
Distribute grid paper and colored pencils to
each student and provide opportunities for
students to draw different shapes and find
specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
the perimeter by counting the squares on
each side. For example:
Retrieved from
https://cdn.splashmath.com/cms_assets/s/ma
th-worksheets/complete-the-area-model.jpeg
Checklist
can accurately compute total area (12 x 8)
Conceptual Understanding - Introduction to Area
● Leaner can accurately determine the
missing figures within the shape (SCO 4,5,6 & 7)
Allow students to partition rectangles into rows and Using Manipulatives
columns. (SCO 7)
Provide students with the opportunity to
create polygons using square tiles. Ask
students questions to develop the concept
of area. For example, “How many square
tiles were needed to make your rectangle?
How many square units is the area of your
shape? Engage students in a whole class
discussion about Area to coin a definition
that Area is how we measure the space
inside a figure. Explain to students that we
specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
use square units because we are measuring
more than how long something is. Use
Knowledge guided questions to help students describe
what we are measuring to find the area of a
8. use language relating to time shape. For example, we are measuring how
much surface space it takes up, and we can
9. recognise time as a measurement attribute
do that with square units.”
10. explain the meaning and use of time
11. interpret the use of time
Have learners cut out a bunch of unit
squares, which are then kept in bags.
Learners will then use these premade
squares to find the area using.
Values
1. show an appreciation for the need for
(Refer to Additional Useful Content Knowledge for
definition of Area)
measurements by using correctly
terms associated with length,
Patrioning
perimeter, area or time
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/
Let students view youtube Video on
2. value the importance of
partitioning. “ Same Size Square’
measurements by describing real-life
situations involving length, perimeter, Class discussion: (SCO 8,9,10 &11) https://youtu.be/nyKQ6GMglyA
area or time
Students talk about their experience relating to Have students cover a rectangular surface
the term “time”. with two or more different sizes of
rectangles to be used as the unit of measure
In small groups: each will develop sentences using
(e.g., recipe cards, paper, sticky notes). Ask
each of the following terms. Teacher observes each
them to place the rectangles close to each
group during discussion where a leader will report
other with no overlaps or gaps. Have them
(one sentence per term)
compare the number of each type of unit of
measure needed to cover the surface.
specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Terms: early, late, morning, evening, night, to be on Identify the unit of measure that requires
time, AM, PM… the least number of counts, and the unit of
measure that requires the greatest number
E.g. I wake up very early to get ready for school. of counts.
Checklist Reference:https://www.dcp.edu.gov.on.ca/
en/curriculum/elementary-
● Each group can use at least 5 terms
mathematics/grades/g3-math/strand-e/e2
above correctly in separate sentences
(yes/ no)
● Each group is able to use at least one
sentence which incorporates more than Once students have understood partitioning
one term from the list above help them discover that the covering of the
(yes/ no) surface (area) is an attribute of all plane
shapes.
Individual work
It can be measured using square units.
Students complete the questionnaire.(does not have to
Allow them to view video
be correct or exact)
https://youtu.be/zbx2JNqLQXs?si=kG1C
WlSiSqHcNeX1
a) Time I get out of bed…...
A. A square with side length 1 unit,
called “a unit square,” is said to
b) Time I have breakfast…..
have “one square unit” of area, and
can be used to measure area.
c) Time I get to school…..
B. A plane figure which can be covered
d) Time Classes begin…..
without gaps or overlaps by n unit
squares is said to have an area of n
e) Lunch time is at……. square units.
specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
f) School ends at….. Conceptual Understanding - Time (SCO
8,9,10 &11)
g) Why is it important to keep to the time
and know the time ? ……. Time is the duration of an event from its
beginning to its end.
Checklist
Teacher helps students develop concepts
● Learner is able to estimate each time give and about time by using short scenarios (e.g., “It
take two hours of reasonable time for took us only two minutes to tidy our
questions a, b, c (yes/ no) desks”) and the actual time in the context of
daily classroom activities – for example, “It
● Learner is able to state accurate time for will be 10:30 in fifteen minutes. At that
questions d, e and f (yes/ no) time, we will go to the gym.” Learning
experiences related to time should be
● Leaner is able to give at least one reasonable
ongoing. Teachers should help students
importance of time (yes/ no)
estimate, measure, and describe the passage
of time, using non-standard units (e.g., find
the time it takes for students to form a line
by counting the number of times the
teacher claps his or her hands) and
eventually standard units (e.g., use a
stopwatch to find the time it takes to
complete a puzzle).
Open Questioning
The teacher presents questions and
scenarios to which students answer.
a) eg: I came to school at 9:30 am.. Would it
be early or late for school?
specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
b) We go to bed in the ____
c) Time is measure in______
d) Name two instruments we can read or
tell time.
Additional Resources and Materials:
● Using Language Stages to Guide the Development of Measurement Concepts | ORIGO Education
● https://www.acleadersresource.sa.edu.au/features/conceptual-narrative-
printables/maths/DECD_Mathematics_Conceptual_Narrative_Using_units_of_measurement_F-Year_2_2017.pdf
● https://www.onlinemathlearning.com/understand-area.html
(teachers will use discretion in viewing part or full length videos based on need)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Informal units of measure are often human related units, such as paces or fingers, but can also be blocks, paper clips, sticks etc.
Informal units are sometimes referred to as non-standard units of measure.
• Uniform informal units are informal units that are of the same size as each other. For example the blocks used are all the same as each
other.
• Using informal units iteratively means the repeated use of the same unit. For example, moving one paper clip along the length of a
shape 10 times, rather than using 10 paper clips in a line
. • Direct comparison is when the two (or more) items that are being compared, are brought together. For example, the pen is laid next
to the pencil to compare their lengths. The ball is placed on one side of the balance and the rock is placed on the other side.
• Indirect comparison is when an intermediary is used to make the comparison. Initially the intermediary could be another item. For
example, a piece of string could be used to compare the height of the school tables with the height of the table in a child’s home. The
two items can’t be brought together for direct comparison, but they can be compared to each other via the piece of string.
Reference: https://www.acleadersresource.sa.edu.au/features/conceptual-narrative-
printables/maths/DECD_Mathematics_Conceptual_NarrativeUsing_units_of_measurement_F-Year_2_2017.pdf
Perimeter
● Perimeter is the total length or distance around an object or region. A perimeter measurement is a length measurement.
● If a perimeter is made up of straight lines, the parts are measured with a ruler and the measurements are combined. This is an application of
the additivity property.
● Curved perimeters are difficult to measure accurately with a ruler. A “go-between,” like a string, is used to match the perimeter of the object
and then measured. The measurement of the go-between is used as the measurement of the perimeter. This is an application of the
transitivity property.
● Different shapes can have the same perimeter. A shape with a perimeter of 20 cm could be a 5 cm by 5 cm square, a skinny rectangle that is
2 cm by 8 cm, or a completely curved shape. To construct a shape with a given perimeter, the amount of length must always be tracked so
that the remaining length can be distributed appropriately around the rest of the shape.
● Measurements of continuous quantities, like length, are always approximate. The smaller the unit, the greater the potential accuracy. If
different-sized units are used to measure an object, each unit is counted and tracked separately.
● Because measurements are approximate, a combination of units might be used for greater accuracy (e.g., a combination of centimetres and
millimetres for a length between 5 cm and 6 cm).
● The appropriate unit of length depends on the reason for measuring an object. Larger units are used for approximate measurements; smaller
units are used for precise measurements and detailed work. While non-standard units are appropriate for quick, personal measurements,
standard units are used when communicating measurements.
Area:
Young students develop concepts about surface by using a variety of materials to cover shapes. Experiences in covering shapes help students understand how the area of a shape
is different from the length or perimeter of a shape. Initially, students may leave gaps or may overlap materials when they cover the surface of a shape, and they may not
recognize the importance of using a consistent unit.
Time:
Because time is intangible, it is an abstract concept for young students and can be difficult for them to understand. Teachers can help students
develop concepts about time by referring to the passage of time (e.g., “It took us only two minutes to tidy our desks”) and to the actual time in the
context of daily classroom activities – for example, “It will be 10:30 in fifteen minutes. At that time, we will go to the gym.” Learning experiences
related to time should be ongoing. Teachers should help students estimate, measure, and describe the passage of time, using non-standard units (e.g.,
find the time it takes for students to form a line by counting the number of times the teacher claps his or her hands) and eventually standard units
(e.g., use a stopwatch to find the time it takes to complete a puzzle). Teachers should also provide students with opportunities to read digital and
analogue clocks, and to relate daily events to certain times of the day (e.g., “Recess begins at 10:30 and ends at 10:45”).
Definitions For students:
Area : the amount of surface within a closed shape.
Time: the duration of an event from its beginning to its end
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
- estimation in rounding off numbers
- measuring the length of 2D and 3D shapes
- finding perimeter of 2D shapes
- identifying patterns and angles on the analogue clock
- using the concept of time to collect data
- analysing statistical data involving time
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research)
Measurement ELO M1.2
Introduction to the Subject:
Strand (Topic): Measurement
Essential Learning Outcomes M1.2 : Comparing and ordering based on measurable attributes
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Learners will be able to solve real world mathematical problems involving perimeter and area of
polygons.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners will be expected to: Product Entrance Slip (SCO 1)
Find the area and perimeter of this shape by Learners will be using guided
Knowledge counting the squares. discovery to compare the concepts of
area and perimeter of plane figures
1. differentiate between the terms and 3D shapes
perimeter and area of a shape
2. calculate the perimeter of a polygon Discovery through play - Online
given its side lengths. Game activity (SCO 1)
3. find the unknown side length of a Allow learners to play interactive online
polygon. games to help them relate to the
Retrieved from
4. exhibit rectangles with the same concept of area
https://www.turtlediary.com/quiz/area-of-
perimeter and different areas
rectangles-by-tiling.html
5. exhibit rectangles with the same area
Checklist
and different perimeters.
● Learner is able to determine premier
accurately (yes/ no)
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Leaner is able to determine area accurately Conceptual Understanding - Varied
(yes/ no) exercises involving the calculation of
Values perimeter (outcomes 1, 2 &3)
6. Collaborate with peer to solve Group Work: (outcomes 1 and 4) 1. Provide students with
problem, that rectangles with the same Place students in groups and give them the opportunities to calculate the
area can have different perimeters and dimensions to draw atleast 3 different rectangles perimeter of polygons-
vice versa with the same perimeter as shown in the diagram quadrilaterals and triangles-given
below. Allow groups to compare their rectangles, diagrams of these with
7. Justify the importance of perimeter taking note that they have the same perimeter but the measurement for each side.
and area by using them to solve different areas. Encourage discussions on why this
everyday problems. is possible.
Retrieved from
https://twitter.com/pickover/status/16204927
09017550848
Do similar activities for rectangles with the same
area but different perimeters.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Retrieved from
https://vibrantteaching.com/how-
Checklist to-find-perimeter-in-3-easy-ways/
● Learners can draw 1-2 rectangles given
dimensions yes/ no 2. Let students draw their own
● Learners can draw more than 2 rectangles shapes and then calculate the
given dimensions (yes/ no) perimeter using non-standard
● Learners can compare perimeters (yes/ no) and standard units.
● Learners can contrast area (yes/ no)
3. Give students opportunities to
calculate the missing side of a
Product- Activity Sheets polygon, given the perimeter
(outcomes 2& 3) and other sides.
Give learners activity sheets where they are to
calculate the perimeter of various polygons. In
some cases, learners will need to find the missing Discovery - Finding Perimeter
side lengths of the polygon in order to calculate the (outcome 2)
perimeter. . Show students a video on how to find
the perimeter of common polygons like
rectangles and squares. Have them
measure each side, add the lengths
together, and calculate the perimeter.
Math Antics - Perimeter
Hands-on Exploration (outcome 2)
: Provide students with 3D shapes made
out of cardboard (prisms, cuboids, and
cubes). Have them measure the side
lengths of their faces and calculate the
perimeter using non-standard units
(hand span, straws, paperclips, etc.).
These measurements can then be
compared to standard units.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Retrieved from
https://www.tes.com/teaching- Comparing area and perimeter of
resource/geometry-worksheets-perimeters-of- rectangles (outcomes 4 &5)
2d-shapes-12740298 ● Allow learners to explore the
idea of the perimeter and area of
Checklist concrete shapes. Have them use
string to measure the
● Learners can accurately determine at least ¾ border/boundary/perimeter of
perimeters (yes/ no) the shapes. Allow them to
colour/shade the surface of the
For this activity sheet, learners will use the given shapes to identify their area.
perimeter and length of one side to calculate the Classroom objects can be used
missing length or width of each rectangle. to ask students to determine
whether the teacher is referring
to perimeter or area, e.g. The
border of the chalkboard, the
surface of your desk; How
much paint do we need to paint
the wall of the class?; We need
to make a frame for this picture.
● Geometric Art:. Provide
students with graph paper and
colored pencils, and ask them to
create rectangles with the same
area but different perimeters.
https://www.sheppardsoftware.com/m
Retrieved from
ath/geometry/area-shape-game/
https://www.tutoringhour.com/worksheets/p
erimeter/rectangles/length-width/
Checklist
Problem Solving (SCO 4 & 5)
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Learners can accurately determine at least Show students a video where they are to
⅗ missing lengths or widths (yes/ no) solve real world problems comparing
areas and perimeters
Hands-On Measurement Stations (SCO 6 & 7)
Set up stations with various polygons and
measuring tools. Students rotate through the
stations, measuring side lengths and calculating
perimeters and areas. Assessment can be based on
their accuracy and ability to explain their methods.
Checklist Retrieved from
● Learners can determine perimeters https://www.nagwa.com/en/videos/84
accurately (yes/ no)/somewhat 9153701784/
● Learners can areas accurately (yes/
no)/somewhat Include other real world perimeter
● Learners can compare and contrast areas applications, such as fencing a yard,
and perimeters measuring around a pool, etc.
(yes/ no)/somewhat
Utilize interactive geometry software to
Think, Pair, and Share (SCO 6 & 7) explore area and perimeter.
https://toytheater.com/area-perimeter-
Have students work in pairs to compare and explorer/
identify shapes with the same area but different
perimeters and those with the same perimeter but https://toytheater.com/geoboard/
different areas.
Show students images of rectangles with
the same area but different perimeters.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Ask them to explain how this is
possible.
Explore the area and perimeter with
Lego blocks or empty matchstick or
cereal boxes from home.
Retrieved from
https://www.weareteachers.com/ar
ea-and-perimeter/
Retrieved from
http://www.icoachmath.com/topics/3rd/Rect
angles-with-Same-Area-but-Different-
Perimeters-and-Same-Perimeter-but-Different-
Retrieved from https://smart-
Areas.html
packaging-
usa.wixsite.com/home/post/you-
Checklist
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
cannot-imagine-how-useful-are-those-
● Learners are able to accurately identify the useless-empty-cereal-boxes
correct figure for questions 1 (yes/ no)
● Learners are able to identify the correct
figure for question 2 (yes/ no)
Product Exit Slip
Retrieved from
https://shop.luckylittlelearners.com/product/
3rd-grade-exit-tickets-measurement-data-3-md-
d-8-version-2/
Checklist
● Learners can accurately determine solutions
for ⅔ questions (yes/ no)
Additional Resources and Materials:
paperclips, match sticks, tooth picks, activity cards, lego blocks, cereal boxes, graph paper
(teachers will use discretion in viewing part or full length videos based on need)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Definition for students
The measurement of area and perimeter are widely used in everyday life, such as measuring the size of a room by talking about its floor area, or how
much fence to put around a playground.
● Perimeter refers to the total distance around the boundary of a polygon.
● Area refers to the space enclosed within the boundary of a polygon.
All rectangles of a given area do not always have the same perimeter.
Retrieved from https://mathpractices.edc.org/pdf/Rectangles_with_the_Same_Numerical_Area_and_Perimeter.pdf
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
-addition and multiplication of numbers
-measuring the length of 2D and 3D shapes
-finding perimeter and area of 2D shapes
-completing patterns involving area and perimeter of rectangles
-analysing statistical data involving area and perimeter of rectangles
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Measurement ELO M1.3
Introduction to the Subject:
Strand (Topic): Measurement
Essential Learning Outcomes M1.3 & M2.3 Developing and applying non-standard units of measure
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Learners will be able to use non-standard and standard units of measurement to estimate, measure,
and compare the mass of various objects.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to: Entrance Slip (SCO 1) Learners will be guided into using
non-standard units of measurement
Knowledge to explore the mass of objects
1. explain the effect that Show students videos on measuring
overfilling, underfilling and mass and using non standard units.
gaps between units have on https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P
accuracy O8ItHHKzbw
2. Compare the mass of various
objects using a pan balance
and non-standard units.
3. Estimate the mass of various Discovery - Using Non-standard
objects using a pan balance units to measure Mass (outcome 2)
and non-standard units.
Skills Have students predict the mass of an
object using non-standard units such as
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4. measure the mass of various Retrieved from https://www.k5learning.com/free- cubes, marbles, or stones. After each
objects using a pan balance preschool-kindergarten- prediction, allow students to use the
and non-standard units. worksheets/measurement/non-standard-units nonstandard unit to measure and
compare.
Values
5. Recognize the importance of Checklist
accuracy when measuring by Discovering Overfilling,
comparing the mass of objects ● Learner is able to estimate accurately the Underfilling, and Gaps with
when overfilled, underfilled, length of ¾ spaceships (yes/ no) Containers
and exact. (SCO 3)
6. Compare the mass of two
objects Group Work (SCO 2, 3, 4 & 5)
7. Compare unit mass in grams Objective: To understand how
and kilograms. Predict the mass of various objects using non- overfilling, underfilling, and gaps can
8. Use kilograms or grams as a standard units such as cubes. Using a pan balance, affect the mass of an object.
unit of mass. weigh the objects to get the correct answer. In pairs,
9. Identify situations in everyday allow learners to compare their predictions with the Materials:
life where grams/kilograms is correct answer as well as their answers with those of
the most appropriate unit of other groups. A set of containers (e.g., jars, beakers,
measure. cups)
Small objects (e.g., marbles, beads,
sand)
A balance or scale
Measuring spoons or cups
Objects of known mass (e.g., small
weights)
Procedure: Place the balance or scale on
a stable surface.
Choose one of the containers and weigh
it using the scale. Record its mass.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from Fill the container with a specific amount
https://www.twinkl.com/resource/t-n-5424-how- of small objects (e.g., marbles) up to the
many-cubes-weight-activity-sheet rim, ensuring there are no gaps and it's
not overfilled or underfilled.
Weigh the container with the objects
Checklist and record the new mass.
Learners are able to estimate within 3 cubes the Repeat the process using the same
capacity of at least 6 objects yes /no container but with gaps between the
objects, and then with the container
either overfilled or underfilled.
Inclusive Assessment Strategies:
Discuss the results with the students.
(Connected back to the Principles of Assessment) Compare the masses of the containers
in different scenarios (no gaps, gaps,
Practical Assessment
overfilled, and underfilled). Emphasize
how the arrangement of objects inside
the container affects the mass.
Guided Discovery
Present an apple and a marble to the
class.
Hold marble in one hand and the apple
in the other hand.
You can place children in small groups. Answer questions:
Have them put on the balance the flour and the Which is heavier? ……. Which is
butter which should be placed on each side. Have lighter?
them tell which is heavier and which is lighter.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Let them pick up these objects from the table
estimate them then put on the balance provided to
see if they are less than or more than 1 kilogram.
Record your answers
Use other materials to find out how
much of the lighter is about the mass of
the heavier.
Oral Assessment
Use a beam balance to find out if the
This assessment will be done orally while teacher answer is correct
observe and record.
Present balance.
In this activity the teacher would three boxes of the
same size. Each box will weigh different kgs. For
example one box could weigh 1 kg, the next 2 kg,
3kg.
The teacher would probe students to tell what
material is in each box..
Retrieved from:
Each Student can write their answers in their
https://www.ebay.ca/itm/3852919089
notebooks.
19
Students would be asked to give reasons why they Do you know what is this?
choose this answer.
What is it used for?
How can we use it to find out which is
lighter?
Can you now use it to see if
your answer was correct?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
When using the balance how do we
know when each one is lighter, heavier
or the same mass?
googleimages.com Retriefed from:
https://stock.adobe.com/search?k=bal
ance+scale+graphic Heavier
lighter
Practical Assessment The lower one is heavier
Things that weighs more than 1 kg or less than 1kg
and can be found in or on
places less than 1 kg more than 1 kg
school
supermarket
If the balance is like this what can we
stores say about the two materials?
boats
home
airport
boxes
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Present a bag of flour to the class.
Why do we use a scale in the places stated in the Examine the bag and tell how much
table? (school, supermarket, stores, boats, home, does the flour weigh?
airport)
It can be found on the bag.
Record the information given by the
child.
Introduce the word kilogram and gram.
Teacher can use the gram song to
reinforce the lesson. This can be found
by the link provided:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5I
iULgFEOwY
Guided Discovery
Provide weights of 1 kilogram and 1
gram.
Put the gram on the balance then the
kilogram weight on the balance.
What happen to the balance?
Why do think it happen?
Investigate the number of grams that
equals 1kilogram. Put two 500g on one
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
side of the balance and 1 kilogram on
the other side.
How many grams equal a kilogram.
List some objects That you think has
more than 1 kilogram in mass.
List some objects that you think has less
than 1 kilogram in mass.
What situations at home would we need
to know the mass of the flour?
Can you think of other places or
situations where we would need to
know the mass of something?
Capacity What situations at home would we need
to know the mass of the flour?
Knowledge
1. use non-standard units to Can you think of other places or
estimate the capacity of situations where we would need to
various objects. know the mass of something?
2. use non-standard units to In groups the students will carry out the
compare the capacity of following activity.
various objects.
Skills Oral/Observation.
3. use non-standard units to You can have students talk about home and school Exploring Capacity using non standard
measure the capacity of and indicate where they use litres and millilitres. units (SCO 1-3)
various objects. Student would record information. Students could
give examples also. Monitor what the children has
and record using a checklist.Teacher would solicit
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4. Estimate and measure the from students if there is any other place where these Students will use objects from home
capacity of containers using measurements are used? (bottles, bowls, cups) to compare their
litres and millilitres. capacity in the following activity.
Value Millitres and litres in real life
5. Volunteer to explain why For example:
there is a need for millilitres as
a unit of measurement for
capacity.
6. Describe situations in real life
where the litres and millilitres
Practical Assessment
are used as unit of
measurement.
Students would be given three different drink
recipes
● lime drink
● kool- aid
Retrieved from
● chocolate drink
https://www.twinkl.com/resource/au-
tivin-556-more-than-less-than-capacity-
They would be placed into groups to make these.
activity-sheet
Children can report on this activity.
Present students with a container of
Pencil/Paper Assessment
water, a litre cup, a bottle, water bottle,
plastic jug, a mug
Grandma made a chocolate drink without using
these instruments. The drink came out perfect how
Watch the Measuring Capacity video on
was she able to do that?
YouTube
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
Student write a short paragraph explaining the
GwWRFgWb2xs). Afterwards, revise
process of measuring the milk for the chocolate
and discuss the task that was being
drink.
performed in the video and how it was
completed.
Rubric
All the steps to measure listed – 5 marks
Provide opportunity for students to
Have some of the steps – 3-4 marks
estimate how many cups of water each
Little evidence of steps- 0-2 marks
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
container holds. They would then
record the information found. Students
will then fill the different containers
using the cups.
Students would record their findings
Answer the following questions:
a) Which container holds the
most?
b) Which container holds the least?
c) Which holds more than the
bowl?
d) Describe the activity you have
just done?
e) What have learnt?
SCO 4
Provide opportunities for learners to
carry out to measure capacity using
standard units. For example spoons
(millilitre), cups and glasses
Retrieved from:
https://www.splashlearn.com/math-
vocabulary/measurements/liquid-
measurement-chart
Specific Curriculum Outcomes: Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Additional Resources and Materials
Nonstandard units- beads, paper clips, toothpicks, marbles, stones, beans, straws. Litre cup, millilitre spoon, jug small bucket, bowl, jug and any other
containers
(teachers will use discretion in viewing part or full length videos based on need)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
For students
Mass refers to the weight of objects, and is usually measured in grams and kilograms. This can sometimes be confused with weight, however they are
different! Weight is the gravitational force upon an object. In other words, gravity causes a mass to have weight.
Capacity is the amount that something can contain.
Non-standard units of measurement for capacity include cubes, marbles or stones, etc. They do not give exact measurements.
Retrieved from
https://www.google.com/search?q=capacity%2C+mas+and+weight&sca_esv=f37637c6fdde7f48&ei=S2uxZd2VAcSHkvQPhq-
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
-comparing whale numbers
-matching objects to appropriate units of mass
-grouping containers with similar capacity
-analysing statistical data involving mass, weight, or capacity
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Measurement ELO M1.4
Introduction to the Subject
Strand (Topic): Measurement
Essential Learning Outcomes M1.4: Learners will be able to understand what and how we measure by applying standard units of
measurement.
Essential Learning Outcome M2.1, M 2.2, 2.2 , 2.4: Applying Techniques, Tools and Formulas for Measuring – Developing
Personal Referents for Measuring Attributes
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Learners will be able to estimate length, perimeter, area and time and measure using standard units of
measurement.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be able to: Product Assessment (outcome 1) Guide students into using the
standard units of measurement: cm
Knowledge and m. Ensure that manipulatives
are used, a metre and centimetre
Perimeter ruler. The teacher helps students
1. determine suitable standard units of understand what a centimetre is
length: centimeters (cm), meters (m), using a ruler and that a 100
decimetre (dm) for measuring objects centimetre is equivalent to 1 metre.
or distances
Conceptual Understanding -
2. estimate the length of any given object Estimating length (outcomes 1& 2)
using standard units: centimetres cm,
m, dm Guide students to identify the best unit
for measuring a given length using the
3. estimate the perimeter of a shape using Retrieved from https://www.k5learning.com/free- 30 cm and metre rulers.
(cm, m, dm). math-worksheets/third-grade-
3/measurement/units-of-length
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4. find the perimeter of a shape using Have students view videos (Estimating
(cm, m, dm Length in Centimetres and Metres).
https://youtu.be/d5awyeF10cs?si=GjF7egRs
VayZiFZP
5. Determine measures of perimeter by Checklist Have students estimate the length of
developing and applying strategies Learners are able to determine at least 4/6 suitable items/objects in their classroom and
without the use of formulae using standard units of measurement (yes/ no). home environment.
standard units
6. Identify at least one strategy ( not the
formula) they can use to find the
perimeter of rectangles, triangles and Product Assessment (outcomes 1 & 2)
parallelograms Given a list of items, students will estimate the
length.
Object Estimated Length
Skill
7. measure the length of an object using
Desk
standard units of measurement (cm, m
classroom window
and dm)
your bed
the chalkboard
8. record the estimated length of any
given object using cm and m.
Checklist
Values Learners are able to estimate the length of at least ¾
9. Justify that objects come in various objects.
standard length units by measuring.
Measuring (outcome 3 & 4)
Group Work (outcome 3 & 4)
The teacher explains to students how
measurement is done. Have the Student
Knowledge In groups of threes, students will measure places or view the video on measuring using a
objects in the immediate environment.
centimetre ruler.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
10. estimate the area of geometric shape E.g. Measure the length of the school corridor, the https://www.mathswithmum.com/measuring-
using standard units of sq. cm, sq. m chalkboard centimetres-using-a-ruler/
and sq. dm Allow students to measure items estimated in Adapted from
previous lessons or places of choice. https://education.gov.dm/images/documents/
curriculum_guide/Mathematics%20Curriculu
Skills Checklist m%20Guide%20Grade%203.pdf
Each group measures and records accurately at least
11. measure the area of a geometric shape 2 objects or distances, each suitably measured in Have students measure the actual length
using standard units (sq. cm, cm, m and dm. of objects estimated in previous lessons.
sq. m and sq dm)
Exit Tickets (outcomes 6 & 7)
12. Determine measures of area by Call students in front of the classroom. To return to Cooperative learning - Estimating
developing and applying strategies their seat, students must accurately calculate the and Finding Perimeter in cm, m,
without the use of formulae using perimeter of a given shape. dm) (outcomes 6 &7 )
standard units Which sentence best defines perimeter?
Checklist a. the size of the edges
13. Identify at least one strategy ( not the ● Learner identifies an object or distance to b. the total length of the outside of
formula) they can use to find the area calculate perimeter (yes/ no) a shape
of rectangles. ● Leaner accurately calculates perimeter using In peers, students will estimate the
cm, m or dm (yes/ no) perimeter of a given shape. One student
Values guesses and the other student calculates
14. Demonstrate and explain using Pair Activity ( SC0 7) the perimeter. Have students switch
examples that a given area can have roles so each person gets an
many perimeters and vice versa Students are given a ruled square paper. On that opportunity to estimate and calculate.
paper, they will draw a shape using the whole
square. Students will then exchange papers. Each
student will count and record the area of the shape Students are told a story in which Chad
drawn by the student. has two cards: a red and a blue. The red
card is 4 cm wide and 9 cm long. The
Checklist blue card is 6 cm wide and 8 cm long.
● Leaner is able to draw a shape (yes/ no) Chad wonders which of the two cards
● Learner determines the area of shape drawn has the longest distance around it.
(yes/ no) Students are asked to help Chad solve
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
the problem by drawing the cards and
Individual Product Activity (outcomes 7&8) then measuring the distances using a
string or a ruler. The teacher explains
Students complete a worksheet on finding an area. that we are trying to find the perimeter.
Guide students into defining what
perimeter means.
Using measured lengths of the
classroom, students will be led into
calculating the perimeter of the
classroom and other shapes in the
environment and text. Teacher guides.
See Students Mathematics Text for
suggested practice activity(ies).
Checklist
Discovery - Estimating and finding
● Learners can estimate area of each shape
Areas (outcomes 8 & 9)
within 5 sq cm
● Learners can accurately find area of each
Now that students are able to measure
shape
the length of shapes. Teacher will guide
students into finding an area.
Have students look at the video: Area
of a Shape on a grid. This will guide
students into deducing that the area is
the space enclosed by the boundary of a
plane figure.
https://youtu.be/p8gblx7QY24?feature
=shared
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from Teacher guides students to the formula
https://www.cuemath.com/measurement/area/ using the grid paper and with the
definition of area as the number of
square units inside the shape to show
the reason area is measured in square
Group Activity (outcome 9) units.
Have students complete activities in groups. Teachers practice activities using
printed worksheets. Students are guided
to find the area of each figure.
Allow students to use square tiles to
find the area of a selected area in their
Time environment (desks, books, devices).
Teacher guides students to ensure that
15. State the relationship between the entire area is covered.
a) days and weeks Students are given a marked area to
b) weeks and months measure using a meter ruler.
c) minutes and hours Have students measure the length and
width of the area.
16. Interpret information on a calendar Teacher then guides students into
17. State and record time on the analog calculating the area by multiplying the
https://toytheater.com/clock/
and digital clocks in the following length by the width.
intervals:
Checklist
(a) hour Remind students that the area is written
Leaner can read write the time from 4/6 analogue
(b) half-an hour ( past and to) in cm/m squared.
clocks.
(c) quarter-hour (past and to) To determine the area of the square
(d) five minutes (past and to) figures drawn below, draw unit squares
- Solve Problems involving time. of 1-centimetre sides. Thus, the shape
will be measured in
18. Solve problems involving elapsed time cm2, also known as square centimetres.
Pair Activity (outcome 10 &11)
( Splashlearn.com)
Skills
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
19. Solve problems involving time using In pairs, working using a real clock, one student will
the different number operations. be allowed to call out a time while the other shows
the time on the clock. Each pair will do an o'clock
and a half past the hr
Money Allow students to play online game
Here, the area of the shapes above will
Knowledge Checklist
be measured in square meters squared
Students should be able to:
and square inches.
20. Identify the coins and notes in ● Learner can read the time using o’çlock and
circulation up to the $100 note. half past the hr (yes/ no)
Retrieved from
https://www.splashlearn.com/math-
21. Read and write amounts up to $100. ● Learner can show the time using o'clock or
vocabulary/geometry/area
half past the hour (yes/ no)
22. Represent the value of coins in
dollar(s) and cent notation when given
an assortment of coins. Interactive activity (outcomes 13 & 14)
Students will select items for purchase in the class
23. Determine the value of various shop, they will total items and say how much each
assortments of coins and notes up to item will cost.
$20.00
Checklist
24. Solve problems involving money by
using the arithmetic operations to ● Learner is able to state the cost of at least 2
determine: items selected Retrieved from
(a) sums/totals ● Learner is able to total the cost of items https://www.splashlearn.com/math-
(b) differences/change selected vocabulary/geometry/area
(c) products
25. Simulate: Individual work (SCO 14 & 15)
purchasing up to three items Have students calculate total prices for given items
(a) giving correct amounts not and change they’d receive if they paid using a given How to calculate the area if there are
exceeding $20.00. amount. half unit squares in the grid.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
26. estimate totals for cash transactions Checklist Step 1: Count the full squares.
involving amounts less than a dollar
● Learner is able to total the cost of at least 2
27. estimate totals for cash transactions items selected (yes/ no)
involving whole dollar amounts ● Learner is able to calculate change from a
given amount (yes/ no)
28. calculate the change amounts for
simple cash transactions involving
whole dollar amounts and less than
one dollar. Product Assessment (outcome 14 &15)
Students complete a worksheet.
Retrieved from
https://www.splashlearn.com/math-
vocabulary/geometry/area
There are 18 full squares.
Step 2: Count the half squares.
On counting, we see that there are 6
half squares.
Step 3: 1 full square =1 square unit
So, 18 full squares =18square units
1 half square =½ square unit
6 half squares =3 square units
Total area =18+3=21 square units.
Have students do guided practice.
Conceptual Understanding -
Reading time (outcomes 10 &11 )
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Teacher presents an analogue clock to
students, telling them that analogue
clocks are circular clocks with the
numbers 1-12 around the edge.
These clocks use two hands to tell the
time. The small hand dictates the hour,
and the big hand dictates the minute of
the hour. The analogue clock
sometimes has a third hand to count
seconds.
We tell the time based on where the
hands on the clock are pointing.
have students view a video:Telling Time
For Children - Learning the Clock
Teachers are encouraged to use a real
clock in helping students understand
time on an analogue clock.
Have students view video: ‘ Telling and
Writing Time’ on a digital clock video:
https://youtu.be/QTvVLblhsBY?si=V
Retrieved from https://images.google.com/ E87nlV_YPbg5vRD
Checklist
Learner is able to solve at least ¾ problems on the Teacher guides students into
worksheet (yes/ no) understanding concept by providing
adequate practice.
Product( Student complete seatwork)
Teacher guides students into solving
Select the correct answer by circling. time using addition and subtraction.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1. Which of these notes is the $5 that we use in the Have students change minutes to
OECS? second and seconds to minutes mentally
and on paper. Let them create their
problems.
Example: • ½ minutes = 30 sec
• 1½ minutes = 90 sec
• 1 minutes = 60 sec
• 2 minutes = 120 sec
2. Which of these coins is not used in the OECS?
• 2½ minutes = 150sec
• 1 min 20 sec = 80 sec
• 4 min 5 sec
Let students find the sum of times.
5 minutes + 20 sec =
2 minutes + 10 sec =
3. Write the names of these notes and coins.
Students will add or subtract times
Teacher will get a quick read on ideas
and explanations from the students. It is
a quick and engaging way to get a class
Write the following amounts in words. snapshot of students’ thinking.
(a) $0.75 (b) $2.86 (c) $41.02 (d) $50.60 Commit and Toss
Write the following amounts in figures. ● Students are given an
assessment probe. (What colour is the
(a) four dollars and ten cents EC$5?)
(b) thirty cents ● After completing the probe,
(c) seventy dollars and one cent students crumple their papers into a ball
(d) ninety-two dollars and fifty-seven cents and,
upon a signal from the teacher, toss the
Solve: paper balls around the room until
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Nicole has 2 ten dollar bills and 3 five dollar bills. the teacher instructs them to stop and
Does she have enough to buy a pair of shoes that pick up or hold on to one paper.
cost $50? ● Students share the answer on
the paper they are holding without
Three apples cost $6.40. Mom pays for the apples presenting their own ideas.
with a $5 and two $1 bills. How much change will ● Confidence increases when
Mom receive? students realize that she or he is not the
only
One orange costs $2.00. How much would 3 one with a different answer.
oranges cost? ● Helps students see that ‘wrong’
answers can be just as valuable for
Playpaper money can be used to help assist students informing learning as ‘right’ answers.
with solving problems. (answer is green)
Simulation: Shopping Game
MATCHING CARDS
E.g., Andy and his sister bought 2 sodas for $6.00,
3 bags of popcorn for $3.00 and 4 chewing gums Students find pairs of cards that share
for $5.00. (a) What is the total amount spent? the same relationship or attribute (e.g,
(b) What is their change from $20.00? $1.00 and 4 quarters).
Partner Speaks
Provide students with an opportunity to
talk through a concept
or problem solution with another
student and receive feedback
before sharing with a larger group.
When ideas are shared with the larger
group, pairs speak from
the perspective of their partner’s ideas.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Eg. What is the total when 3 tens cents,
5 quarters and 2 five cents are added?
Pass the Problem
● Students begin by working
together in pairs to respond to a
problem, partially completing a solution
to the problem.
● When the time is up, students
exchange their partially completed
solution with another pair to finish –
modifying, adding to, or changing it as
the pair deems necessary.
Eg. Rosemary has 3 five dollar bills and
1 ten dollar bill whereas Alix has 4 five
dollar bills. Which of them has more
money? Explain your answer.
Partner Speaks
● Provide students with an
opportunity to talk through a concept
or problem solution with another
student and receive feedback before
sharing with a larger group.
● When ideas are shared with the
larger group, pairs speak from the
perspective of their partner’s ideas.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Discovery - Shopping (outcome
13,14,15)
Have students bring in items from
home to make their own classroom
shop. Guide students into pricing items.
Allow students to take turns buying and
selling. Give students selected items, let
them tell the total price and the change
they would receive if they were to pay
with a selected bill. E.g: Tom buys 1 can
milk and 1 box of matches , how much
will he be required to pay? If Tom pays
with $5.00, how much change will he
receive?
Additional Resources and Materials:
Links to online games and resources.
https://sciencing.com/measure-millimeters-centimeters-meters-8146016.html
https://www.iknowit.com/lessons/b-estimating-lengths-centimeters.html
https://www.k5learning.com/free-math-worksheets/third-grade-3/measurement/units-of-length-metric
https://www.twinkl.com/teaching-wiki/measurement
(teachers will use discretion in viewing part or full length videos based on need)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (Perimeter is the total length or distance around an object or region. A perimeter
measurement is a length measurement.
- If a perimeter is made up of straight lines, the parts are measured with a ruler and the measurements are combined. This is an
application of the additivity property.
- Curved perimeters are difficult to measure accurately with a ruler. A “go-between,” like a string, is used to match the perimeter of the
object and then measured. The measurement of the go-between is used as the measurement of the perimeter. This is an application of
the transitivity property.
- Different shapes can have the same perimeter. A shape with a perimeter of 20 centimetres could be a 5 centimetres × 5 centimetres
square, a skinny rectangle that is 2 centimetres × 8 centimetres, any other polygon, a combination of curves and straight lines, or a
completely curved shape. To construct a shape with a given perimeter, the amount of length must always be tracked so that the
remaining length can be distributed appropriately around the rest of the shape.
- Measurements of continuous quantities, like length, are always approximate. The smaller the unit, the greater the potential accuracy. If
different-sized units are used to measure an object, each unit is counted and tracked separately.
- Because measurements are approximate, a combination of units might be used for greater accuracy (e.g., a combination of centimetres
and millimetres for a length between 5 centimetres and 6 centimetres).
- The appropriate unit of length depends on the reason for measuring an object. Larger units are used for approximate measurements;
smaller units are used for precise measurements and detailed work. While non-standard units are appropriate for quick, personal
measurements, standard units are used when communicating measurements.
Note
In Grade 3, students do not use decimals in their measurements.
Area
We can calculate the area of a shape using a grid. The area of any shape is the number of square units that can fit into it. The grid is made of
many squares and each square has sides 1 unit by 1 unit, i.e., the area of each square is 1 square unit. Each square is known as a unit square.
Take a pencil and draw a square on a piece of paper. It is a 2-D figure. The space the shape takes up on the paper is called its Area.
Now, imagine your square is made up of smaller unit squares. The area of a figure is counted as the number of unit squares required to cover
the overall surface area of that particular 2-D shape. Square cms, square feet, square inches, square meters, etc., are some of the common units
of area measurement.
The easiest method to interpret the area of geometric shapes is using “unit squares.” A unit square is a square with each of its side lengths
measuring 1 unit. Using this as a basis, the area of a polygon is the number of unit squares within a shape.
Time
• Clocks can answer two questions: “What time is it?” and “How much time has passed?.” The focus in Grade 3 is on the first question.
• A colon (:) is used to separate units of time. Generally, time is read in hours and minutes, so 12:36 means 36 minutes after 12:00. To
describe time more precisely, another colon is used to show seconds, so 12:36:15 means it is 15 seconds after 12:36.
• Analog clocks use fractions of a circle to provide benchmark times: quarter past the hour; half past the hour; and quarter to the hour.
Benchmark times are not evident in digital clocks.
• Analog clocks have a face with three different scales. Analogue clocks use two hands to tell the time. The small hand dictates the hour,
and the big hand dictates the minute of the hour. The analogue clock sometimes have third hand to count seconds. Navigating these
scales can make reading an analog clock challenging.
• The shorter hour hand (0 to 12, numbered scale) measures broad approximate time.
• The longer minute hand (0 to 60, unnumbered markings) measures time more precisely.
• The optional second hand (same 0 to 60 scale as that used by the minute hand) is used for precise time.
• The 24-hour clock is widely used in transportation schedules and in the military. For many parts of the world, it is the standard way of
describing time.
Note: Digital clocks are easier to read but may be more challenging to understand. To know that 9:58 is almost 10:00 requires an understanding
that there are 60 minutes in an hour. This is unlike the place-value system, which moves in groups of 10 and 100. Using both digital and analog
clocks helps make the 0 to 60 scale visible.
Reference:https://www.dcp.edu.gov.on.ca/en/curriculum/elementary-mathematics/grades/g3-math/strand-e/e2
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics:
-estimation in rounding off numbers
-counting using multiples of five
-simplifying fractions involving hours and minutes
-finding a fraction of an amount eg half hour equals 30 minutes
-analysing statistical data involving unit and total prices prices
-identifying patterns and angles on the analogue clock
-using money totals to collect data
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Language Arts: Allow students to use words associated with measurement in vocabulary lessons, e.g length, perimeter, surface, cover.
Allow students to read stories involving partitioning or sharing, involving time
Science : Allow students to estimate and measure length of plants
Social Science: Finding change using different types of currency used in the region
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
● Have students estimate and measure objects in their immediate environment
● Students can make their own centimeter and meter rulers using material from the environment such as sticks.
● Have students use local material to measure, such as strings.
● Help them identify areas in their environment that are measurable using both standard and non-standard units of measurement.
● Have students build their own clocks from material from their immediate environment such as cardboard and disposable plates
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Retrieved from https://www.homeschoolingsc.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/math-measure.jpg
Data Handling & Probability ELO1.1
Introduction to the Subject:
Data Handling is a prominent concept that ensures the veracity of the research data. In this unit, students are therefore guided in the steps taken
to collect, interpret and represent data correctly. They will also develop the skills needed to infer and make probabilities of events from data
received.
Strand (Topic): Data Handling and Probability
Essential Learning Outcomes: Collecting, Organising and Displaying Data - Formulating questions that can be answered with data
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Brainstorm and identify topics of personal interest for investigation and develop
questions for surveys to generate data
Focus Questions.
How can data be used after it is collected?
Why is it important to collect data?
How can the collection of data be significant over time?
How can collecting data help us to make informed decisions?
Why is it important to use the best method to collect data?
How can data collected change over time?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Knowledge Conversation (example)
1. Identify the different methods used to Create scenarios which require students to compare Inquiry-based Learning
collect data. and contrast different data collection strategies.
Provide students with scenarios to generate
Skills Example: The principal wants to introduce a new students’ interest to formulate questions and
sport to the school, and the students are asked to collect data.
2. Create questions that may be investigate what sport students like the best. Students
answered through data collection. would be required to create an interview schedule. - Teach students the importance of planning
3. Collect and record simple data in and their data collection process. Help them
around the school using different Journal Writing identify the purpose of their data collection
methods (observation, questionnaire, and the specific variables they need to
interview). Students create a journal recording their activities measure.
collecting data using different data collection methods.
Values - Guide students in designing appropriate data
Think Pair Share collection methods such as surveys,
4. Choose//volunteer to collect observations, experiments, or interviews.
information using types of data Data Presentations
collection methods to answer - Encourage students to create a data
questions. Have students work in pairs to collect and analyze collection plan with clear steps, timelines, and
data on a specific topic. Each pair will then create a resources needed.
presentation to share their findings with the class.
After each presentation, allow time for other students - Teach students how to record data
to ask questions and provide feedback on the data accurately. Emphasize the importance of
collection methods, analysis techniques, and overall using consistent units of measurement and
presentation. clear labels.
Peer Assessment
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Students work in pairs to collect the information for - Provide students with templates or tools to
the new sport to add to the curriculum. organize and record their data effectively,
such as data tables, charts, or digital
Students choose the most appropriate method to collect spreadsheets.
data. Students present their findings to the rest of the
class. Their peers assess the work done and their - Remind students to record data in real time
presentation. to minimize errors or memory biases
Data Critique Panels
Divide the class into small groups and assign Authentic Learning (group work)
each group a specific data set to analyze. Have
each group prepare a short presentation Engage students in a yard/ jumbo sale activity
critiquing the data collection methods, data in which they record the buying and selling of
quality, and analysis techniques used. Then, items to generate questions:
bring the groups together for a panel
discussion where they can present their
critiques and engage in a constructive dialogue
about the strengths and weaknesses of each
data set.
Observation
KWL
Source:
https://www.paramountcity.com/services/ya
1. Know: Begin by asking students what they
rd-sales
already know about data collection. Write down
their responses on a chart or whiteboard. This
Example:
will help you gauge their prior knowledge and
activate their background understanding of the What was the favoured item?
topic. Some possible responses might include: Which gender bought the most items?
"Data collection involves gathering How many of a given item was bought on the day?
information," "Data can be collected through
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
surveys or experiments," or "Data collection
helps us make informed decisions."
2. Want to know: Ask students what they want
to learn or understand better about data
collection. Encourage them to think about
Group Work
specific questions or areas they would like to
explore. Write down their questions on the
Guide students as they work in groups to
chart or whiteboard. This will help guide your
formulate questions that they will use to
instruction and ensure that you address their
collect data about selected topics.
curiosity. Some possible questions might include:
"How do we choose the best method for data
Example: Topic - The number of students in
collection?" "What are some common challenges
Grade 3 who belong to the different sports
in collecting data?" or "How can we ensure that
houses at school
our data is accurate and reliable?"
3. Learned: After students have had the
Possible questions:
opportunity to explore and engage with the topic
of data collection, revisit the KWL chart. Ask 1. How many sports houses are there at
students to share what they have learned about school?
data collection. Write down their new 2. How many students belong to each
understandings and insights on the chart or house?
whiteboard. This will allow students to reflect
on their learning and consolidate their
knowledge. Encourage students to reference their
initial questions and see if they have been
answered or if they need further exploration.
Checklist
Students’ questions are evaluated using a rubric,
analyzing if the questions are suitable for the topic and
relevant for collecting data.
Additional Resources and Materials
Wordwall Game: Ways we represent data: https://wordwall.net/resource/32294527
YouTube video on how to collect and record data using a tally: Data! | Mini Math Movies | Scratch Garden - YouTube
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts- Asking/ writing and answering research questions, reading stories, Spelling words used, e.g. pictographs, information, etc.
Social Studies - List the natural resources in the nation and observe how many are found in their school environment.
Science -writing hypothesis
HFLE -
Art/Craft - Students create posters and or flyers for their yard sale.
Data Handling and Probability ELO 1.2
Introduction to the Subject:
Strand (Topic): Data Handling and Probability
Essential Learning Outcomes: Collecting, Organising and Displaying Data - Collecting, organizing, displaying and communicating data.
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Sort sets of data about people or things according to two and three attributes, using tables and logic
diagrams, including Venn, Carroll, and tree diagrams, as appropriate. Collect data through observations, experiments, and interviews to answer questions of interest that
focus on qualitative and quantitative data and organize the data using frequency tables. Draw a scaled picture graph and a scaled bar graph to represent a data set with
several categories. Solve one- and two-step “how many more” and “how many less” problems using information presented in scaled bar graphs. For example, draw a bar graph
in which each square in the bar graph might represent 5 pets.
Focus Questions:
1. How can the data that was collected be best displayed?
2. Why is it important to organize, display and communicate the data collected?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Knowledge Group Work Observation
1. Select/choose the most appropriate ‘Bucket dash Game’ - Students work in teams to Think Pair Share
method/way (chart, table, graph) to display compete, by throwing coloured balls into a bucket. Each
data collected group has a special colour. Each group records the number of Learners play 3 rounds of a game called tic-
balls they got in the bucket. The entire class will record the tac-toe. Teacher asks students a series of
Skills information. Each group would display the information questions (Did you enjoy the game? Who
collected in a graph. won each round? How many X’s and O’s
2. Draw/construct/design scaled picture graphs were used?) Students record how many X’s
(pictograph) and bar graphs to represent and O’s were used in the game. They create a
collected data graph to show the results.
3. Communicate/interpret displayed data
through questions and answers.
4. Sort sets of data about people or
things according to two and three
attributes, using tables and logic
diagrams, including Venn, Carroll,
and tree diagrams, as appropriate.
Values
Source:
5. Participate in data collection activities Source: https://2716595.fs1.hubspotusercontent- https://cdn.pixabay.com/photo/2013/07/1
showing enthusiasm during tasks. na1.net/hub/2716595/hubfs/undefined-Sep-23-2022-
2/15/56/tic-tac-toe-150614_1280.png
09-56-39-21-
AM.jpeg?width=600&height=400&name=undefined-
Sep-23-2022-09-56-39-21-AM.jpeg
Whole Class Activity
Data Comparison Activity
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Bar Graph Guru Provide students with multiple data sets
related to a common topic. Ask them to
Students create a bar graph to represent data of compare and contrast the data using different
their interest collected in a survey. types of graphs or charts. This activity helps
students understand how different
representations can highlight different aspects
of the data and support meaningful
comparisons.
Individual work
Each learner gets a pack of Skittles or M&Ms
and records the flavours or colours they got
in the pack.
Source: https://www.cambridge.org/elt/blog/wp-
content/uploads/2018/07/students-presenting-
e1532074767453.jpg
Product (Worksheet)
Students represent data on information gathered about
favourite fruit.
Source:
https://cdn.filestackcontent.com/dzeMSZ3C
SyG9In3lFHOq
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners will complete worksheets on data
collection to practice data representation
skills.
Present a list of raw scores previously
collected and allows students to organize in a
method they are comfortable with.
Interview and Compare
Students interview two classmates and collect
information to compare their hobbies using a
Venn diagram.
Source:
https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/math/data-
graphing/grade-1-collecting-data-a.gif
Favourite Sports
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Choose two popular sports and create a Venn
diagram to show similarities and differences in
their rules and equipment.
Source: https://educators.brainpop.com/wp-
content/uploads/2014/03/venn_diagram.pn
Source: g
https://ph-static.z-
dn.net/files/d88/4b5837fcdf0668f6d81562d310a7
1e34.jpg
Sort Animals Using a Carroll Diagram
Use a Carroll Diagram to sort a variety of
Tree Diagram Presentation animals based on their characteristics.
Students create a presentation explaining how tree
diagrams can be used for data collection.
Source:
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
https://cd1.edb.hkedcity.net/cd/eng/vocab09/im
ages/ch2mod1_pro_t1a_1.jpg
Tree Diagram Reflection
Students write a reflection on how tree diagrams
help in organizing and analyzing data.
Source: https://teleskola.mt/wp-
content/uploads/elementor/thumbs/animal-
carroll-diagram-
ec1e645e8e855156255cf091d8e9bc8a-
op3aeygja7r43lrdcjc996i5klh52yaaps5y377g1s
.jpg
Additional Resources and Materials
3rd Grade - Math - Interpret Data - Topic Overview Part 1 of 2
What is a Venn Diagram?
2020/21- Maths - Week 8 - Lesson 2 - Animal Carroll Diagram
Online game (Creating a graph) - IXL | Create pictographs | 3rd grade math
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts- Write an expository writing stating how they would collect data for their topic.
Social Studies - collecting information about the population (census)
Science - collect and record data about the weather, germination and growth of plants
HFLE - collect and record data about the type of family their peers belong to
Art/Craft - create and display 3D graph models, probability spinners, Draw pies divided into various sectors. Colour sectors.
Data handling and probability ELO 2.1
Introduction to the Subject:
Strand (Topic): Data Handling and Probability
Essential Learning Outcomes: Using Statistical Methods to Analyse Data - Describing sets.
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Can obtain information from a graph (scaled bar graph); Can read and describe data sets displayed on
bar graphs.
Focus Questions:
1. How can we gather information from a bar graph?
2. Why do we use a bar graph to display a data set?
3. Why do we use a bar graph to display data?
4. How do we select the most appropriate method to analyse a data set?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Students will be able to: Product (Worksheet) Video Presentation
Knowledge Students answer questions based on data presented in a bar Present a YouTube video clip to students on the topic
graph. of data interpretation. During intervals, have a
1. 1. Describe a given data set (of numbers, discussion with students to help them understand how
shapes or objects)
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
2. 2. Read and interpret data presented in to answer questions relating to the data set presented
bar graphs in the bar graph.
3. 3. Answer questions about data presented
in bar graphs YouTube video:
4. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iCnh6EL1Lm
o
Skills
Duration: 3 :16 mins
1. Label the title, horizontal axis and
vertical axis of a bar graph (Give
appropriate titles to bar graphs
Group work
2. Create questions related to data Sample questions:
Place students in small groups and present them with
presented in bar graphs
1. Which fruit is most liked? a bar graph with data they would have collected in a
Attitudes 2. How many students prefer guavas than jar plums? previous lesson. Students will use such to practise
3. Which fruits are preferred by the same number of interpreting and analysing data.
1. Willingly participate in group students?
activities Example: Use the bar graph that shows the different
2. Collaborate with classmates to number of M&Ms in a pack to answer the
complete assigned tasks. questions.
3. Ask questions to gain clarification Observation (Gallery walk)
about concepts they may not Possible questions:
understand. Place students in groups and present each with different bar
graphs. Each group will use the data to answer related 1. Which colour is most popular?
questions about the data presented. Upon completion of the 2. Which colour is the least popular?
task, students will post their individual group’s work on the 3. How many yellow M&Ms are there?
walls of the classroom. Students then take turns to walk 4. How many M&Ms are in the pack?
around the room to peruse the groups’ responses to the
questions.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Source:
https://www.decaturclassical.org/apps/pages/inde
x.jsp?uREC_ID=1148429&type=u&pREC_
ID=activity&postid=1657015
Conversation (Think-pair-share)
Present various images of bar graphs to students;
have them work collaboratively to identify suitable
titles based on the data sets presented.
Data Comparison
Students compare two sets of data by creating a double bar
graph and answering questions about the differences and
similarities.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Source: https://s3-us-west-
2.amazonaws.com/infinitestudent-
images/ckeditor_assets/pictures/420560/original_wrong_
2.png
Additional Resources and Materials
Mr. Pearson Teaches Third Grade - All About Bar Graphs
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
A bar graph or chart is used to organized data using rectangular bars of different heights or lengths. The height/length of each bar is proportional
to the value or number it represents. Bar graphs can be drawn vertically or horizontally.
Bar graphs are often used to compare data of different categories. They also make it easier to see patterns and trends in data. If the value of a
category is increasing, or decreasing, this is called a trend. A pattern is something that seems to keep happening. Presenting the data so you can
interpret these patterns and trends is one of the benefits of using bar charts.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts- Write a paragraph to describe the data collected., report finding.
Social Studies - Collect and organize data to answer the question, which place in St. Vincent and the Grenadines the pupils in grade 5 are living.
Science - predicting the weather,
HFLE - make decision regarding diet and health,
Art/Craft -
Data handling and Probability 2.2
Introduction to the Subject:
Strand (Topic): Data Handling and Probability
Essential Learning Outcomes: Using Statistical Methods to Analyse Data - Developing and applying methods to analyse data sets.
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Explain why many-to-one correspondence is sometimes used rather than one-to-one correspondence. Can
read between that data to make comparisons and describe relationships. Analyse different sets of data presented in various ways, including in frequency tables and in graphs
with different scales, by asking and answering questions about the data and drawing conclusions, then make convincing arguments and informed decisions.
Focus Questions:
1. Why do we sometimes use many-to-one instead of one-to-one correspondence in data analysis?
2. How can we make convincing arguments and informed decisions based on data analysis?
3. How do we determine the best way to organize data?
4. How can data analysis assist a small business operator (tuck shop vendor, shopkeeper)?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Students will be able to Product (Individual Assessment) Observation
Knowledge presents students with information in one form Have students describe, orally or in writing,
for example a bar graph and ask them to use the what the graph is showing (interpret the
1. Ask and answer simple questions by information in the graph to construct a table with data). Use guiding questions if needed. (What
counting the number of objects in a the same information. is the graph showing? How do you know
category and sorting the categories by this? Which is the most? Which is the least?)
quantity.
2. Compare two sets of data to draw Students complete worksheets answering
conclusion. questions correctly based on the information
3. Choose the best method to organize presented on the graph and table focussing
data. on the many to one correspondence.
Skills
4. Interpret and present data using
graphs, tally charts and simple tables. Source:
5. Solve one-step and two-step https://ecdn.teacherspayteachers.com/thumbitem
questions. For example: “How many /Types-of-Graphs-Anchor-Chart-Tally-Chart-Bar-
more or how many fewer?” Using Graph-Pictograph-Line-Plot-5080020-
information presented in a scaled 1657580191/original-5080020-2.jpg
graph.
6. Create graph to represent data.
Values Conversation (Group Work)
Product
7. Organize a set of data as one-to -one Have students work in groups to investigate
Create a criterion with the students, then
and many-to-one correspondence. something of interest to them. Let them present
have them create a concrete graph to display
8. Use mathematical language correctly the information collected in an oral presentation
the information.
when explaining the graphs. using graphs to explain what was collected and
state their interpretation of what was gathered.
Source:
https://i.pinimg.com/736x/7f/38/66/7f3866b0b7
4ffb59b797410e39e5cf54--first-grade-math-grade-
.jpg
Source:
https://i.pinimg.com/originals/43/1f/1e/43
1f1ee14be379ee0409070de664d1dc.jpg
Conversation (Oral Presentation)
Practical:
Present two sets of data with income generated
pupils are given paper and pencils to use at
from two vendors on a weekly basis for pupils to
break to collect data. They will then organize
make graphs and draw conclusions on the data that
them using the best method. They will then
is more profitable to the seller and which seller is
make suggestions as to which snacks vendors
most likely to generate the most profit from sales
should purchase most in order to maximise
over a specific period of time.
and why.
Pupils present their conclusion to the class and
give reasons for making such conclusions.
Product (worksheet)
Students complete worksheets requiring them to
interpret data presented in graphs.
Source:
https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/math/d
ata-graphing/grade-3-analyzing-scaled-bar-graphs-
a.gif
Additional Resources and Materials
Data Collection Game: Bar Graph Egg Sorting Game | Game | Education.com
Answering Questions from a Bar graph - IXL | Use bar graphs to solve problems | 3rd grade math
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Data is organized to help one analyse and make decisions. Different sets of data can be organized differently for example, frequency
table
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts- Write an argumentative essay on a set of data to make an informed decision.
Social Studies - Compare the populations of two countries with their land spaces to determine which population is denser.
Science - Construct a bar graph/table on the daily temperature for the week at a particular time of the day every day.
HFLE -
Art/Craft - From data collected make different graphs to be displayed around the class.
Data Handling and Probability 3.1
Introduction to the Subject:
Strand (Topic): Data Handling and Probability
Essential Learning Outcomes: Evaluating Inferences and Making Predictions Based on Data - Making inferences with data sets.
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Can read beyond the data by making inferences and predictions based on the data.
Focus Questions:
How can data help us to predict what can happen in the future?
How would a business owner use the data collected from sales to determine which products to keep and those to get rid?
What information can you use or look for to help with making a prediction?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Students will be able to: Oral Presentations Observation & Oral Questioning
Knowledge Learners would be presented with the opportunities to Students would be presented with a graph and are
analyse a graph and present the information to the class. asked questions orally by the teacher to test their
1. Demonstrate their ability to read and understanding of what is shown.
interpret data by answering data
collection questions correctly.
Skills
2. Analyse graphs to answer questions
correctly.
3. Make simple predictions based on the
graphs given.
Values
4. Recognize the need to interpret Source: http://tinkeredu.net/wp-
graphs to get information. content/uploads/2020/03/Feature-Photo-
5. Demonstrates autonomy in e1583936082832.png
independently working with graphs.
Source:
https://c8.alamy.com/comp/2JD2MHD/a-
Story Telling Time bar-chart-displaying-the-data-sets-of-four-
different-kinds-of-pets-that-students-have-at-
Students write a short story incorporating inferences drawn
home-cats-dogs-fish-birds-2JD2MHD.jpg
from a given data set.
Storyboard Creator
Students look at a graph and are asked to
answer questions based on the picture.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Create a storyboard illustrating an inference made from Students will also make predictions based on
given data. the information shown on the graph.
Example:
Source:
https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:1400/1*v9lvN3h
Source:
IX1AiAAe4u32Q1Q.png
https://www.math4texas.org/cms/lib6/TX0
1927955/Centricity/Domain/24/210D.PNG
Questions:
Data Analyzer
1. Which month should the P.E teacher
Analyse a graph or chart and draw conclusions
prepare for indoor sports with the
based on the data.
students?
2. Parents must protect their children’s
skin from the sun. Which month
would they buy the most amount of
sunscreen lotion?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Source:
https://ecdn.teacherspayteachers.com/thumb
item/Interpreting-data-given-in-graphs-and-
charts-Drawing-conclusions--505563-
1686295094/original-505563-1.jpg
Worksheet
Students answer questions correctly by interpreting the
information on a graph.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Source:
https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/math/data-
graphing/grade-3-data-graphing-worksheet.gif
Additional Resources and Materials
Interpreting picture graphs (notebook) | Math | 3rd grade | Khan Academy
Online game on graph (Interpreting Data) - IXL | Interpret pictographs | 3rd grade math
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts- Write a paragraph comparing the weather represented in a graph.
Social Studies - Look at data and interpret the dominant gender in the school.
Science - Look at a graph and predict the months they would have to walk with an umbrella.
HFLE -
Art/Craft -
Data Handling and Probability ELO 3.2
Introduction to the Subject:
Strand (Topic): Data Handling and Probability
Essential Learning Outcomes: Evaluating Inferences and Making Predictions Based on Data - Making and testing conjectures based on data sets
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Analyse examples of graphs in prints and electronic media (various data sets and graphs); Can make
and test hypothesis based on data sets.
Focus Questions: How can we determine if data presented to us is correct?
What are some questions that can be asked to determine if the data presented is true?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Students will be able to: Group Work Discussion / Conversation
Knowledge Mr. Bug is said to be the most favoured Students bring a graph (printed/ electronic) to school
teacher in grade 5. Pupils will now test the to discuss among their peers. They can make
1. Create hypothesis and use a data set to hypothesis by collecting data from the grade 5 hypotheses, examine the data and test the
test it. students and make their conclusions based on hypothesis.
2. Analyse graphs to test hypotheses the data gathered.
based on data collected.
3.
Skills
4. Examine graphs to gather information
5. Develop questions for surveys.
6. Create hypotheses to be tested based
on a data set.
Values
7. Volunteer to give and test hypotheses. Source: https://img.freepik.com/premium-
8. Willingly participate in class discussion photo/school-kid-class-happy-child-holding-
on the making and testing of blackboard-blank-education-concept_411285-
hypotheses. 6569.jpg?w=2000
Source:
https://www.educationquizzes.com/library/
America/Elementary-345/Grade-4/Gd-4-SL-
Discussion-Rules-main.jpg Group Activity
Conversation (Oral presentation) Students state their opinion of what is the
most favoured cartoon show on television.
Students state their belief of which show
would be the school’s favourite. The students
with the same preference work together as a
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Group shared their findings and concluded team to go around to the rest of the school to
whether the hypothesis should be accepted or find out the favourite cartoon show on
rejected. television from the school.
The class would report their findings and
each group would present the information
Think Pair Share collected.
Students are paired, each student creates a
hypothesis and the other gives the method
and means of testing the hypothesis. Students
work in pairs to test their findings on a topic.
Source:
https://i0.wp.com/www.benedictnewsonline.
org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Best-
Source: Cartoon-
https://iris.peabody.vanderbilt.edu/wp- graphic.jpg?resize=475%2C363&ssl=1
content/uploads/2013/01/palsK1_05_pairre
adingL.jpg
Individual Activities
Students would give their opinion on the day
they would read the most books. Students
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
would document the amount of books they
read daily for the week to test if their
hypothesis is accurate.
Source:
https://ecdn.teacherspayteachers.com/thumb
item/Read-Tally-Graph-Days-of-the-Week-
pt-2-1657281739/original-243823-2.jpg
Additional Resources and Materials
Teaching students about graphs: ASL Graphs for Kids - YouTube (6.35 minutes)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
A hypothesis is a belief made based on limited evidence as a starting point for further investigation. Therefore, hypotheses must be tested and
proven before they can be accepted. An example of a hypothesis is smoking is the leading cause of lung cancer.
Help students understand why making hypotheses is important in data analysis. Explain that hypotheses help guide their investigation and
provide a framework for testing and analyzing data. Help students understand the importance of background knowledge in forming hypotheses.
Encourage them to draw on their prior knowledge, research, or observations to make informed guesses about the relationship between
variables. Teach students about the process of analyzing data to evaluate their hypotheses. Help them understand how to interpret the data,
look for patterns or trends, and draw conclusions based on the evidence.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts- Define the term ‘hypothesis’ and give examples of hypotheses.
Social Studies - Test the hypothesis of the ratio of boys to girls that enter Kindergarten
Science - Test the hypothesis: air affects the rate of falling objects
HFLE -
Art/Craft -
Data Handling and Probability ELO 3.3
Introduction to the Subject:
Strand (Topic): Data Handling and Probability
Essential Learning Outcomes: Evaluating Inferences and Making Predictions Based on Data - Evaluating data descriptions and reports
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Analyze data to draw conclusions, make decisions, or stimulate other questions about the data sets.
Focus Questions: How can we use data to make decisions?
Why do we need to use data to make decisions?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Students will be able to: Product Whole Class Activities
Knowledge Students predict outcomes from math scenarios given. Predict the Story
1. State the meaning of making Teachers would give students mathematical
inferences. scenarios to predict the outcome.
2. Make predictions and inferences
based on trends in data. For example: Joshua has an ice cream shop. He sells:
3. Compare and contrast sets of data to Chocolate, Strawberry and Vanilla ice cream. He
draw conclusions. made $10, from the chocolate, $25 from Strawberry
and $15 from the vanilla. Joshua goes to the
Skills supermarket, which flavour ice cream would he buy
most?
1. Read and interpret data to make
inferences.
2. Use evidence to support inferences
based on data given to them. Classroom Changes Predictions
Values One student closes his or her eyes while 3
other children make changes to the
1. Combine text with prior knowledge Source: classrooms, such as closing the blinds or
to make inferences. https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F moving a child from one seat to the other.
2. Articulate how their mental concept %2Fwww.lessonplanet.com%2Fsearch%3Fkeywords%3Dp Then the student with their eyes closed has to
and text clues work together to help redicting%2Boutcomes%2Bmath&psig=AOvVaw3_BO predict what he or she thinks they would see
them make inferences. mNpui88- when they open their eyes.
nUaROrejBl&ust=1696442220793000&source=image
s&cd=vfe&opi=89978449&ved=0CBEQjRxqFwoTC
JCQifK52oEDFQAAAAAdAAAAABAE
‘What am I Predicting?’
Students would predict the future of one
thing and the rest of the class would try to
figure it out.
For example: “They will get smaller and thinner and
not limited to text and calls.” Answer: Cell phones
Individual Work
Students will complete worksheets on
predicting outcomes.
Source:
https://www.easyteacherworksheets.com/pa
ges/pdf/math/kindergarten/shapepatternpre
diction/7.gif
Additional Resources and Materials
Inferences | Making Inferences | Award Winning Inferences Teaching Video | What is an inference?
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Making predictions is a valuable skill that helps students actively engage with the content and develop critical thinking abilities.
Textual Clues: Teach students to look for clues within the text or context that can help them make predictions. These clues can include
foreshadowing, character actions, dialogue, or even the title or cover of a book.
Prior Knowledge: Encourage students to draw on their prior knowledge and experiences to make predictions. Help them understand that their
background knowledge can provide valuable insights and help them make more accurate predictions.
Evidence: Emphasise the importance of using evidence to support predictions. Encourage students to find specific details or information from the
text that support their predictions, rather than relying solely on guesswork
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts- Make predictions from text read.
Social Studies - Predict the population of the school based on figures from previous years.
Science - Predict the months in which rain would fall heavily based on information presented about the weather in a particular country.
HFLE -
Art/Craft - Make a collage of items before and after. (E.g.: What the first cell phone looked like vs a current cell phone)
Data Handling and Probability ELO 4.1
Introduction to the Subject:
Strand (Topic): Data Handling and Probability
Essential Learning Outcomes: Understanding and Applying Concepts of Probability - Predicting and describing the likelihood of events.
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Develop and apply language to describe the likelihood of events (E.g., always, sometimes, never, etc.)
Make and test predictions about the likelihood that the mode(s) of a data set from one population will be the same for data collected from a different population.
Focus Questions:
1. How can you describe the likelihood of an event occurring?
2. Why is it important to be able to describe the likelihood of an event?
3. How can you identify the mode of a data set?
4. What do you look for to determine if something is possible?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Students will be able to: Think, Pair & Share Group work and oral presentation.
Knowledge ● Pair students and provide them with a list of ● Place students into groups. Provide
probability related terms (e.g. likely, unlikely, each group with a scenario in which
● Define the terms associated with impossible, sometimes, etc.). Ask them to offer they are required to think about three
likelihood such as always, certain, a definition of each term. Students will then possible outcomes. Students will give
likely, sometimes, impossible and provide an example of a situation in which a brief presentation to state their
never etc. each of the terms can be used to describe the
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Distinguish among the terms related likelihood of its occurrence. They will share predictions and justify the reasons for
to likelihood. their work with the rest of the class. each.
● Identify the mode for a data set.
The West At school, your In your
Indies Cricket first class class of
● Understand the significance of the Observation
team intends usually begins 20, you
mode in a data set.
to play three at 9:00. For an find that
● Present students with a data set (e.g. ages of
cricket entire week you four
students in the class, the number of times
matches recorded the other
students are absent for the month). Observe
against India. time you students
Skills students as they work on finding the mode.
What are the arrived for your are
Ask students to explain its significance.
● Use appropriate terms to describe the possible first class. What always
likelihood of events occurring. outcomes of do you think competin
these matches? will be the g with
Product possible you to
outcomes? get the
Values Have students work in pairs to create a video to highest
explain how to identify the mode of the data set grades in
1. Work collaboratively to complete
presented in table form and on a picture graph. your
given tasks. maths
class.
2. Willingly participate in activities
Hence,
early in
3. Ask questions to understand concepts
the term
relating to probability.
you
decided
to work
extremely
hard.
Discuss
the
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
possible
outcomes
and give
reason
why
In 2021 and
2022, the
Manchester
airport in
London
records show
that half of the
incoming
Game planes arrived
from the
Label four corners in the classroom (certain, impossible, Caribbean. If
likely , unlikely). Read aloud different scenarios/events asked to
that can fall under each of the headings/ labels. Have predict how
students move to the corner to show their answer many planes
choice. will arrive
from the
Caribbean in
2023, what are
your
predictions?
Graphic Organizer
● Provide students with a list of events
to categorise as “certain”, “possible”,
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
and “impossible”. Have students work
in groups to classify each event and
share their reasons.
Source :
https://access.openupresources.org/curricula/our-k5-
math/en/grade-1/unit-2/section-d/lesson-
17/student.html
Video presentation
Probability For Kids (Likely, Most Likely, Least
Likely, May Be & Never) | Probability Examples
Math
Duration: 5:55 mins
Present the video clip to students to help
them understand and distinguish among the
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
different concepts associated with
probability/likelihood of events occurring.
Additional Resources and Materials
Probability! | Mini Math Movies | Scratch Garden
Tree diagram probability examples,
https://www.turtlediary.com/game/probability.html
Story: That’s a Possibility! A Book about What Might Happen by Bruce Goldstone
Story: A Very Improbable Story by Edward Einhorn
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Probability is the likelihood of something happening. It is used in business, weather forecasts, sports, science and much more. The probability
or likelihood of an event occurring can be expressed as a fraction, a percentage, on a number line, and by using probability vocabulary (certain,
likely, equally likely, unlikely, and impossible).
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts- Predicting outcomes in stories.
Social Studies - Using probability to draw conclusions about the population of their school, community etc.
Science - Predicting the likelihood of a magnet moving an object/ Predicting the likelihood of rain falling, sun shining etc.
Art/Craft - Creating a poster to show vocabulary related words and their meanings.
Data Handling and Probability ELO 4.2
Introduction to the Subject:
Strand (Topic): Data Handling and Probability
Essential Learning Outcomes: Understanding and Applying Concepts of Probability - Calculating Probabilities
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Determine general probabilities (0 means impossible and 1 means certain) for specific real-world
contexts and events.
Focus Questions:
1. How do you calculate the probability of an event?
2. Why do we need to calculate the probability of an event?
3. How is the probability of an event important in real life?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Students will be able to: Oral presentation Classroom Games
Present various scenarios to groups of students. Instruct ‘Bag of Skittles’ - Give each student a bag of
students to give a brief explanation on how they intend to Skittles and ask them to list the different
Knowledge determine the probability for each outcome. colours. Have them calculate the probability
of receiving each colour recorded. Finally, let
1. Differentiate between the terms Examples of scenarios them compare the results with their peers.
‘impossible’ and ‘certain’ in relation to
real- life events. a. Seeing an elephant at La Soufriere
2. Calculate the possibility of an event b. Christmas lights being sold in the week before
happening. Christmas.
3. Define probability and its relationship
to relative frequency of an item or Group work
event.
Have students work in pairs to list at least three impossible
Skills events and three certain events.
4. Classify events as being impossible or
Impossible events Certain events
certain.
5. Calculate probabilities by counting
the outcomes in a graph. 1. 1. Source: https://mathgeekmama.com/wp-
6. Solve simple problems involving 2. 2. content/uploads/2015/08/Skittles-Count-
probability. 3. 3. and-Graph-with-printables.jpg
4. 4.
Values
7. Willingly participate in activities in
and outside the classroom that
Observation
Online Games
involve determining the probability of
given life events occurring.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
8. Appreciate the use of probability as a Listen to students as they discuss their reasons for classifying Have students engage in online games to
measure of chance. given events as either impossible or certain. Students will be practise calculating probability.
encouraged to justify their reasons.
Students state the probability of each event.
Product
This section may also include relevant content related https://wordwall.net/resource/55248583
to each outcome. Students work in groups to complete an activity involving
classifying real-life events as certain or impossible using the https://wordwall.net/resource/10826344
numbers 0 and 1.
Gallery Walk
Have students work in groups to set up a
center. Each center would have a scenario
with simple probability, and several related
questions to answer. Have students in groups
of 3 4 workork together to answer the
questions.
Product
Independent Work
Students complete worksheets on probability.
Have students complete worksheets
independently to assess learning.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Source:
https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F
%2Fbrainly.ph%2Fquestion%2F16674404&psig=AOv
Vaw3ptXKgsSYL_oUEebOVjPLY&ust=169643163
9778000&source=images&cd=vfe&opi=89978449&ve
d=0CBEQjRxqFwoTCNiMubyS2oEDFQAAAAAd
AAAAABAa
Probability Story
Students write a short story that includes events Source:
with different probabilities (e.g., likely, unlikely, https://i.pinimg.com/474x/f8/24/2e/f8242
certain). ed8aecb80b9cfea1bc63a25319b.jpg
Hands-on Activity (Games)
Roll a die: Use a die with six sides or you can
use one with more sides for greater challenge.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Pupils will roll and find the probability of
getting a particular number.
Pull a card from a deck.
Flip a coin: Have students take turns to flip a
coin. Ask them to calculate the probability of
getting a head/tail.
Additional Resources and Materials
Video: Lesson Video: Probability: Certain, Possible, Impossible | Nagwa
Making predictions with probability | Statistics and probability | 7th grade | Khan Academy
Source:https://mathskills4kids.com/kindergarten/worksheets/17.probability/18-1.probability-more-likely-and-less-likely.png
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Probability is the state that an event is likely to occur. It is calculated by dividing the number of favourable events by the total number of possible
events. For example, what is the probability that we get a head if we toss a coin in the air. Number of favourable events is one because the coin has
1 head. Total number of possible events 2 ( head and tail). Therefore the possibility would be 1 divided by 2 which gives a half.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts- Predicting outcomes of events in stories
Social Studies - Using probability to predict the time their country will celebrate their festive activities.
Science - Using probability to predict the weather for a specific day or week.
HFLE -
Art/Craft - Creating
Pattern and Relationship ELO P1.1
v
Introduction to the Subject: Identifies the purpose and goals of the subject area with links to the Vision and the Essential Education Competencies.
Knowledge of the operations of numbers, which involves addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, to grade 3 students is necessary since it builds
a strong foundation in mathematics and helps them develop essential problem-solving and other mathematical skills and the confidence to tackle more
advanced mathematical concepts in the future. These skills are not only valuable in academic settings but also in practical, real-world situations.
Learning how to compute numbers at the Grade 3 level will result in basic mathematical competency, where students will acquire fundamental
mathematical skills essential for daily life and solving a wide range of mathematical problems.
The following are the goals of teaching these operations at this grade level:
Problem Solving: Teaching addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division equips students with the tools they need to solve a variety of real-world
problems. These operations are used in everyday situations, from calculating prices and making changes to measuring ingredients for recipes.
Number Sense: Developing an understanding of how numbers work and how they relate to each other is a key component of numeracy. These operations
help students develop number sense, enabling them to make estimations and understand the relative sizes of numbers.
Critical Thinking: Learning operations fosters critical thinking and logical reasoning skills. Students learn to analyze problems, identify the operations
needed to solve them and apply the appropriate mathematical strategy.
Mathematical Fluency: Practicing operations improves mathematical fluency, which means students can perform calculations quickly and accurately. This
fluency is important for more advanced math concepts in later grades.
Foundations for Algebra: The operations of numbers are the building blocks for more advanced mathematical concepts like algebra. Understanding how
to manipulate and solve equations is a crucial skill built on a solid foundation of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.
Preparation for Higher Grades: Proficiency in these operations is essential for success in higher grades, as students will encounter more complex
mathematical concepts and problem-solving tasks. Mastery of these basic operations is a prerequisite for understanding more advanced mathematics.
Communication Skills: Learning to express mathematical concepts and solutions through numbers, symbols, and words is important to mathematical
literacy. It enhances students' ability to communicate their thought processes and solutions effectively.
Increased Confidence: As students become more comfortable with operations, they gain confidence in their mathematical abilities. This can positively
impact their overall attitude toward math and their self-esteem.
Mathematical Reasoning: The operations of numbers encourage students to think critically and logically. They learn to analyze problems, choose
appropriate strategies, and explain their reasoning, fostering mathematical reasoning skills.
Interdisciplinary Skills: Mathematical operations are used in various subjects beyond math, such as science, economics, and engineering. Proficiency in
these operations enhances a student's ability to apply mathematical skills in other areas.
Life Skills: Beyond the classroom, understanding how to perform basic mathematical operations, such as budgeting, shopping, and measuring, is essential
for making informed decisions in everyday life.
Strand (Topic): Pattern and Relationship
Essential Learning Outcomes:
- Essential Learning Outcome P1.1: Recognizing, describing and extending patterns – Repeating Patterns
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
- identify, describe, extend, create, and make predictions about a variety of patterns, including those found in real-life contexts. Identify arithmetic
patterns (including patterns in the addition table or multiplication table) and explain them using properties of operations. For example, observe
that 4 times a number is always even, and explain why 4 times a number can be decomposed into two equal addends; demonstrate an
understanding of patterns (repeating, growing, place value)
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Use of authentic materials or hands-on
Knowledge Games manipulatives/use of everyday objects
- Identify the relationship between Pupils match arrays to multiplication number
repeated addition when multiplying. sentences. They find the corresponding number The learners will discover the relationship between
- Describe the pattern in the product of sentence for the array represented. multiplication and repeated addition.
numbers multiplied by 2-12 The 2 multiplication tables will be used to
demonstrate. Other multiplication tables can be
done in the same manner.
Skill
- Discover patterns in multiplication Firstly, the learners make a set of two bottle caps
fact families. on the grid.
- Justify your solution of the missing
number in an addition or
multiplication pattern.
Values
- Volunteer to solve authentic problems
by discovering the patterns.
Responses:
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Then the learners are asked: How many sets of
two did you make?
Answer: 1 set
Pupils match multiplication number sentences to
Here is how we represent 1 set of two using a
repeated addition number sentences.
multiplication number sentence.
1 x 2 = 2 means 1 set of 2 or 1 row of 2
To gain a greater understanding, especially to
discover the relationship between multiplication
and repeated addition, the learners represent 2 sets
of two bottle caps on the same grid.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The learners are then guided to write a
multiplication number sentence.
They are asked: How many sets of two did you
make?
Answer: 2 sets of two.
2 x 2 = 4 means 2 sets of 2
Group Work/Presentations
They are also asked: What did you do to one set of
The learners are placed in groups. They use repeated
two to get two sets of two?
addition to complete different multiplication tables.
Answer: Add one row of two/
They then study the products found to discover
The learners then represent two sets of 2 in an
patterns.
addition number sentence.
2 + 2 = 4
5 Multiplication Table
A. Complete the 5 multiplication table.
They are aided in seeing the pattern being
developed.
1 x 5 = 5
1 x 2 = 2 means 1 set of 2
2
2 x5 = 10
3 x 5 = 2 x 2 = 4 means 2 sets of 2
2 +2 = 4
4 x 5 =
The learners are encouraged to follow the same
pattern using bottle caps up to 12 sets of 2.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5 x 5 =
The same pattern is continued with three sets of 2.
The learners are asked what must be done to two
6 x 5 =
sets of 2 to get three sets of two.
7 x 5 = Example:
8 x 5 =
9 x 5 =
3 x 2 = 6
10 x 5 2 + 2 + 2 = 6
=
The learners are aided to come up with the
11 x 5 conclusion: To find the next number in the two-
= multiplication table, you add 2.
12 x 5 They are also guided with discovering the pattern
= for the repeated addition, for example:
1 set of 2 is represented in the following way using
A. Answer the following questions:
the multiplication sign.
1 x 2= 2
we cannot add 2 to anything to get 2, so we have
1. What pattern do you see in the products
one 2.
of the 5-multiplication table?
Answer: 5, 0, pattern in the ones place of
2 x 2 = 4
the values.
This means we have 2 sets of 2.
Also, the products are the numbers you say
There are two sets of 2, so we add 2 to itself.
when counting by 5, starting with 5.
3 x 2 = 6
2. Study the numbers multiplied by 5 to get
It tells us we have 3 sets of 2.
a product with 0 in the ones place. When is
This tells us that we add 2 to itself 3 times.
there a product with 0 in the ones place in
2 + 2 + 2 = 6
the 5-multiplication table?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Answer: When 5 is multiplied by an even
number, the product has 0 at the end. Now, the learners will complete the table below
using the same pattern.
3. When does the product end with 5 in the
ones place in the 5 multiplication table?
1 x 2 = 2 2
Answer: When 5 is multiplied by an odd
number.
2 x 2 = 4 2 + 2 = 4
6 Multiplication Table 3 x 2 = 6 2 + 2 + 2 = 6
A. Complete the 5 multiplication table.
4 x 2 =
1 x 6 = 6
5 x 2 =
2 x 6 = 12
6 x 2 =
3 x 6 =
7 x 2 =
4 x 6 =
8 x 2 =
5 x 6 =
9 x 2 =
6 x 6 =
10 x 2 =
7 x 6 =
11 x 2 =
8 x 6 =
12 x 2 =
9 x 8 = The slower learners are encouraged to use the grid
to assist.
10 x 6
= Response
1 x 2 = 2 2
11 x 6
=
2 x 2 = 4 2 + 2 = 4
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
12 x 6 3 x 2 = 6 2 + 2 + 2 = 6
=
4 x 2 = 8 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 = 8
B. Answer the following questions: 5 x 2 = 10 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 = 10
1. What patterns are the patterns found in
the 6-multiplication table? 6 x 2 = 12 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 = 12
Answers: All the products are even.
There is a visible pattern in the ones column 7 x 2 = 14 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 =
where the digits end with numbers in this 14
pattern:
8 x 2 = 16 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2
6, 2, 8, 4, 0.
= 16
2. Following the pattern 35, 42, 48, 54, 60,
9 x 2 = 18 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2
and 72, what number will come next?
+ 2 = 18
Answer: 78
10 x 2 = 20 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2
+ 2 + 2 = 20
Checklist
11 x 2 = 22 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2
A checklist is used to assess the learners + 2 + 2 + 2 = 22
understanding of multiplication fact families. The
following activity will be given to the learners to 12 x 2 = 24 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2
complete. The learners will then use the assessment + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 = 24
checklist to assess their understanding.
What do you notice about the products of
multiplying by 2?
A. The learners are given numbers to create
Possible answers: add two each time to get to the
multiplication fact families.
following number.
- The products of multiplying by 2 are even
1. 4. 20, 5
numbers.
2. 42, 6, 7
- The products are the numbers you say
3. 3,12,4
when you’re counting by 2 starting with 2.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
C. Write two multiplication fact families with a The learners are asked to represent the following
product of 18. multiplication number sentences using repeated
addition. Remember what the multiplication
number sentence means.
Fact Families Assessment Checklist
Example: 6 x 7 =
Create Fact, families, Yes No
Remember: 6 x 7 means 6 sets of 7 so
6 x 7 = 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 = 42
1. 4, 20,5 4 x 5 = 20 Complete the following using the same pattern.
a. 3 x 7 =
5 x 4 = 20
b. 5 x 4 =
c. 4 x 5 =
2. 42, 6, 7 6 x 7 = 42
Responses:
7 x 6 = 42 a. 3 x 7 = 7 + 7 + 7
b. 5 x 4 = 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 + 4
3. 3, 12, 4 3 x 4 = 12 c. 4 x 5 = 5 + 5 + 5 +5
Use of manipulatives
4 x 3 = 12
The learners study the 3 multiplication table.
The learners use their understanding of the 2
2 Fact Families with a multiplication tables to answer the following
product of 12 questions:
3 x 6 = 18
6 x 3 = 18
2 x 9 = 18
9 x 2 = 18
1 x 18 = 18
18 x 1 = 18
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Think, Pair, Share
1. What is the product of 1 x 3?
The learners are presented with the information Answer: 3
presented in a table. They study the relationship 2. How do we represent 1 x 3 using the bottle caps
found in the information presented and then solve a on the following grid?
problem. Guided questions are given to guide the
process.
Study the table below to answer the following
question.
a. How many eggs were laid in 12 days?
b. How long will it take the hens to lay 36 eggs?
Table showing the number of eggs laid in a
given number of days.
Number of days Number of eggs laid
5 20
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
10 40
15 60
Guiding questions 3. What do we do to 1 x 3 to get 2 x 3?
1. What is the common number that connects Answer: add 3
5 and 20, 10 and 40 and 15 and 60?
2. How will you use this number with 12 to 4. 1 x 3 = 3
find the number of eggs laid in 12 days? 2 x 3 = 6
What is three times 3 equal to?
The learners shared how they arrived at their What can we do to 6 to get the product of 3 x 3?
solutions.
Answer: Add 3
5. What is the product of 4 x 3?
1 x 3 = 3
2 x 3 = 6
3 x 3 = 9
4 x 3 = ______
How will we get the product of 4 x 3?
Do you notice a pattern?
Answer: Every time one more set is added to the 3
multiplication table, we add three.
Starting from 3, we add three each time to get the
products of the 3 multiplication tables.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Think Pair Share The learners use the skip counting by three to
The learners are placed in pairs. They read the complete the following table:
problem, pair up to solve it, then present their
solution to the class.
1 x 3 3
2 x 3 6
3 x 3 9
4 x 3 12
5 x 3
6 x 3
7 x 3
8 x 3
9 x 3
10 x 3
11 x 3
12 x 3
13 x 3
14 x 3
15 x 3
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The learners are asked: Do you see a pattern in the
2 and 3 multiplication tables?
Answer: They both require skip counting. When
we multiply by two, we add 2 each time, and when
we multiply by 3, we add three each time.
The products of the 2 multiplication tables are all
even numbers.
There is a pattern in one's column where the digits
end with 2, 4, 6, 8, and 0, and the pattern repeats.
When a number is multiplied by one, we get the
same number.
The learners are asked to use skip counting to
complete the 4-multiplication table.
1 x 4 = 4 = 4
2 x 4 = 4 + 4 = 8
3 x 4 =
4 x 4 =
5 x 4 =
6 x 4 =
7 x 4 =
8 x 4 =
9 x 4 =
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
10 x 4 =
11 x 4 =
12 x 4 =
Student responses:
1 x 4 = 4 = 4
2 x 4 = 4 + 4 = 8
3 x 4 = 4 + 4 + 4 = 12
4 x 4 = 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 = 16
5 x 4 = 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 20
=
6 x 4 = 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 24
+ 4 =
7 x 4 = 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 28
+ 4 + 4 =
8 x 4 = 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 32
+ 4 +4 + 4 =
9 x 4 = 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 36
+ 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 =
10 x 4 = 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 40
+ 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 +
4 =
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
11 x 4 = 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 44
+ 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 +
4 + 4 =
12 x 4 = 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 48
+ 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 +
4 + 4 + 4 =
Is there a visible pattern in the product of the 4-
multiplication table?
Response: All the products are even numbers.
The values in the ones place follow a pattern of 4,
8, 2., 6, 0.
Discussions
The learners learn about multiplication fact
families.
The two multiplication number sentences make a
multiplication fact family.
3 x 2 = 6
2 x 3 = 6
What do we notice about the numbers used?
Answer: The same numbers are used. Even when
the two multiplier and multiplicand positions are
exchanged, the product is the same.
This tells us the commutative property of the
multiplier, and multiplicand allows for the
positions of these numbers to be swapped without
changing the product.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The learners are asked to find a fact family from
the multiplication chart in pairs.
The learners are asked:
Why do you think it is important to know about
the commutative properties of numbers when
multiplying them?
The learners discuss the importance of this
information and how this knowledge can be used
when multiplying.
The learners study the multiplication tables and
answer the following questions?
1. What kind of number is the product of
multiplying any number by an even number?
a. odd
b. even
2. What kind of number is the product of
multiplying any odd number by an even number?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
a. odd
b. even
3. What kind of number is the product of
multiplying any odd number by an odd number?
a. odd
b. even
Group or Pair Work
The learners are engaged in looking for
relationships between the 2 and 4, 3 and 6, 4 and
8, and 5 and 10 multiplication tables using a
multiplication chart.
2 and 4 multiplication tables
Questions
1 x 2 = 2 1 x 4 = 4
2 x 2 = 4 2 x 4 = 8
3 x 2 = 6 3 x 4 = 12
Are you seeing a pattern?
We multiply 1 x 2, and we get to and 1 x 4 and we
get 4.
What is multiplied by 2 to get 4?
2 x 2 = 4 and 2 x 4 = 8.
What do we multiply by 4 to get 8?
Through discussions the learners should discover a
pattern of doubling.
Manipulatives can be used to assist the slower
learners in discovering the pattern.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3 and 6 multiplication tables
The learners vertically list the products of the 3
times tables and then the 6 times tables in a table
like the one shown below.
3 6
6 12
9 18
12 24
15 30
18 36
21 42
24 48
27 54
30 60
33 66
36 72
They are encouraged to double the answers in the
same row as the 3 times tables to find the products
for the 6 times tables. They then verify their
responses using the multiplication chart.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The learners are asked if there is a pattern of
doubling.
They discuss the ways this can be useful.
They investigate whether there is a pattern of
doubling between 4 and 8, 5 and 10 and 6 and 12
times tables.
The students should conclude the following:
All products of 4 are double the products of 2.
The products of 6 are double the products of 3.
Also, all products of 8 are twice the products of 4,
and all products of 10 are twice those of 5.
Additional Resources and Materials
(Additional material and resources that are not included in the Inclusive Learning and/or Inclusive Assessment Strategies that may be useful for lesson planning)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher, such as reading material at
a lower or higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the
curriculum)
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the discretion of the Team Leads
and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, and Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Pattern and Relationship ELO P1.2
Introduction to the Subject: Identifies the purpose and goals of the subject area with links to the Vision and the Essential Education Competencies.
Strand (Topic): Pattern and Relationship
Essential Learning Outcomes: P1.2 Recognizing, describing and extending patterns – Increasing and Decreasing Patterns
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
- Demonstrate understanding patterns (repeating, increasing, decreasing, place value) by identifying, describing, reproducing, extending, creating,
translating from one representation to another and sorting.
- Can describe a pattern rule.
- Create and describe patterns to illustrate relationships among whole numbers up to 1000.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
.
Knowledge SCO 1, 2, 5 SCO 1, 2, 5
1. Identify and copy repeating elements in a
repeating pattern. Observe students as they work. Distribute Pattern blocks to students. Model the
Observation Checklist following pattern below for students and have
2. Explain the rule used to create a repeating them copy the pattern with their blocks.
nonnumerical pattern. Behavioural Criteria E S NI
3. Identify the rule in an increasing and 1. Make a repeating Figure 1
decreasing pattern. pattern.
4. Identify errors in an increasing and
decreasing pattern. 2. Students identify
Have students identify the shapes represented in
the pattern
the pattern. Have students observe the shapes
core/element.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Skills and identify similarities and differences between
5. Translate a pattern to a different medium 3. translate the the shapes.
(e.g., clap, jump, clap, jump instead of pattern using
triangle, circle, triangle, circle). different Comparisons will be represented on a Venn
6. Represent an increasing and decreasing mediums Diagram.
pattern concretely and pictorially and
explain the rule. E -Excellent, S- Satisfactory, NI- Needs Improving
7. Extend the element in an increasing and
decreasing pattern.
Identify and describe increasing and SCO 3, 6, 7
decreasing patterns in various contexts
(e.g., a hundred chart, number line, Think Pair Share
Guided Questions
addition tables, a calendar, a tiling pattern,
or drawings). Allow learners to work in small mixed-ability
What shapes are in the pattern? (square and
8. Solve a problem using increasing and groups. Observe them as they generate ideas for
Triangle)
decreasing patterns. finding the pattern rules. Listen as they discuss
How can we compare and contrast the attributes
with peers. Allow them to explain how they derive
of the shapes?
Values their answer and reasons for selected pattern
9. Create problems with repeating and rules. Encourage discussion on basic addition or
Have students then identify the shapes and name
increasing environmental patterns (e.g., subtraction.
them as they are represented, naming the
house/room numbers, flower petals, book
repeating pattern (triangle, square, square, triangle
pages, calendar, pine cones, leap years). SCO 3, 6, 7
square, square...)
Guided Questions
This section may also include relevant content related to Behavioural Criteria E S NI
1. What is a pattern element/core? (what is
each outcome.
being repeated)?
2. What type of pattern is being represented?
3. Other than the shapes, is there another
core that can be represented in the
pattern? (green, orange, orange)
4. Can you continue the pattern?
5. What if I added triangle and triangle
squares to the pattern? (Have students
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
1. Represent the model it and identify that there is an error
pattern using in the pattern element.)
manipulatives.
2. Students identify Model how to translate a pattern with students
pattern rules. using mediums.
3. Extend the Figure 2
pattern using the
pattern rule. A
B B A B B A B B
E -Excellent, S- Satisfactory, NI- Needs Improving
3 4 4 3 4 4 3 4 4
Specifically consider how these:
Support learner-centred assessment. Ask students to think-pair-share to translate the
Inform teaching and learning pattern using verbs(actions). For example.: clap,
Affirms identity snap, snap or sit, jump, jump)
Support differences in learners
Group work
Each assessment included in this section should In groups of 2-3, students will use any items in the
outline the purpose of the assessment and the class to create a repeating pattern, identify the
type of assessment (conversation, observation, pattern element, translate the pattern using
product, etc.) and provide samples of the different mediums, and continue the pattern.
assessment tools (rubrics, checklists, etc.)
SCO 3, 6, 7
It will not be necessary to provide an assessment
strategy for each SCO; SCOs may be clustered, Next to the previous pattern, have students model
and some assessment strategies will give overall the following pattern using the squares. Have
indications of progress within the ELO. students compare and contrast the previous
pattern with this new pattern. (This pattern is
getting bigger instead of repeating; therefore, it is
an increasing pattern))
Have students identify the numbers below the
pattern.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Students will identify the pattern rule.
One way to find the pattern rule is to subtract two
elements next to each other. Example 8-6 = 2;
therefore, the rule is adding 2.
Figure 3
2 4 6 8
Have students extend the pattern using the rule.
Write 3, 6, 9, ____, ____
Have students represent the data using
manipulatives, using Figure 3 as a model. Have
students Identify the pattern rule
and extend the pattern. Repeat with the following:
5, 10, 15, _____, ______
4, 8, ___, _____, _____
Explain that for bigger 2-digit numbers, a number
chart can be used.
Another way is to use a number chart to count the
number of jumps.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
83, 86, 89, ____, ____, ____
26, 28, ____, ____, 34, ____
Challenge
7, 6, 5, ____, ____
Students will identify that this pattern is the
inverse/opposite that decreases instead of
increases.
Guided questions:
How is this pattern different from the one pattern
before?
How would we find the rule? (subtract)
SCO 9
MATH TALK
Students will engage in think-pair-share to name
the 3 types of patterns learnt for the day’s lesson.
They will also give examples of each type of
pattern in the real world.
1. repeating pattern
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
2. increasing or growing pattern
3. decreasing pattern
Specifically, consider how this support:
Equitable learning
Meaningfully constructed learning
Deep and comprehensive learning
Identify affirmation
Learner difference
Each learning strategy outlines the materials that will be
used for the strategy.
Additional Resources and Materials
(Additional material and resources that are not included in the Inclusive Learning and/or Inclusive Assessment Strategies that may be useful for lesson planning)
● Pattern blocks
● Unifix blocks
● 2D shapes manipulatives
● Number chart
● Number line
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher, such as reading material at a
lower or higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
A repeating pattern repeats the same pattern element over and over.
The Pattern element is what is repeated in a repeating pattern.
An increasing pattern is a pattern in which one or more elements of the sequence or arrangement increases.
An increasing pattern is a pattern in which one or more elements of the sequence or arrangement decreases.
The pattern rules tell how much a pattern increases or decreases.
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the
curriculum)
Science:
Repeating patterns in the different life cycles and the water cycle.
Increasing patterns in living things.
Language:
Increasing Pattern in Sequencing.
Arts and Craft
Repeating pattern in Tessellation. A tessellation or tiling is the covering of a surface, often a plane, using one or more geometric shapes called tiles, with no
overlaps and no gaps.
Repeated and Increasing patterns can be found in crocheting and basket weaving.
Music
Patterns can be found in Rhythm, melody, harmony, and musical composition.
Increasing pattern in crescendo.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the discretion of the Team Leads
and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, and Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Pattern and Relationship ELO P2.1
Introduction to the Subject: Identifies the purpose and goals of the subject area with links to the Vision and the Essential Education Competencies.
Strand (Topic): Pattern and Relationship
Essential Learning Outcomes: P2.1 Variables and Relationships – Representing Unknowns
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
- Represent the idea of a variable as an unknown quantity using a letter or a symbol;
- Can solve simple, open sentences with one unknown for addition and subtraction up to two 4-digit numbers and multiplication and division fact
families.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
(Note not all 3 below need to be explicitly identified for
each SCO, but the presence of all three should be Conversation (peer assessment) SCO# 1, 2
apparent.
Student will work with a peer. One student will
Knowledge write a question using a different operation, and
1. Identify the inverse function of the other student write the inverse of the
operations. problem. For example
(Example: 4 + 5 = 9, 9-5=4) One student may write: 15 - 6 = 9
2. Represent an unknown quantity. Another student is asked to figure out what they
with a letter or symbol can be used to could add to 6 to get the answer 15. Hence, this
represent changes the sum from subtraction to an addition
to find the answer. 6 + 9 = 15
Skill
3. Use the part-part-whole model to Using Multiplication and Division
demonstrate the inverse function of
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
operations. For example, one students will write the problem Display the picture above to students. Have
4. Use the part-part-whole model to solve 12÷ 3 = 4 and another student must recognize them describe what they see. Explain that people
open sentences in addition/ subtraction that the inverse of division is multiplication and used symbols or letters in ancient times to
and multiplication and division fact that this sum can also be solved by expressing it represent unknown or hidden things in real life
families. as 4 x 3 = 12. Students will justify their answers. (e.g., secret codes, ancient hieroglyphs).
Value Word problems Create a code that students must decipher using
5. Demonstrate a positive attitude when the hieroglyphics key as the clue.
solving problems with one unknown. One student may say, I'm thinking of a number. I added
4 to it. I divide it by 2. I ended up with 17. What Code 1
number was I thinking of?
Another student solves the problem and justifies (33)
the solution.
Code 2
SCO 3 &4 Product (self-assessment)
Students will complete the worksheet and be
given a mark scheme to provide feedback on
their work. For example, (325)
Introduce the concept of using letters or symbols
in math to represent unknown quantities, such as
A, B, X, Y, OR, and explain that these are called
variables.
Display the following for students to see.
__ + 5 = 12.
Explain that a letter can be used to represent the
missing value.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Retrieved from Example:
https://www.twinkl.co.uk/resource/wl-inverses- a + 5 = 12 or x + 5 = 12
differentiated-activity-sheets.
SCO 2 & 5: Solving problems involving Explain that to solve the equation, the
equations orally and giving reasons for solutions. inverse/opposite operation can be used.
For example: Guided questions
What operation is being used in the number
sentence/equation?
What is the inverse of the opposite of that
operation? (addition’s inverse is subtraction)
Is an addend or sum missing from the equation?
Challenge students to use the numbers in the
equation to create the inverse number sentence in
the equation. (Hint: Read the equation from right
to left)
a + 5 = 12
12 - 5 =a
SCO 3 & 4
After monitoring student discussion and
solutions.
Introduce the following models as solutions to
simplify.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
For addition and multiplication: part + part =
Whole (Small + Small = Big)
For subtraction and division: Whole - part = part
(bigger - small = smaller)
Have students input the digits into the model.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Guided questions:
What is the operation represented in the number
sentence?
Which pattern does addition follow: part + part
= whole or Whole - part = part?
Which number represents the whole in the
equation? (12)
Which number represents the parts in the
equation? (5 & a)
What number sentence will be represented?
.
Represent 12-7=a
a= 5 therefore 7 + 5 = 12
Show 25 - x = 10
In groups, have students think-pair and share
how they would use the part-whole model to
solve the following equation.
The guided questions below to guide students to
the solution.
Guided questions
What is the whole? (21)
What are the parts? (10 and X)
The Teacher will explain that using the inverse is
unnecessary for this equation. Subtraction can be
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
used instead, where the 2 parts are switched in
the equation/.
25-x =10
25-10=x
x=15
Repeat the process with the multiplication
sentence below.
4 x b= 20
Ask students to name the inverse of
multiplication. (division).
Students will represent the information on the
part-whole chart.
4 x b = 20
20 / 4 = b
b = 5
The teacher will play; I’m thinking of a number
game with students. Students will write the
equation and use the inverse and part-whole
method to solve.
6. I’m thinking of a number when added to 15,
gives a sum of 36.
(b + 15 =36,
part = b, 15
whole = 36
36 -15 = b, b = 21
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
7. I’m thinking of numbers when divided into
45, which gives a quotient of 9.
(45 / x =9)
8. Switch the parts to 45 /9= x, x=5)
● Give students word problems involving
unknown quantities and ask them to write
and solve equations using variables.
● Provide different levels of difficulty to
cater to students' varying abilities.
● Encourage students to explain their
thinking and reasoning behind their
equation choices.
● Allow time for students to work
individually or in pairs and provide
support as needed.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
SCO 3 & 4
Observation:
Use the following observational checklist below
to monitor learners as they engage in variables
and sharing activity.
Behavioural Criteria E S NI
1. Identifies the
whole.
2. Identifies the parts.
3. Identifies inverse
operation.
4. Completed the
part-whole model
5. finds the number
that the variable
represents.
E -Excellent, S- Satisfactory, NI- Needs Improving
Additional Resources and Materials
(Additional material and resources that are not included in the Inclusive Learning and/or Inclusive Assessment Strategies that may be useful for lesson planning)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher, such as reading material at
a lower or higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
Key Vocabulary
Variable Unknown Symbol Equation
A variable is an alphabet or term representing an unknown number, value, or quantity.
Inverse operations are opposite operations. They are the operation that reverses the effect of another operation.
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the
curriculum)
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the discretion of the Team Leads
and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, and Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Pattern and Relationship ELO P2.2
Introduction to the Subject: Identifies the purpose and goals of the subject area with links to the Vision and the Essential Education Competencies.
Strand (Topic): Pattern and Relationship
Essential Learning Outcomes: Variables and Relationships – Understanding and Representing Equivalence
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
- Can determine if and explain why two given quantities are equal or unequal;
- Apply properties to determine equality and inequality (quantities over 100, distance, area, arithmetic expressions)
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Knowledge SCO 1 & 2 SCO 1 & 2
1. State the definition of the following
vocabulary words:” equal, unequal, Students will use prior knowledge on what they
quantity, and compare. know about the different terms listed in the
2. Use equal and unequal symbols correctly objectives.
when comparing.
Skill SCO 9
3. Demonstrate how to compare two
quantities using symbols such as = for Pop Quiz
equal and ≠ not equal, > for greater than Students will be given a sheet of paper with a
● Each student will be given a card with a
and < for lesser than. series of number comparisons using equal and
word, symbol or definition. They will be
unequal symbols. Have students circle the correct
given a certain amount of time to find the
Value symbol for each comparison within a time limit
person that matches their symbol, word or
of 2 minutes. Collect the papers and review the
definition. They will then present to the class
answers together.
what their word or symbol means.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
4. Recognize the importance of equality in Compare using the Symbols SCO 3
solving problems. Symbol Relay Race
Using a set of visual representations, such as Divide the class into teams. Give each team a
number lines or bar models, the student will whiteboard and marker. Call out a number
accurately compare numerical expressions using comparison or number sentence comparison
the equal and unequal symbols, showing an using equal or unequal symbols, and the first
understanding of their meaning and application. student from each team must correctly write the
symbol on their team's whiteboard. The first team
to hold up the correct symbol gets a point.
Repeat with different comparisons for a few
rounds and declare the winning team at the end.
Guided Question
Why is it important to correctly use equal and
unequal symbols when comparing numbers?
Additional Resources and Materials
(Additional material and resources that are not included in the Inclusive Learning and/or Inclusive Assessment Strategies that may be useful for lesson planning)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher, such as reading material at
a lower or higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the
curriculum)
Arts & Crafts/ Engineering
● Students can create the equal & inequality symbols using popcicile sticks. They can use what they create to compare different objects in sets or number sentences.
● Students can draw and design floor plans using rectangles and squares and then find the area of each room or the total area of the room.
Language Arts
● Comprehension - Students will listen to stories being read to them and can answer questions based on what they learnt from the story. They can also do a journal entry and
write a summary of the book that was read to them.
● Students can complete journal entries by answering different questions from their topic or objective.
● Compare and contrast Area and Perimeter
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the discretion of the Team Leads
and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, and Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
PATTERN AND RELATIONSHIPS
Introduction to Topic:
Strand (Topic): Pattern and Relation ELO O2.3
Essential Learning Outcomes: Essential Learning Outcome 2.3 Variables and Relationships – Writing Expressions and Equations
Can represent and explain, concretely and in writing, the preservation of equality in addition and subtraction using simple, open sentences.
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Can represent and explain, concretely and in writing,
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
SCO 1,2 &3
Knowledge SCO 1, 2 &3
1. Identify variables (represented as letters Manipulatives:
or symbols) within mathematical Story Problems Use concrete materials that students can relate to
expressions or equations. The Farmer's Field in their daily lives. Use objects like mangoes,
2. Write simple mathematical expressions A farmer has n apples in one basket and 4 apples in blocks, candies, or toys to demonstrate the
using variables to represent unknown another basket. If he combines both baskets, he will have concept of equality.
quantities (e.g., 3 + x = 7). 15 apples in total. Write an equation to show how many
3. Write basic equations using variables, apples the farmer initially had. Engage students in hands-on activities that
demonstrating the concept of equality involve sorting and grouping objects to explore
(e.g., x + 5 = 12). Example Response: n+4=15 equality. Have them sort objects into equal
groups and discuss why they are equal.
Skills The Pizza Party: additionally, allow students to create a blank
4. Recognize relationships between numbers Emily ordered p pizzas for her party. After everyone had group to represent the unknown.
and variables in simple mathematical their share, there were 3 pizzas left. If she started with 10
contexts. pizzas, write an equation representing the situation.
Example Response: p−3=10
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5. Solve basic addition and subtraction
equations to find the variable's value (e.g., SCO4 and 5
x - 3 = 8, x = 11).
Varied Representation:
Value Provide problems in various formats. Some
6. Create word problems involving variables, students might excel with equations, while others
requiring classmates to write equations to may benefit from visual representations or word
https://study.com/academy/lesson/how-to-
solve them. problems.
write-equations-formulas.html
Equation-Based Problem
SCO4 and 5
Problem 1: Solve for x: 4+x=9
Games
Visual Representation:
Number Line Hopscotch:
Problem 2: Use the number line to show the
How to Play: Use masking tape to create a number
relationship between 3 and 8. Place a mark where the
line on the floor. Assign different mathematical operations
variable x would be.
(e.g., +2, -3) to specific numbers. Students take turns
hopping on the number line, following the operations to
determine their next hop.
Word Problem:
SCO 6
Problem 3: Jenny had some apples. She ate 3 apples,
Guided Examples:
and now she has 7 apples. How many apples did she have
Strategy: Begin with guided examples where the teacher
at the beginning? Write an equation to represent this.
models creating a word problem with a variable and
writing the corresponding equation.
SCO 6
Implementation: Collaboratively create a sample word
problem as a class, discussing the thought process and the
Math Journals:
steps involved.
Strategy: Assign students to keep math journals where
they create word problems involving variables. They can
illustrate the scenarios to aid understanding.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Implementation: Periodically, students swap journals
and solve each other's problems, reinforcing the concept of
writing equations for word problems.
Additional Resources and Materials
Spinner wheel, bingo cards, ten patterns, local fruits, ludo sheet, playing cards, dice, number lines, number cards, balance scales, addition and subtraction
wheel
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
The preservation of equality in addition and subtraction using simple, open sentences is a fundamental concept in mathematics, particularly in algebra. It
refers to the principle that when you perform the same operation (either addition or subtraction) on both sides of an equation, the equation remains balanced
and true.
An open sentence is a mathematical statement containing an unknown value, e.g. 3 + x = 7
Closed sentence is a mathematical sentence where all the values are known, e.g. 3+4 =7
Equality means that both sides of the equation have the same value, e.g. 7+8 =15 0R 7+8 = 10+5
A variable is a mathematical symbol that can represent an unknown value.
Preservation of Equality: When you have an equation with an open sentence and perform the same operation (either addition or subtraction) on both sides
of the equation, you ensure that the equation remains true. Here's how it works:
Addition: The equality is preserved if you add the same number to both sides of an equation. For example:
If you have "x + 4 = 9," you can add 4 to both sides to get "x + 4 + 4 = 9 + 4," which simplifies to "x + 8 = 13."
Subtraction: Similarly, the equality is preserved if you subtract the same number from both sides of an equation. For example:
If you have "x + 8 = 13," you can subtract 8 from both sides to get "x + 8 - 8 = 13 - 8," which simplifies to "x = 5."
The open sentence remains true in both cases because the operation was performed equally on both sides of the equation. This concept is crucial in algebra
and problem-solving, as it allows you to find the value of the variable (in this case, "x") by isolating it on one side of the equation while keeping the equation
balanced and accurate.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Activities:
Creation of riddles /sentences with singular and plural of nouns to show understanding of addition and subtraction.
For example, If Tommy has five red cars, Micah has six, and Noah has fifteen.
How many cars do Tommy and Micah need to get to have the same number of cars as Noah?
Presentations: Students show two boxes with the same number of objects in each box and discuss how they are equal.
Math Storytelling:
Students create short stories incorporating math problems involving addition and subtraction. They write open sentences to represent the problems and
explain the steps to preserve equality.
Students maintain math journals where they write about real-life situations involving addition and subtraction. They use open sentences to represent the
problems and explain their solutions in writing.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Literacy: Creation of word problems, reading and understanding story problems
Civics:
Science
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, and Environment that are integrated:
Local fruits and materials
Games
Caribbean folktales
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Pattern and relationship ELO P3.1
Introduction to the Subject:
Strand (Topic): Pattern and Relationships
Essential Learning Outcomes: P3.1 Modelling Quantitative Relationships and Analyzing Change – Modelling Patterns and Relationships
with Equations and Functions
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
Use models to represent and solve problems (tallies, drawings, concrete materials, etc.); model problem situations with objects and use representations
such as graphs, tables, and equations to draw a conclusion.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
SCO 1 SCO 1
Knowledge Story Problems: Present real-life scenarios in the Visual Aids:
form of story problems that require students to
identify relationships and patterns. Drawings: Encourage students to draw pictures
or diagrams to help them visualize and solve
Skills Toy Sharing Story: problems given patterns and relationships.
Scenario: Three friends, Amy, Ben, and Chloe,
have a collection of 15 toys. They want to share
Values the toys equally among themselves. How many
1. Identify the relationship/pattern by using toys will each friend get, and are there any toys
different representations (tables graphs, left over?
and simple equations)
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. Recognize and describe patterns in
number sequences and tables SCO2
3. Identify the relationship between input
and output values. Pattern Puzzles: Create pattern puzzles where
4. Determine the function between the students must match a sequence of numbers or
input and output symbols to a given pattern. This adds a problem-
5. Explain how the input and output values solving element to the assessment.
are related in simple functions, using
appropriate language
(e.g., "When the input increases by 2, the
output also increases by 2") https://www.twinkl.com/resource/us2-m-363-
7. Identify and explain changes in number multiplication-strategies-display-posters
patterns, recognizing the different
SCO2
operations involved in the relationship
(additions, subtractions, or
Collaborative Learning: Foster collaborative
multiplications)
learning environments where students work
https://www.math-only-math.com/3rd-grade- together to identify and describe patterns. This
patterns.html allows for peer support and the sharing of
different perspectives.
SCO 3,4,5
Visual Representations:
Create visual representations like tables or charts
to illustrate the relationship between input and
output values. Visual learners can benefit from
seeing the patterns and connections.
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/3927983987335
Observational Checklist:
93456/
Integrate the checklist into classroom activities
that involve working with numbers.
SCO3, 4, 5
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Place a tick by the appropriate response.
ITEMS YES NO
Can the student explain
the relationship between
input and output clearly
and concisely, using
appropriate terminology?
Can the student identify
the numbers that represent
the output?
What strategy does the
student use to identify the
relationship between the https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop
numbers? &v=1486kIXmoU8
Can the student identify
patterns in input-output
tables or sequences? Tables: Teach students to organize data in tables. If
you're working on a word problem that involves keeping
Can the student predict the track of time or quantities, create a table to help them see
output for a given input the information clearly.
using the provided
equation or pattern? For example, if they are tracking the number of books
read in a week, they can use a table with days of the week
Can the student explain in one column and the number of books read in another
the relationship between column.
input and output clearly
and concisely, using
appropriate terminology? SCO 6
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Can the student use visual
Real-World Context
aids or diagrams to
illustrate the input-output
Connect the use of models to real-world
relationship effectively?
situations. For example, the number of sweets in a jar
change as it is eaten or how a plant grows taller each day.
Can the student adapt their
understanding to different
types of input-output
problems?
Engage students in hands-on activities that
involve change.
Measure the height of a plant each day and record the data
SCO 6 using a table.
Journal This can be a fun way to introduce the concept of
functions and how one variable changes with
Students make entries about their methods to another.
identify the pattern or relationship. Also, they can
include generalizations formulated and equations
as well as the strategies they use to ensure that the
function is correct. Further, they can indicate Concrete Materials: Use physical objects like
their feelings about the mathematics they are counters, cubes, or coins to model problems. If
learning and their preferred methods. you have a problem with addition, give students
physical objects to represent the numbers and
Interactive Games: educational games that then physically combine them.
involve identifying changes in number patterns to
understand how additions, subtractions, or For example, if they need to add 3 and 4, they can
multiplications affect number patterns. use three counters and four counters, physically
combine them, and count the total.
Number Pattern Bingo
Create bingo cards with number patterns on
them.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Call out equations that represent additions, Utilize concrete objects like blocks, coins, or
subtractions, or multiplications. counters to model different situations. This helps
students visualize and understand the concept of
Students mark the corresponding numbers on change. Use blocks to represent the growth of a plant over
their bingo cards. several days.
Equations: Introduce simple equations to
represent mathematical relationships. For instance,
if you have a problem where students need to
find the total cost of buying 5 candies at $1 each,
they can write the equation: Total Cost = 5 x 1.
Math Bingo:
Create bingo cards with equations instead of Interactive Apps and Games
numbers.
Students can be engaged in online games
Call out the result, and students mark the correct involving functions.
equation on their cards.
https://www.mathplayground.com/functionmac
hine.html
https://www.mathgames.com/skill/3.31-
increasing-addition-patterns
https://www.mathgames.com/skill/3.57-
multiplication-input-output-tables-find-the-rule
Additional Resources and Materials
(Additional material and resources that are not included in the Inclusive Learning and/or Inclusive Assessment Strategies that may be useful for lesson planning)
Understand basic arithmetic operations such as addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
EQUATION: a mathematical statement that shows the equality of two expressions.
An EQUATION typically consists of two sides separated by an equal sign (=). The expressions on the left and right sides of the equal sign are called
the left-hand side (LHS) and right-hand side (RHS) of the equation, respectively.
EXAMPLE: 5 + ___ =8
(e.g. 3 + ___ = 8) and express them in mathematical notation.
Function: A function relates an input to an output. It shows the relationship between two numbers.
A function is defined as a relation between a set of inputs having one output each.
● Function: "Double the Number"
● Rule: Multiply the input number by 2.
● Example: If the input is 3, the output is
● 2×3=6
● 2×3=6.
● Function: "Add 5"
● Rule: Add 5 to the input number.
● Example: If the input is 7, the output is
● 7+5=12
● 7+5=12.
Example:
https://mathstory.com/input-output-machine-3rd-grade-3/
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the
curriculum)
Science:
Study the growth patterns of plants (height vs. time) or populations of animals (population size vs. years) in a science class. Collect data, create graphs,
and analyze the patterns. Translate the patterns into equations or functions. Discuss the relationship between the scientific observations and the
mathematical representations.
Use a thermometer to measure the temperature.
Technology: Interactive Simulation
Utilize interactive simulations or educational apps that allow students to create and manipulate mathematical patterns. Students explore the patterns,
modify variables, and observe the changes in real time.
Music: Exploring Rhythmic Patterns
Activity: Analyze rhythmic patterns in music, including beats, tempo changes, and time signatures. Students identify and represent mathematical
patterns in musical compositions using equations or functions. They create their own musical patterns and translate them into mathematical expressions.
Social Studies:
Record and create a table to show the number of members for each group in the school.
Identify a pattern.
Identify relationships created
Language
Students will effectively communicate their predictions based on identified relationships, using appropriate language and supporting their assertions with
evidence from patterns.
Students will explain their reasoning when making predictions or generalizations in patterns, demonstrating a clear understanding of their identified
relationships.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the discretion of the Team
Leads and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, and Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Pattern and relationship ELO P 3.2
Introduction to the Subject:
Strand (Topic): Pattern and Relationships
Essential Learning Outcomes:P3.2: Modelling Quantitative Relationships and Analyzing Change – Representing Functions and Relationships
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Can look for and apply relationships between varying quantities to make predictions; make and
explain generalizations in patterns.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Knowledge
SCO 1 SCO 1
1. Identify relationships to make accurate Predictive Games:
predictions about future data points or Create games that involve predicting outcomes Story-Based Prediction Activity:
outcomes, based on patterns. For example, a game where Develop a story that involves patterns or trends.
2. Use patterns and trends to identify students predict the next number in a sequence or Ask students to identify the relationships within
relationships the colour of the next item in a pattern. the story and make predictions about future
3. Make predictions based on identified events.
relationships Number Sequences:
4. using appropriate language and supporting If a player draws a number card, they must look at For example: Title: The Friendly Forest Parade
assertions with evidence from patterns. the sequence on the card (e.g., 2, 4, 6, __) and
5. Explain reasoning when making predictions predict the following number. Players move their
or generalizations in patterns, game piece forward the number of spaces they
6. Justify the relationships identified. predicted.
Colour Patterns:
Values If a player draws a colour card, they must examine
7. Collaborate in analyzing data sets and the colour pattern on the card (e.g., red, blue, red,
identifying relationships, __) and predict the colour of the next item. Players
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
8. Discuss patterns and predictions as a move their game piece forward to the next space
group and share insights and with the predicted colour.
interpretations.
SCO 2, 3 and 4
Skills Structured Sentence Starters: Offer structured
9. Create tables, listing input and output pairs sentence starters or sentence frames that guide
for simple functions (e.g., 2 times the input students in expressing their predictions. For
number). example, "I predict that the next number/colour
10. Students will represent relationships such will be ___ because ___." This provides support
as addition or subtraction pattern. for students in organizing their thoughts and
expressing predictions verbally or in writing.
In the heart of Whispering Woods, a magical
forest housed animals of all sizes living
harmoniously. Annually, they organized the
Friendly Forest Parade, led by the Grand Gecko,
http://maxwellsmunchkinsattes.weebly.com/patte
with a captivating colour-changing pattern—green,
rns.html
blue, and red. Animal friends Rosie, Timmy, and
Oliver cracked the code, predicting and celebrating
the Grand Gecko's colours. Inspired, they
explored patterns of other forest creatures, turning
the Friendly Forest Parade into a magical
adventure in Whispering Woods.
SCO 2,3 and 4
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/bar-graph-
Role-Playing Scenarios:
meaning-types-and-examples/
Develop role-playing scenarios where students
assume different roles and predict outcomes based
SCO5
on patterns. This adds a creative and interactive
Problem-solving and rule generation
element to learning and provides a platform for
expressing predictions.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Students can apply their understanding of patterns
and relationships to real-world scenarios, such as
predicting trends in sales, analyzing weather
patterns, understanding population growth, and
making connections between classroom learning
and everyday situations.
SCO 5
Visual Aids:
Visual aids like drawings, charts, graphs, and
manipulatives can make abstract concepts more
https://www.ixl.com/math/grade-4/input-
concrete. For representing functions and
output-tables-with-addition-subtraction-
relationships, you can use bar models, number
multiplication-and-division
lines, and simple graphs to illustrate the
connections between different variables.
Real-World Application Project: Identify a
function and create a table of input and output
pairs. For example, explore doubling the
ingredients in a recipe.
SCO 6
Pattern Representation
https://www.turtlediary.com/lesson/input-
output-tables.html
SCO6
https://www.toppr.com/ask/question/observe- Manipulatives:
the-patterns-of-digits-made-from-line-segments- Provide students with hands-on manipulatives
of/ such as counters, blocks, or shapes to explore and
create their own functions and relationships. This
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
can help kinesthetic learners and students with
diverse learning needs.
https://the-world-is-my-
classroom.weebly.com/unit-14-relationships-in-
patterns.html
Technology:
Utilize educational technology, such as interactive
math software or apps, to engage students and
provide additional support.
https://www.mathgames.com/skill/3.31-
increasing-addition-patterns
https://www.mathgames.com/skill/3.60-select-
the-rule-with-input-output-tables
Interactive Apps and Games
Students can be engaged in online games involving
functions.
https://www.mathplayground.com/functionmachi
ne.html
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.mathgames.com/skill/3.31-
increasing-addition-patterns
https://www.mathgames.com/skill/3.57-
multiplication-input-output-tables-find-the-rule
Additional Resources and Materials:
I OU
N T
3
4
6
RULE: Add 3
Create a rule for the function below:
I OU
N T
10 7
8 5
7 4
6
RULE:
Complete the sequence: 3, 7, 11, ____, _____
Find the pattern rule in the sequence above.
Create a pattern containing five (5) numbers that begin with an odd number.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher, such as reading material at a
lower or higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
EQUATION: a mathematical statement that shows the equality of two expressions.
An EQUATION typically consists of two sides separated by an equal sign (=). The expressions on the left and right sides of the equal sign are called the left-
hand side (LHS) and right-hand side (RHS) of the equation, respectively.
EXAMPLE: 5 + ___ =8
(e.g. 3 + ___ = 8) and express them in mathematical notation.
Example:
https://mathstory.com/input-output-machine-3rd-grade-3/
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include
other subjects in the curriculum)
Science:
Study the growth patterns of plants (height vs. time) or populations of animals (population size vs. years) in a science class. Collect data, create graphs, and
analyze the patterns. Translate the patterns into equations or functions. Discuss the relationship between the scientific observations and the mathematical
representations and develop generalizations.
● Study an anemometer and thermometer, identify a pattern between the two readings, analyze data and represent data on a bar graph.
Literacy:
● Use a diary/journal to write about feelings and experiences while looking for and applying relationships between varying quantities to make
predictions; make and explain generalizations in patterns
● Explain their own ideas and understanding in light of the discussion. Share ideas relevant to class activities and discussions.
● Use stated and implied information and ideas in texts to make simple inferences and reasonable predictions about them.
● Explain meanings conveyed by charts and graphs.
Social Studies:
● Record and create a table to show the number of members for each group in the school.
● Identify a pattern.
● Identify relationships created.
● Construct a generalization.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, and Environment that are integrated:
Local fruits and materials: Marbles, beads, tamarind seeds, plants.
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Pattern and relationship ELO P3.3
Introduction to the Subject:
Identifies the purpose and goals of the subject area with links to the Vision and the Essential Education Competencies.
Strand (Topic):
Identify a Strand which may have a sub-component that will be reflected in the Specific Curriculum Outcomes.
Essential Learning Outcomes:
P3.3: Modelling Quantitative Relationships and Analyzing Change – Solving Problems with Functions and Relationships
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
Create and solve story problems involving simple functions and relationships in open sentences
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Knowledge SCO1 SCO 1
Skills Story-Based Problems Visual Aids and Graphics to create story
problems:
Present mathematical functions in the context of
Values
real-life scenarios or stories. Craft word problems Use visual aids like charts, diagrams, or drawings
that involve addition, subtraction, multiplication, to represent mathematical functions visually.
1. Describe simple mathematical functions,
or division, allowing students to apply
such as addition, subtraction,
mathematical functions in meaningful contexts.
multiplication, and division.
2. Write open sentences (equations or
Addition: Sarah is baking cookies. She already has
expressions with blanks) to represent
5 chocolate chips on one tray and 3 on another.
mathematical relationships in real-world
How many chocolate chips does she have in
situations.
total?
3. Solve open sentences to find the missing
values or variables using appropriate
Mathematical Function: 5+3=?
operations and strategies.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4. Translate verbal descriptions of real-life
scenarios into open sentences, focusing on Subtraction: Johnny had 8 marbles, but he lost 3
identifying key information and variables. of them while playing. How many marbles does
5. Create story or word problems involving Johnny have now?
simple functions and relationships
represented by open sentences. Mathematical Function: 8−3=?
6. Apply addition and subtraction operations
https://www.weareteachers.com/word-problems-with-
Multiplication: Emma has 4 boxes, and each box
to situations involving combining or
pictures/
has 6 chocolates. How many chocolates does she
taking away quantities, such as money,
have in total?
objects, or time.
SCO2 and 3
7. Apply multiplication and division
Mathematical Function: 4×6=?
operations to situations involving equal Role-Playing and Simulations:
groups, sharing, or repeated addition.
Division: There are 15 candies, and Lily wants to
8. Check and validate solutions to story Engage students in role-playing activities where
share them equally among her 3 friends. How
problems by using inverse operations or they act out real-world situations. After the role-
many candies will each friend get?
estimating to see if the answer makes play, prompt them to create open sentences
sense in the context of the problem. based on the mathematical relationships they
Mathematical Function: 15÷3=?
encountered during the simulation.
SCO2 and 3
Cooking Challenge: Students participate in a cooking
Role-Playing Scenarios: challenge where they must double or triple a recipe based on
the number of people they serve.
Introduce role-playing scenarios where students
can act out real-world situations. Afterward, they Open Sentence: Total servings=______×______
can create open sentences to represent the
mathematical relationships involved (addition,
subtraction, multiplication, division).
e.g. Students act as gardeners planting rows of flowers.
Each row contains a certain number of flowers. Open
Sentence: Total number of flowers=______×_____
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=0e4
GC2qMnJk
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
SCO4
https://www.teachoo.com/8483/2101/Ex-6.4--
8/category/Ex-6.4/
SCO4
https://www.weareteachers.com/graphic-organizers/
Visual Organizers
SCO5
Provide visual organizers or graphic organizers:
Scenario:
students structure the information from verbal
descriptions.
Distributing Candies
Planting Flowers in a Garden
Problem: Alex has 24 balloons, and he wants to
distribute them equally among 8 friends. How many
Verbal Description
balloons will each friend get? Open Sentence: Each friend
gets:24÷8=3
In the garden, there are 4 rows of flowers, and
each row has 5 flowers. Sarah wants to find out
how many flowers there are in total.
Open Sentence Using Visual Organizer:
Total number of flowers = 4 × 5 or 4+4+4+4+4
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Visual Organizer: http://asmsi.org.au/teacher_modules/multiplication_and
_division.html
SCO6
Games
Math Relay Race:
Organize relay races where teams solve addition
and subtraction problems at each station before
SCO5 passing the baton to the next teammate. The
team that completes the race first wins.
Real-life Scenario:
Shopping Spree:
Using real-life scenarios ensures that the
problems posed are relevant to students' Role-play a shopping scenario where students
experiences and interests. This relevance fosters "buy" items with play money. They practice
engagement and makes the learning experience adding the cost of items and subtracting the
more relatable. For example amount they've spent from a set budget.
haring Stickers SCO 7
Problem: Sarah has 15 stickers, and she wants to Multiplication and Division Arrays:
share them equally with her 5 friends. How many
stickers will each friend get? Introduce the concept of arrays for multiplication
and division. Have students create arrays with
objects or draw them on paper to visualize equal
groups and repeated addition.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
SCO 6
Assessment through Games: Incorporate
educational games that involve addition and
subtraction. Games make learning enjoyable, and
they provide an opportunity for continuous
evaluation as students engage in the activities.
For example: Math Puzzles: Create jigsaw puzzles
with math problems on one piece and the answer
https://thirdspacelearning.com/us/math-resources/topic-
on another. Students must match the problem
guides/number-and-quantity/multiplication-and-division/
with the correct answer to complete the puzzle.
SCO 8
SCO 7
Multiplication/Division Models: Ask students to
Think-Pair-Share:
create visual models to represent multiplication
and division problems. This could include arrays, Implement the "Think-Pair-Share" strategy where
equal grouping diagrams, or number lines. Visual students first individually consider the
representations help students grasp the concepts reasonableness of their solutions, then discuss
concretely. their thoughts with a partner, and finally share
their findings with the whole class. For example
Think (Individual Consideration):
Each student thinks independently about the
problem and solves it using addition to find the
answer. For this problem, they would add 15
(initial candies) and subtract 7 (candies given
away).
https://www.teacherspayteachers.com/Product/Multiplic Student's Thought Process: "I have to add 15
ation-Equal-Groups-Arrays-and-Number-Lines- candies and then subtract 7 because Sarah gave
7694421 some away. So, I think the answer is 15 + 7 = 22
candies."
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
SCO 8 Pair (Discuss with a Partner):
Inverse Operation Checks: Students pair up with a partner to share their
individual solutions. They explain their reasoning
Present story problems that require either addition and to each other, discuss the steps they took, and
subtraction or multiplication and division. After solving compare answers.
the problem, ask students to use the inverse operation to
check their solution. For example, if they added to find the Peer Discussion: "I added 15 and then subtracted
solution, they should subtract to verify, and vice versa. 7 to get 22. Did you get the same answer? How
did you solve it?"
Addition and Subtraction Story Problems:
Share (Whole Class Discussion):
Problem: Sarah has 15 apples. She gave 7 apples
to her friend. How many apples does she have After discussing with their partners, students
now? participate in a whole-class discussion. Some
pairs share their solutions, and the teacher
Inverse Operation Check: After adding to find facilitates a discussion by asking questions like,
the solution, students should subtract to verify. "How did you arrive at your answer?" or "Does
the solution make sense in the context of the
Problem: There are 24 students in a class. If 9
problem?"
students are absent today, how many students are
present? Class Discussion:
Inverse Operation Check: After subtracting to "Let's hear from a few pairs. How did you solve
find the solution, students should add to verify. the problem, and does your answer make sense?
Why or why not?"
Multiplication and Division Story Problems:
Problem: There are 4 shelves, and each shelf has
8 books. How many books are there in total on
all the shelves?
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Inverse Operation Check: After multiplying to
find the solution, students should divide to verify.
Problem: Julia has 20 stickers, and she wants to
share them equally among 5 friends. How many
stickers will each friend get?
Inverse Operation Check: After dividing to find
the solution, students should multiply to verify.
Additional Resources and Materials
(Additional material and resources that are not included in the Inclusive Learning and/or Inclusive Assessment Strategies that may be useful for lesson planning)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher, such as reading material at a
lower or higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the curriculum)
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
This section is optional and intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework. It can be used at the discretion of the Team Leads
and PICT Subject Specialists. It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, and Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
