December 2023
OHCP Grade Two Social Studies Curriculum
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Social Studies
Historical and Cultural Thinking
Essential Learning Outcome: To Appreciate How Our Past and Present Shape Our Identity
Introduction: This section seeks to give students a unique opportunity to explore through the roots or foundations of their identity as Caribbean people.
It covers a wide range of topics, including, family relationships and interactions, festivals and celebrations, and historical sites. Knowledge of this kind is
important because it helps students understand and appreciate how our past and present shape their identity.
Essential Learning Outcome: To Appreciate How Our Past and Present Shape Our Identity
Section 1 – Our Ancestors
Grade Level Expectations:
Students would be able to:
1. State where the early settlers came from.
2. Explain how and why the early settlers came to the Caribbean.
3. Discuss why our community is made up of diverse ethnic groups.
Focus Questions:
1. Where did our ancestors come from and why did they come?
2. What evidence (physical and cultural) is there to show that our ancestors have influenced our identities in the community?
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Learners
will be
expected to:
2 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
HCT • Conversation-Video/Picture Inferencing: Introduction - (Identifying Different Ethnic Groups in
Knowledge Are students able to identify at least two features of the various the Community)
1 - Identify ethnic groups in their community based on the video/picture
the early inference activity?
groups of Video/Picture Inferencing:
people who • Students view images (pictures, videos, models/dolls) of
settled in our people from different ethnic backgrounds OR selected
community students in the class from different ethnic backgrounds are
and explain asked to stand.
why and how • Students state what they observe about the physical features
they came (E.g. hair texture, skin colour) with guidance from the
teacher.
• Students name the different ethnic groups of the
images/students with teacher’s probing.
• Students then create a list of two/three physical features of
• Product - Locating information and representing the various ethnic groups.
data on a map: As students engage in map work activity, • Students discuss ways in which the groups are similar and
are they able to locate the different places from which ways they are different
their ancestors came? (Students can use an interactive
map on a personal device or smart board, or use Map Work - Identifying Locations:
a printed map.) • Using a map, the students are guided by the teacher, to
(See identify the various regions where our ancestors were
https://contrib.pbslearningmedia.org/WGBH/rttt12/rtt located before they came to our community. Interactive
t12_int_samap/index.html) maps can be used.
(See https://contrib.pbslearningmedia.org/WGBH/rttt12/r
ttt12_int_samap/index.html)
• Product - Discussion and Analysis of Data: Can • Students then colour the various regions from which our
students use pictographs to present data on the ethnic ancestors came on a blank map of the word.
composition of their class and community?
3 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Oral Inquiry/ Research: (Location of Early People)
• Students ask a family member about the origin of their
ancestors. For example:
i.Which ethnic group(s) did our ancestors belong to?(Amerindian, European,
African, East Indian, Garifuna)
ii.Where did our ancestors come from?
• Students share their findings with the class.
• Students are guided by the teacher to present the data on a
pictograph.
• Students discuss and evaluate data to explain the ethnic
composition of the class, and how this composition is
reflected in their community.
HCT Skill 1 Product - Discussion and Analysis of Data: Can students use Games:
- Identify on pictographs to present data on the ethnic composition of their a. Take Me Home:
a map the class and community? • In preparation for this activity, students will make different
locations fro types of transportation (E.g. during art class).
m which the • On a map, students will use a paper boat to sail to the
early people Observation - Four Corners: As students engage in the four location from which their ancestors’ came before they
that settled corners activity, are they able to demonstrate that they know settled in our community based on scenarios created by the
in our com the origins of their ancestors? teacher.
munity came. For example:
Are they able to recognize that our ancestors came from i. Jiang is of Asian descent. She wants to visit her ancestral home in
different places and settled in our community? Asia. Use the sailboat to help her find her destination.
ii. Duvale, an Amerindian descendant, is moving to his ancestors’
home in South America. Help him find his way.
4 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Product- Checklist (Peer Assessment):
Are students able to present a community that represents
the different ethnic groups (drawings, devices, paintings, b. Game
playdough, etc.) within their community? Four Corners:
Teacher provides a checklist to guide students. • Students go to a corner labeled with a specific geographic
location that best represents the origin of their ancestors; e.g.
Asia, Africa, Europe, South America, when prompted to do
so. . Teacher labels the corners before class.
Listening/Viewing & Reporting: (How and Why They
Came)
HCT • In groups, students view a video OR read a short article OR
Values 1 - listen to resource personnel on how and why our ancestors
Recognise came.
that the • Students report orally and in writing how and why our
community is ancestors came.
made up of
families of Model Building and Display Corner:
different • Students work in small groups to create a community of
ethnic persons of different ethnic origins by drawing, painting,
origins. using play dough or devices.
• Students use a checklist to determine their completion of the
assigned task. See example below:
5 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
• Students display their creations in class.
Song (culminating activity)
• Students listen and dance to the song ‘So Many Colours, So
Many Shapes’ (See https://youtu.be/ZiOSzuXjDD0 ,
https://youtu.be/R4csXJXHVGA?si=HUKFHQzkk_f0Xm
Dz) or ‘Different Colours One People’. (See
https://youtu.be/R4csXJXHVGA?si=HUKFHQzkk_f0Xm
Dz)
6 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials:
1. History of The Caribbean For Kids | Bedtime History
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rw9SfJUkX4A
2. Caribbean Culture and Heritage
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3UCl2jBc52Q
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Our Ancestors:
• Our ancestors came from different parts of the world for various reasons and at different times.
• The main groups and their locations are:
1. Amerindians - South America
2. Europeans - Europe
3. Africans - West Africa
4. Asians - Asia
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the
curriculum)
Subject Areas:
1. Visual Arts - drawing, colouring and model building.
2. Mathematics - pictograph.
3. Language - oral expression.
7 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: To Appreciate How Our Past and Present Shape Our Identity
Section 2 – Our Families
Grade Level Expectations:
Students will be able to:
1. Describe their relationship to other family members.
2. Represent family relations using a family tree.
Focus Questions:
1. How can we represent relationships among family members?
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Learners will
be expected
to:
HCT Conversation - Introductory Activity:
Knowledge 2 Scrapbook: As students share • Students listen to song “Baby Shark” (See (25) Baby Shark Baby songs
Know that their pictures and drawings, can Compilation - Nursery Rhymes & Kids Songs - YouTube)
family they explain their family • Students are guided to identify the different relations within the family and then
relationships can relationships using pictures or make a list.
be represented drawings?
on a family tree. Guided Research:
• Students construct a simple interview prompt to present information about their
relationship to other family members within their household.
• Students (Using Google Jamboard) show pictures or drawings of family members
in their home and state their relationship to them.
Scrapbook: [My Family Album]
• Students create a scrapbook using the pictures/drawings of family members.
8 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
• Students will label pictures and identify the relationship. For example: Jane
Joseph - Grandmother
Family Bracelet: (To show family relationships)
• Students make personalized bracelets (E.g. mummy, daddy, brother, sister and
grandparents) using letter beads to gift to a family member. See example below.
Family Train: (To show family relationships)
• Students label cars named as different family members, then connect the cars to
form a train.
. Family Tree:
• Students are introduced to the concept of the family tree by the teacher
explaining that family relationships are represented using a family tree.
• Product: • Students view and discuss examples of a family tree. See
https://youtu.be/x0mnJpty78E.
9 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Visually representing • Students label a model/diagram of a family tree.
information: Can students label
a simple family tree showing
HCT Skills-2 three generations.
Represent
relationships of
families on a • Summative Assessment:
simple family (Question and Response) Can
tree. students answer questions based
on a given family tree?
HCT Values -2 • Conversation - Student
Appreciate that Reflection: Are students able to
our family tree reflect on lessons? Source:https://i.pinimg.com/474x/43/23/e4/4323e445b709a84615e607e11238925f.jpg
is made up of a i.What did I like most about the lesson? • Students take turns stating their relationship to the other members of their family
diverse range of ii.What did I not like? on the family tree.
people who • Students insert labelled cars on the floor or 3D model/diagram of a family tree.
share a common • Family tree should reflect EITHER maternal OR paternal side of his/her
heritage. family. (grandparents, parents, children and siblings)
10 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
My Family:
• The family is made up of a group of persons related by blood, marriage and adoption.
• Relationships include grandparents, parents and children.
• A family tree shows how persons in a family are related to each other.
Essential Learning Outcome: To Appreciate How Our Past and Present Shape Our Identity
Section 3 – Family Interactions
Grade Level Expectations:
Students will be able to:
1. State ways in which family members interact and the reasons for doing so.
2. Discuss the importance of family interactions.
Focus Questions:
1. Why is it important for families to interact?
2. How do we interact within our families?
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Learners will
be expected
to:
11 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum Strategies:
Outcomes
HCT • Conversation- Guided Guided Discussion:
Knowledge – Discussion: Are students able to • Teacher guides students to share their experiences on times they enjoyed with
3 State the ways share their experiences when they family members and to give reasons why they feel happy on these occasions.
individuals and interacted with families in
families share positive ways?
positive human
interactions with
others. Story Telling/ Video Viewing and Roleplay: (Group Activity)
• Observation- • Students are divided into groups, then given a short story or video showing how
Roleplay: After watching people in their community interact.
video/listening to a story, are E.g. Activities In Our Community (See
students able to role-play positive https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SrbwgyOIjV8)
HCT Skills – 3 aspects? • Teacher guides students to discuss positive interactions and explain why they
Investigate how think they are positive.
families in • In their groups, students role-play different aspects of the short story or video of
various family life that highlight positive interactions.
communities • Reflection: Students draw a picture of their favourite positive family interaction
fulfill their need and write one sentence about the reason they enjoy this activity.
for interaction. • Product-Reflection: Do
students' drawings reflect positive
interactions?Are the reasons Stand or Sit Trivia:
plausible? • Students listen to scenarios that depict positive and negative interactions.
• Students who think that a statement is positive will stand up, those who think
otherwise will remain seated.
For example:
i.Chris is new boy in class. Jim and his friends invite him to the village kids' football game.
ii.On Christmas Day, Rosita’s big sister helps to cook the food while Rosita helps to clean the dishes.
iii.Pam and other children, along with their parents, gather to celebrate Emancipation Day.
iv.Priya and her family decorate the porch with lights in preparation for Diwali. Her neighbour complained
and ripped them down.
12 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum Strategies:
Outcomes
• Conversation-Stand or Sit v.John wore a dashiki to his school’s fair. His classmates teased him.
Trivia: After listening to the • Students discuss why scenarios are negative or positive.
scenarios, can students identify
positive human interactions in Interactive Puzzle - Jigsaw Puzzles -
their communities? • Students work in groups to complete jigsaw puzzles (provided by the teacher)
depicting positive human interactions in a particular culture. (See
https://tinyurl.com/j9shpp8f and
HCT Values – • Conversation: Can students https://www.youtube.com/shorts/mn9L7i5cnbE)
3 compare and contrast positive • Students then discuss the interactions depicted in the puzzle.
Appreciate that and negative human interactions
there are diverse using a digital worksheet? Spin the Wheel / Think and Share-
ways that people • Students spin word wheel [web generated] with slots representing different
fulfil their need cultural celebrations/festivals. E.g. Christmas Day, Harvest, All Saints Day.
for human • Students are given time to reflect and then discuss the chosen
interaction celebrations/festivals. The following questions can be used as prompts:
i.How do people recognise/ mark this celebration/festival in your community?
ii.What activities do people engage in together during these festivals?
• Students write an email or create a voice note to tell a friend in another country
how any two festivals are celebrated in their country.
Traditional Games Afternoon (School Community):
• Students engage in a traditional games afternoon. Games may include marble
pitching, hand games, skipping, cricket, football, sack race, lime and spoon etc.
• Reflection: Students reflect (in writing, drawing, song/jingle etc.) on how this
games afternoon fostered positive human interaction?
13 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Living Together in Communities
• Concepts associated with positive interaction:
interaction,
i. uniting /working together,
ii. collaborating,
iii.sharing,
iv.compromising-respecting differences,
v.cooperating,
vi.communicating.
• Cultural and religious celebrations/ activities promote positive interactions among individuals and families in a community. These include:
i.Festivals - Christmas Nine Mornings, La Rose Festival, Drum Festival, Jazz n’ Creole Festival
ii.Celebrations - Independence, Emancipation Day, National Heroes’ Day
iii.Sports/Traditional games - cricket, kite flying, marble pitching
• These celebrations/activities:
i.Unite individuals and
ii.families together from different cultures/backgrounds.
iii.Spread happiness and love.
iv.Create a sense of belonging in the community.
Essential Learning Outcome: To Appreciate How Our Past and Present Shape Our Identity
Section 4 – Family Occasions
Grade Level Expectations:
Students will be able to:
1. Identify occasions when families come together and the significance of doing so.
Focus Questions:
14 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
1. How do families support each other in times of celebration, grief and need?
2. How do we feel when families get together?
Specific Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum Strategies:
Outcomes:
Learners will • Product- Critical thinking: Are Introduction: (KWL Chart)
be expected students able to create a list of • Students will complete the first two columns of the KWL chart.
to: occasions where people come
HCT together to share?
Knowledge 4
Describe
occasions when
people in the
community
come together
to share.
Retrieved from kwl chart template - Bing images
Charades:
• Students select a card that depicts an example of community members coming
together to share.
• Students describe using words, actions or drawings to show what the card
depicts.
• Students then take turns to guess what each action, word or drawing depicts.
15 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum Strategies:
Outcomes:
• Students then name other occasions when people come together to share.
• Students list and discuss the different occasions where people come together to
share.
Simulation: Mock Celebration (birthday, school anniversary, national
festival):
• Students engage in a mock celebration to depict an occasion where people in the
community share.
• Observation- Mock Role Playing:
Celebration: During mock • Students role play different scenarios of people caring for each other in the
celebrations, are students able to classroom, families and communities. For example:
demonstrate positive actions to i.An old person in the community died. How does the community show
care for others? support to the family?
ii.Your aunt is getting married. What can your family do to show support?
iii.Your brother is turning five years old. What can your family do to
HCT Skills 4 • Observation-Role Play: Are celebrate this occasion?
Practice caring students able to demonstrate
for one another caring actions during role play?
in families,
classrooms, and
communities.
• Product-Summative
Assessment: Are students able
to create a poster or draw a
picture of people coming
16 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum Strategies:
Outcomes:
together in the community to Community Service Learning Project
share? (Students may write, draw, • Students plan and engage in a service learning project of their choice to
speak or use playdough) demonstrate care and support for selected community members or institutions.
• Students will reflect on how they felt while planning and after completing the
project.
• (Students will use any format of their choice to reflect. E.g. video, audio
• Observation-Community recording, text, emojis).
Service Learning Project:
Are students displaying positive Self Assessment
attitudes while planning and
executing the project? • With teacher’s guidance, students create a 4 question checklist to evaluate the
HCT Values 4 poster.
Observation- Community
Appreciate the Service Learning Project:
value of Are students actively participating
community in the activity?
members
supporting one
another in times
of celebrations,
grief, and need.
17 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Social Gatherings:
• A community is a group of people living in the same area.
• People in the community come together for different reasons. - worship, work, eat, play, celebrate and comfort.
• Coming together as a community helps to build positive relationships and appreciation for different people.
Essential Learning Outcome: To Appreciate How Our Past and Present Shape Our Identity
Section 5 – Our Festivals
Grade Level Expectations:
Students will be able to:
1. Know the festivals that are celebrated in their communities.
2. Understand that festivals are important to our communities.
3. Respect the rights of people to celebrate different festivals
Focus Questions:
1. Why is it important to celebrate festivals in communities?
2. How are they celebrated?
18 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Learners will • Conversation: Critical Introduction: Flip Tile App (Word Wall)
be expected Thinking: Are students able to • Students explore a series of two sided tiles by tapping to zoom and swiping flip
to: identify the festivals celebrated in which will reveal examples of festivals celebrated in their country.
HCT their country and state why they are • Students then identify the festivals that are unique to their country.
Knowledge- 5 important?
State examples Whole group discussion on festivals:
of festivals • Students describe the activities for each festival.
celebrated in • Product- Match Up Game : Are • Students state other festivals celebrated in their country.
their country. students able to match keywords to
the correct festivals?
Think Pair Share:
• Students are divided into teams to discuss reasons why each festival is
celebrated.
• Students share their reasons with the teacher and the class about reasons why
each festival is celebrated.
• Students and teachers engage in discussion about the importance of festivals in
building national pride.
HCT Skills -5 Match up Game:
Discuss the • Students use their devices to match keywords correctly to images depicting
reasons for festivals. (E.g costume - Carnival, christmas tree - Christmas, cross - Easter)
celebrating
various festivals
in their country. Class Cultural Expo:
• Students bring items that represent different festivals celebrated in their
country.
• Students display items in the classroom followed by a gallery walk.
19 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
• Students state which festival each item represents. (E.g. Can black cake, sorrel,
ginger beer, (Christmas), The National Flag (Independence), hot cross buns,
HCT Values - crucifix (Easter))
5
Appreciate that
festivals can be
an important
way to build
community,
national
cohesion and
pride.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Countries celebrate different festivals.
• Some examples: are
i.Christmas,
ii.Easter,
iii.Carnival,
iv.Divali,
v.Independence
vi.Creole, La Rose
20 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
• People celebrate different festivals in our country for varied reasons.
• Festivals are important because they help us:
i.Celebrate our ancestors/past.
ii.Continue our traditions.
iii.Unite persons in our communities
iv.Earn money for families.
Essential Learning Outcome: To Appreciate How Our Past and Present Shape Our Identity
Section 6 – Historical Sites
Grade Level Expectations:
Students will be able to:
1. Students will name historical sites in their community and state their importance to the cultural and historical identity.
Focus Questions:
1. What evidence (physical and cultural) is there to show that our ancestors have influenced our identities in the community?
2. How have the historical sites influenced our identities in the community?
21 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive learning Strategies:
Curriculum
Outcomes
Learners will • Observation/Conversation: Can Introduction:
be expected students identify important • Students view a slide show on historical sites in their country.
to: historical sites and why they may • Students develop a definition for the term historical sites based on the slide
HCT have been designated as such? show.
Knowledge-6
List examples of Field Trip to Historical Sites in the Community:
the oldest • Conversation: Can students • Students tour the oldest historical sites in their community. They use a digital
historical sites in describe features of historical sites? camera or phone to take pictures during their tour. Students without access to
our community . these devices can use a sketchpad to draw and or make note of features of the
sites.
• Students will look for information boards/signs/markings at the sites which
provide details of their historical significance.
HCT Skills - 6
Investigate the • Observation-Map Work: Are
location, the students able to locate historical Reflection/ Exit Form:
age, significance sites on the map? • Students will write or state orally a short reflection of their trip to the oldest
of these historical sites using an exit form. (Must include name/location/date of
historical sites. establishment/significance of the site.)
For Example:
• Conversation-Reflection/Exit
Form: As students reflect on their
Reflection Form: Field Trip to Oldest
experiences with historical sites, can
Historical sites
they discuss how historical sites
help us better understand who we 2 sites I visited
are?
2 Things I Found Interesting about the sites :
• Product-Poster Collage: Can
1 Question I Have:
students present examples of
22 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive learning Strategies:
Curriculum
Outcomes
historical sites in their community Students share and discuss responses with classmates.
using a picture collage? (Age/date
of establishment, location) Map Work:
• In groups, students locate sites on virtual map, eg. Google Maps or World
Heritage Interactive Map https://whc.unesco.org/en/interactive-map/Google
Earth
• Students will take turns placing markers/pictures of the historical sites in their
correct location.
Discussion:
• Students, guided by the teacher will discuss the significance of the historical
sites r. Example:
i.Why are the old churches built from stone?
ii.Why were these sites important to the people who built them?
HCT- Values-6 Poster Collage: ”Historical Sites that Make My Community Special
• Students collect images of historical buildings/sites, then create a poster
Appreciate that promoting the sites in their community.
historical sites • Collage is posted on the school's social media pages.
can help us
understand our
identity.
23 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials: (Additional material and resources that are not included in the Inclusive Learning and/or Inclusive Assessment Strategies that may
be useful for lesson planning )
https://www.oecs.org/empower/ebook/images/OECS%20Virtual%20Historic%20Tour%20Video%20(Final%20Update).mp4?
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Finding out about our past.
• It is difficult to find out about the groups of people who first came to live in our country.
• Mostly, we learn about them through the things they used and the buildings they constructed.
• People who study these remains are called archaeologists.
.
• Historical buildings/sites that give us an idea of how people lived long ago are:
i. Churches
ii. Forts
iii. Schools
iv. Petroglyphs
v. Plantation Buildings
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
• Language Arts: Research, Read and Report
• Art & Craft: Create poster collage
• Mathematics: Measurements
24 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Social Studies
Spatial Thinking
Essential Learning Outcome: Understand that our islands are made up of many diverse regions and communities
Essential Learning Outcome: Understand that our islands are made up of many diverse regions and communities
Section 1 – Locating My Community
Grade Level Expectations:
Learners will state the four cardinal directions
Learners can give directions to your community in relation to other districts or parishes using cardinal direction
Leaners recognize the value of directions for finding your way
Focus Question: How do I give directions to my community in relation to other communities?
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Learners will
be expected to:
ST Knowledge- Pre-Assessment: Pre-Assessment ActivityHave the students listen to the poem “ geese on the
1 go”.
State and label Observation: https://media.nationalgeographic.org/assets/file/Cardinal_Directions_Poetry.pdf
the four cardinal Are the students raising their hands when one of the four
and have the students raise their hand each time they hear a cardinal direction.
directions directions is read?
How many students have prior knowledge of the cardinal
Portfolio Activity
direction?
● Have students create a lap book/portfolio with blank pages. (Students can
use large sheets of Bristol board or purchase a large drawing book). Have
As students listen and respond to the poem, teacher uses
students design the cover page and write the cover title “My Social Studies
a checklist or take notes to record how many can identify
Big Book” and also chapter one “The Cardinal Points”.
north, south, west and east as cardinal directions. ?
25 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Critical Thinking Viewing of video and whole class discussion
Conversation:
Have students view a video on cardinal directions, for example:
Use probing questions to encourage critical thinking. Are
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fBKjwTzImYE.
students able to identify the main ideas in the video?
Are students grasping the concepts of direction, cardinal
After students view the video, have a class discussion. Ask them questions such
direction?
as:
What are the main ideas/points in the video?
How would you explain the term direction to a classmate? Explain what cardinal
directions are?
In what situations do we use cardinal direction?
Group Conferencing Group Work and Oral Presentation
● Have students work in groups to create a song/poem/ mnemonic to
Observation recall the four main cardinal directions. Present them with a simple
checklist to guide their work. Explain to them how to use the checklist.
As students are working, walk around to observe and
Have the group make oral presentations of their work. Display students'
conference with the groups. Take records of how students
work and have each student include a copy under chapter one in their
are working, if they are discussing the content, if they are
portfolio books.
understanding and applying the content correctly.
Are students working collaboratively?
Are students applying their knowledge of cardinal
directions?
Take note of group dynamics: who is leading, who is
being silent etc.
Oral Presentation:
Are students able to create a song/poem/mnemonic to
remember the cardinal points?
26 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Conduct both teacher and student peer assessment using
the checklist provided to students.
Compass Activity: Compass Activity
● Have students use a compass (where possible download a compass app)
Observation: Are students able to locate north, south, to explore various positions to locate north, south, west and east.
west and east using the compass?.
Drawing/Model Construction Compass Rose Model
● Have students draw or create a 2D model of a compass rose with the
Observation: Are students able to create an accurate four cardinal points using materials of their choice and have students
model or drawing of the compass rose ?
label the points of the compass rose. Have students display their models
for their peers to see.
Product: Is the model/drawing an accurate representation
of the compass rose? Use a simple mark scheme or rubric
to assess the final product. Note: The important thing is
that students have the cardinal points in the correct
location. Craftsmanship is not to be assessed.
ST – Skills 1 Map Skills Map Work
-Give directions Observation/Conversation:
to your Walk around as students work to observe and talk to Have students examine a map of their country in the atlas. . Have them point out
community in them.
the compass rose. Ask students to identify districts/parishes located in the
relation to other Are the students able to identify the compass rose??
north, south, west and east of the country.
districts or Are students able to identify districts/parishes in the four
parishes using cardinal directions?
cardinal
direction. Take records of students' responses. Note how many can
identify north, south, west and east.
27 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Floor Map Activity Floor Map Activity
● Draw a large sketch/es of the country on the classroom floor (or in the
Conversation: Are students able to state the districts / school yard outlining the districts or parishes.
parishes located to the N, S, W and E of where the
● Stand, facing north, in any one of the districts or parishes and have
teacher is standing?
students state which areas are located to the north, south, west and
east of where you are standing.
Observation: Are students able to stand facing north in
● Then have students take turns to stand, facing north, in the
the district where their community is located ?
district/parish where their community is located and ask students to
Are students able to identify the districts / parishes
jump to the district or parish that is to the north, south, west or east of
located to the N, S, W and E of where they live?
their community.
Mapping the Location of My Community Map Work: Locating My Community
● Present students with a blank political map of the country outlining the
Product: Are students able to identify the district that districts or parishes. Have students colour the district they live in. Then
their community is in on the map?
have students use colour codes to identify the districts or parishes that
Are students able to correctly identify the parishes or
are to the north, south, west and east of where they live. Have them
districts that are located to the north, south, west or east
write the title “Location of My Community” and place their maps in their
of where they live?
portfolio.
28 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Conversation: Are students able to confidently state the ● Oral Presentations
location of their district in relation to other districts/ Have students make oral statements describing the location of their
parishes using the four cardinal directions district/ parish in relation to other districts/ parishes in the country using
the four cardinal directions and complete the following “fill in the blank
Observation: Are students able to correctly fill in the
statement” under the map in their portfolio.
blanks? Does the statement align with their maps?
I live in the district/parish of -------------. It is to the north of --------------------, the
south of -----------------, the west of ------------------- or the east of
ST – Values 1 Conversation: Are students able to express logically the Oral Discussion
Appreciate the importance of cardinal direction? ● Have students discuss why cardinal directions are important.
value of Do students recognize the importance of being able to ● Have students discuss what would happen if they did not know how to
directions for give directions?
give the directions.
finding your way
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Direction is the pathway along which an object is moving or the location of a feature based on the position of another feature.
● Cardinal directions are the four main points of a compass: north, south, east, and west which are also known by the first letters: N, S, E, and W.
● N, S, W and E are also known as cardinal points.
● A compass rose is a symbol found on maps that shows the four cardinal directions.
● Cardinal directions help identify the location of one thing or place in relation to another. This is known as relative location.
● Knowing directions helps us find our way.
29 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: Understand that our islands are made up of many diverse regions and communities
Section 2 – Features of My Community
Grade Level Expectations:
Learners can describe the important natural and built features of your community.
Learners can observe and illustrate the various natural and built features of your community.
Learners Appreciate the unique landmark features of your community that you find interesting
Focusing Questions:
What features make my community unique?
What features does my community have in common with other communities?
Specific Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum Strategies
Outcomes
Inclusive Assessment Strategies: ( Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners will Pre-Assessment: KWL KWL
be expected to: Conversation: Are students able to give
examples of features in the environment? ● Draw a KWL chart on the board or on a large sheet of paper. Ask students to say what
ST Knowledge
they know about features in the environment (examples etc) and what they want to
2
know. Have students give examples of natural and built features in their environment.
-Describe the
important Write the information in the relevant columns.. Tell students they will discuss this after
natural and built viewing a video.
features of your
community.
30 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum Strategies
Outcomes
Conversation: Video and Guided Discussion
Are students able to differentiate between a ● Have students view the following video
natural and built feature? https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rZVQjQWuoGE.
Are students able to accurately summarize
● After watching the video, have a guided discussion with students.
what they learned from the video?
- What does the term feature mean?
Are students able to recognize natural and
-What is the difference between a -natural and a built feature?
built features from the list of examples they
-state one thing that you learned from the video.
shared?
Which examples on the board are natural or built features and which are not?
Are students naming both natural and built
features?
Observation:
Are students taking turns to discuss
examples?
Are students listening while others are
speaking?
Are students taking note of the examples?
31 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum Strategies
Outcomes
Product: Classifying Information
● Present a table with the two columns labelled built/man-made and natural. Using the list
Are students able to correctly classify the of examples written on the board, have students take turns to place them under the
list of examples
correct column to identify which ones are natural and which are built/man-made.
Conversation: Group Work and Oral Discussion
● Group students according to their community/district or parish. Have students discuss
Are students able to identify natural and and take note of the various natural and built features they have observed in their shared
built features in their communities.
community. Groups will report their findings to the class.
Are students able to identify common and
unique features in the various
● Have students discuss what the communities have in common and what is unique to
communities?
each community.
●
32 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum Strategies
Outcomes
ST Skills-2 -Observation: Lap Book Activity
Observe and Are students drawing both natural and built ● Have students start chapter two of their lap books titled “Features of My Community”.
illustrate the features from their communities? Then have students create two pockets on the page one labelled Natural and the other
various natural Are students placing their cut outs/slips in
Built.
and built features the correct pocket.
● students will draw, colour and cut out various natural and built features within their
of your
communities (or they can simply write these on slips of paper) and place cut outs/slips
community.
in the correct pocket.
ST Values 2 Observation: StoryRead Aloud
-Appreciate the ● Have students listen to this story.
unique landmark Are students actively listening to the story https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GIHVIguHeD0
features of your Are they ● Have them discuss what the story is about. How is the story linked to their communities?
community that
you find
interesting
33 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum Strategies
Outcomes
Product: Do the posters depict a natural or Poster Presentation
built feature?
● After listening to the story tell students, they are now going to create a poster showcasing
Conversation: Are students able to one natural or built feature in their community that they find interesting. (This can also
articulate why they find this feature
be a homework assignment).
interesting?
● Have students present their poster and say why they find this feature interesting. Explain
that everyone may have a different feature which they find interesting and that it’s
important that they share their ideas, no matter how different they are. Help students
appreciate that people give varying importance to different places because of their
experiences.
KWL Chart
● Have students complete the last column of the chart by stating one thing they have
learned.
34 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: Understand that our islands are made up of many diverse regions and communities
Section 3 – Locating My Community
Grade Level Expectations:
Learners are able to identify the basic features of a map including title, key, compass rose, border
Learners can draw a map of your community which includes basic features
Learners appreciate that a map can be used to show our important landmarks in the community.
Focusing Questions:
What is a map?
How is a map useful to us?
Specific Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum Strategies
Outcomes
Learners will
be expected to:
ST Knowledge Conversation: Are students able to Introduction: Video and Discussion
3-Identify the recognize that persons are lost or ● Have students view the following video.
basic features of trying to find their way? https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ck3mbJUbN1A
a map including Are students aware that George has a
● Engage students in a guided discussion:
title, key, map?
-What is happening in the video?
compass rose, Are students familiar with a map?
-What does George have in his hand?
border Are students aware of the purpose of a
-Have you ever seen one of these?
map?
-What is George using the item for?
Do students have prior knowledge of
-Can you describe the item?
the basic features of a map
35 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum Strategies
Outcomes
Conversation: Are students able to View a Video
state the features mentioned in the ● Have students watch the video:
video?
● Learn About Maps - Symbols, Map Key, Compass Rose - YouTube
● https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mtsx8V3mE8o
Observation: Are students able to
identify title, key, compass rose, ● https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Czk4p5QmLSA
border? After watching the video have students state the main features of a map identified in the
video.
● Show students an example of a simple community map. Point out the main features: title, key,
compass rose, border.
● Then distribute or show some more examples of simple maps. This time, have students point
out the main features: title, key, compass rose, border.
● Add words related to maps to your word wall
ST Skills 3 Map Lap Book Activity: Mapping My Community
-Draw a map of
your community Product: ● Have students listen to the story https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gZqYCwixTzA
which includes
● Have students start chapter three in their big book titled “A Map of My Community”.
basic features Do students’ maps include important
● Have students draw a picture of their community in their lap books, which includes their
features of a map? Are the symbols
homes, neighbours’ homes, important built features such as bridge, church and school, natural
used appropriate representations? Is
the compass rose accurate? features such as rivers, waterfalls. Have them include major connecting roads.
● Have students give their maps a title and include a key, border and compass rose.
36 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum Strategies
Outcomes
Observation: Are students able to Treasure Hunt
follow the map? ● Engage students in a treasure to assess their map skills. Hide treasure in different places
Do students understand the symbols around the school. Draw and make copies of a simple map of the school which includes a
used?
symbol to indicate where the treasures are located. Have students work in pairs to follow the
How many pairs were able to find the
map to find the treasure (each pair canshould have to find a different location). The activity
treasure?
can be timed to up the challenge.
ST Values 3- Conversation: Video and Discussion
Appreciate that a ● Have students watch the video.
map can be used Are students able to outline what maps https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BTKv0X__5vM
to show our are used for and why they are After viewing the video have students discuss why maps are important. Have them complete the
important important? statement “Maps are important because _________________________.
landmarks in the
community.
Product:
Can students complete a statement
explaining why maps are important.
37 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: Understand that our islands are made up of many diverse regions and communities
Section 4 – Plants and Animals in the Community
Grade Level Expectations:
Learners will identify some of the plants and animals in your community
Learners can classify the plants and animals according to wild, domestic and uses such as food, medicine, pets.
Leaners demonstrate willingness to care for/protect the plants and animals in our community
Focusing Questions:
What types of plants and animals are found in my community?
How can I show respect and care for plants and animals in my community?
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Learners will be
expected to:
ST Knowledge - (Conversation: Introduction: Animal Song
4- Identify some Are students aware of the different ● Have students listen to the song.
of the plants and animals and plants in their https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yS1zl4g7HLA
animals in your community? After listening to the song, have students recall the animals mentioned. Ask students to state
community which animals mentioned can be found in their community. Ask them to name other animals in their
community which were not mentioned.
38 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Product: Are the animal representative Lap Book Activity
of animals found in the country? ● Have students work on chapter four of their lap books titled “Animals in My Community.
● Have students bring in pictures of animals found in their community to stick in their lap
books. Those who wish to draw may do so. Have students label the animals by name.
Observation: Role Play
Are students depicting animals found ● Have students role play the sounds and movement of their favourite animal found in the
in the local community? community.
Are students depicting the sounds of
the animals accurately?
ST Skills - 4 Conversation: Are students able to Classifying Animals: Discussion
Classify the differentiate between wild and ● Have students view the video.
animals according domestic animals? https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xyHagfDgvmw
to wild, domestic, Are students able to identify animals After viewing the video engage students in a guided discussion:
food or pets. which provide us with food? What is a wild animal?
Are students able to identify animals What is a domestic animal?
we keep as pets? Which animals do we use for food?
Which animals do we keep as pets?
Product: Are students able to classify Lap Book Activity
the animals found in their community, ● Have students classify the pictures of the animals in their lap books for example placing a W
correctly? next to those which are wild, a D next to those which are domestic, a P next to those which
are pets and an F next to those which provide us with food. Let students know that some
animals may be classified under more than one category.
39 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
ST Knowledge 5- Observation: Are students observing School Tour
Identify some of the plants? ● Take students on a walk around the school compound to observe the various plants they
the plants in your Are students recording their come across.
community observations? ● Have students record in writing or drawing the plants they observe.
Are students able to use the plant ● (Optional) Have students download a plant identifier app to get information on the various
identifier app? plants as they explore. Students can also take pictures of the plants.
Conversation: Are students able to Oral Discussion
identify the plants they observed? ● Engage students in a post tour discussion about the plants they observed:
Are students knowledgeable about -Which plants were familiar to you?
plants in their community? -Which ones were you able to identify?
Do students know the local or -Which plants have you observed in your community?
scientific names of plants? -Can you name some other plants that are found in your community?
-Do you know the local names for some of the plants?
-Do all communities have the same plants?
Product : Lap Book Activity
Are students' pictures representative of ● Have students start chapter five in their lap books titled “Plants in My Community”.
plants in the local community? ● Have students bring in pictures of plants in their community to stick in their lap books.
Are students able to identify, label Those who wish to draw may do so. Have students label the plants.
correctly plants in their community?
40 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Observation: Are students being Resource Person
attentive? ● Invite a resource person (farmer, herbalist, forestry officer) to speak to students about and
Are students asking relevant show them samples of the types of plants found in the country and their uses.
questions?
Do students seem to understand the
information being shared?
ST- Skills 5 Conversation: Are students aware of Oral Discussion
the various uses of plants? ● Engage students in a guided discussion where they share their knowledge of different plants
- Classify the Can students identify plants that are found in their community:
plants according used as food, medicine or decoration? Do you know of any plants that can be used for food?
to wild, domestic Do you know of any plants that are used as medicine?
and uses such as Do you know of any plants that are used to decorate?
food, medicine.
Observation: Exhibition and Gallery Walk
Are students bringing in three
categories of plants? ● Have students bring in one plant each used for food, medicine and decoration. Ask students
Are students labelling plant names to research the name of the plant (local or scientific) and what it is used for.
correctly? ● Have students display their plants according to the three categories. Have students prepare
labels which identify the name and use of each plant.
● Have students do a gallery walk to learn about the various plants. Ask students to identify
plants others brought in that are found in their community and those that they do not
recognize?
41 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
ST – Values 5 Conversation: Are students aware of Oral Discussion
-Appreciate the the negative consequences if there ● Discuss with students the importance of these plants for their community well-being and
importance of were no plants or animals? why we should protect them.
caring Are students aware of the role that ● Engage students in a reflective discussion on what would happen/how would they feel if
for/protecting the plants and animals play in our there were no plants and animals.
plants and animals survival?
in our community
Product: Do students drawings Lap Book Activity
demonstrate care and concern for ● Engage students in a reflective activity where they:
plants and animals? -draw how they would feel if there were no plants or animals.
Do students statements demonstrate -complete the statements ’It is important to care for and protect plants and animals in the
understanding of the importance of community because_______________________________.
caring and protecting animals? I promise to help care for animals by ______.
Are students demonstrating I will help protect the plants by __________.
willingness to care for and protect
plants and animals?
Essential Learning Outcome: Understand that our islands are made up of many diverse regions and communities
Section 5 – Weather
Grade Level Expectations:
Learners can describe weather patterns in your community.
Learners can assess the impact of weather conditions on the community at different times of the year.
Learners appreciate how the weather affects the environment.
42 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Focusing Questions:
What types of weather are usually experienced in the community?
How do the different types of weather affect the environment?
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Learners will be
expected to:
ST Knowledge -6 Conversation: Are students demonstrating Introduction: Oral Discussion
understanding of the concept of a pattern?
Describe weather ● Show students examples of a pattern to introduce the concept of a pattern to
Are students able to connect the weather to
patterns in your students (this can be linked with patterns in Mathematics). Ask students to find
the concept of pattern? examples of patterns around the classroom. Guide students to come up with a
community.
What prior knowledge do students have definition of pattern. Discuss with students how weather can be connected to the
about weather patterns? concept of pattern.
-Have you observed patterns when it comes to the weather?
-What patterns have you observed when it comes to weather?
-How can you predict what the weather will be like tomorrow?
43 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Observation: Are students able to identify the Weather Log
various conditions of weather? ● Have students recall the main weather conditions (rainy, sunny, cloudy, hot, cold
etc). Then have students watch the video
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Uo8lbeVVb4M. Tell students that they are
going to be weather watchers for the week who will investigate weather patterns in
Observation: Are students completing their
their communities.
daily weather log?
Add the weather related words to your word wall.
● Have students start chapter six in their lap books titled “Weather Patterns in My
Product:
Community” Have students create or provide them with a template for a weather
Do the weather logs created by students
log which they will stick in their lap books. https://www.twinkl.com/resource/roi-
have the relevant components? t-25943-my-weather-record-activity-sheet
Do students understand how to use the Make sure students understand how to use the weather log.
weather log? ● Have students observe and record the weather in their communities for 3-5 days
both in the morning and afternoon. Students can write or draw a picture to record
the weather.
44 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Conversation: Are students able to analyse Oral Discussion
the sample data? ● Using an example demonstrate to students how they can analyse the information
Are they able to observe patterns? from their weather logs. Discuss with students -Generally, what was the weather like for
the week?
-How many sunny days, mornings or afternoons were there?
-How many rainy days were there? (Have students count the number of rainy and
sunny days)
-What time of day was it usually sunny?
-What time of day was it usually rainy?
-Did you observe any patterns?
-What do you think the weather will be like on the weekend or next week?
Product: Do the reports align with their Weather Report
weather logs? How well did students analyse ● Provide students with a report template such as
the data from their logs? https://www.google.com/imgres?imgurl=https%3A%2F%2Fdryuc24b85zbr.cloud
How well do the reports describe the weather front.net%2Ftes%2Fresources%2F11804273%2Fimage%3Fwidth%3D500%26heig
ht%3D500%26version%3D1634033790989&tbnid=4EAQ_8zw5ojbxM&vet=12a
pattern?
hUKEwjXuZa-7cX_AhWwXTABHRK5AR8QMygNegUIA which they will use to
write a few sentences to report on the weather patterns in their communities. (The
same questions can be used to guide their writing).
45 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
ST Skills -6- Conversation: Oral Discussion
Assess the impact of Con students describe what they observe ● Have students go outside to explore their surroundings. As they explore, ask them
weather conditions about the environment? what they observe about the colour of the leaves, what they observe about the grass
on the community Can students identify differenences in the etc.
● Show students pictures depicting different times of the year (dry season and rainy
at different times of environment from the pictures?
season). Ask students if the surroundings always look like what they observe
the year. Can students describe how the environment
outside or in the pictures. Have them tell you what is different and when do they
is affected by rain and sun?
notice these differences. Ask students if they know about the rainy season and the
ST Values 6- Can students express what would be different
dry season and when they usually occur.
Appreciate how the about the environment if there was no sun or ● Focus on the sun and rain and have students outline how the sun and rain affect
weather affects the rain? the environment (soil, animals, plants, rivers etc) differently.
environment. ● Ask students what outside would look like if there was no rain at all or if there was
no sun at all.
Product: Do the drawings depict sunny and Reflection
rainy days accurately? ● Have students draw a picture of the environment when it is sunny and when it is
rainy.
Conversation: Do students’ responses ● Have students say what is their favourite type of weather and why?
demonstrate appreciation for different types
of weather?
46 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: Understand that our islands are made up of many diverse regions and communities
Section 6 – The Environment as a Resource
Grade Level Expectations:
Learners will identify the environment as a resource
Learners will investigate how to use resources found in the environment
Learners will value the importance of the local environment and its link to human survival
Focus Questions:
Where do the things we use in our everday lives come from?
How would we survive without the natural environment?
Specific Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum Strategies
Outcomes
Learners will
be expected to:
ST Knowledge Conversation: Are students able to state Video and Discussion
7 what the environment is?
-Identify the ● Have the students watch the video. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=05spudqST8U
natural
environment as a
● Have students talk about what they understood in the video to come up with a
resource
definition for the term environment.
47 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum Strategies
Outcomes
ST Skills 7 Conversation: Are students able to Oral Discussion
-Investigate how identify natural resources found in their
resources found community? ● Bring in a set of goods made from natural resources commonly used around the home or
in the local school to display. Ask students to identify the materials used to make these items. Record
environment are their responses on the board. Ask students where these materials come from.
useful to us
● Ask students to name one thing they cannot live without. Tell them to think about where
this thing came from or how it is made. Ask students if they know the word for things in the
natural environment which are useful to us. Have students define the term natural resource.
Conversation: Are students able to Video
identify natural resources found in their ● Have students view the video
community? https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dsTgyb_ITtk (stop at 2:32)
● Ask students to name natural resources found in their community
Product: Lap book Activity: Graphic Organizer
● Have students start chapter seven in their lap books titled “Resources in My Community.
Do the drawings depict natural ● Have students draw and colour an outdoor scene which includes natural resources found in
resources? their community such as trees, a river/sea/waterfall and land. Have them draw a line from
Are students able to identify accurately each resource and write down at least two items we get from the resource e.g trees give us
two uses of each resource? lumber and paper.
Conversation: Oral Presentation
● Have students select one natural resource. Ask them to bring in one item that they or their
Are students able to identify the natural family members use. In the oral presentation ask them to state the material from the natural
resources used to make the item? environment the item is made from and explain how it is useful to people.
Are students able to explain how these
items are useful to people?
48 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum Strategies
Outcomes
ST - Values-7 Product: Do students statements Reflection
Value the demonstrate an understanding of the ● Have the students reflect on the question “Can human beings survive without the natural
importance of importance of the natural environment? environment?’ and them complete statements such as:
the local Do the statements show that they -The natural environment is important because _______________________.
environment and understand the link between the natural -Human beings depend on the natural environment for _______________.
its link to human environment and human survival? -Human beings can/cannot (circle one) survive without the natural environment
survival because____________.
Essential Learning Outcome: Understand that our islands are made up of many diverse regions and communities
Section 7 – Caring for the Environment
Focusing Questions: What actions by humans can harm the environment?
How can each individual help to protect our environment?
Grade Level Expectations:
Learners will identify ways in which people harm the environment
Learners will gather information on the ways we harm and protect our environment
Learners appreciate each other’s role in caring for the environment
Focusing Questions:
What actions by humans can harm the environment?
How can each individual help to protect our environment?
49 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Learners will be
expected to:
ST Knowledge -8 Conversation School/Community Walk
-Identify ways in Are students able to identify parts of the environment after taking the tour of ● Have the students walk around the school
which people harm the school compound?
compound to observe ways in which people harm
the environment Can students describe ways in which humans harm the environment?
the environment . Have the students talk about
harmful practices they observed in their
environment.
● Engage students in a discussion on the ways that
human beings harm the environment.
ST Skills - 8 Observation: Investigation
● Have students assume the role of Guardians of
-Gather information Are students collecting the right information? the Environment. They are to observe or talk to
on the ways we What sources are they gathering information from?
persons in their home, school and neighbourhood
harm and protect Is the data being recorded?
over 2-3 days to find out ways in which we harm
our environment
the local environment. Select two students to
record data. Each day students are to report to
the recorders what they found out. e.g. a person
threw a bottle out the window of a vehicle.
Students can record the information on large
sheets of Bristol board placed on the classroom
wall.
50 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Conversation: Are students aware of actions that harm the environment? Oral Discussion
Do students understand the impact of these actions? ● Engage the students in a discussion on their
observations. Guide them to talk about what is
wrong with these actions, how they are bad for
the environment and how the actions of one
person can affect the environment for all persons.
Product: Are students able to create a collage depicting ways in which we Collage
harm the environment?
Are the pictures used appropriate for illustrating harm to the environment? ● Have the students create a collage showing the
various ways in which people harm the
environment.
Product: Resource Person
● Invite an environmental officer to speak to
Can students come up with relevant questions to ask the resource students about ways in which they can help
person? protect the environment. Have students prepare
questions that they can pose to the officer.
Observation: Are students being attentive? Are students asking
questions? Are students’ contributions demonstrating awareness of their
own responsibility?
51 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Product: Do the jingles demonstrate measures we can take to protect the Jingle
environment? ● Have students listen to the following song.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yfhyXx1kCz0
Ask them what the song is about and what is the
purpose of the song. Then place students In
groups, and tell them they are going to create
their own jingle to encourage others to protect
the environment.
ST Values - 8 Product: Do the skits display how the action can harm the environment? Drama/Role play
-Appreciate each Do the skits display the proper actions we can take to protect the ● Place students in small groups. Place a few
other’s role in caring environment? scenarios in a bag. Students a scenario from the
for the
bag. and then provide them with a guide (simple
environment
rubric) to help them prepare a short skit on how
the action selected causes harm to the
environment and how each individual can play a
part in caring for the environment.
52 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Social Studies
Civic Participation
Essential Learning Outcome: Understand how our rights and responsibilities are important for building strong communities
Introduction to the Subject: Identifies the goals and purpose of developing civic competence and thereby exposing students to the importance of strong
foundations towards active citizenship, democratic values, and essential knowledge, values and critical thinking skills that are vital for the continuance of a thriving
society.
Essential Learning Outcome: Understand how our rights and responsibilities are important for building strong communities
Section 1 – Keeping our Neighbours Safe and Healthy
Grade Level Expectations:
Learners will describe actions that children can take to make their neighbourhoods safe and healthy.
Learners engage in actions to improve one’s community.
Learners appreciate the positive benefits of helping others who are in need in your neighbourhood.
Focus questions:
1. How can we keep our neighbourhood safe and healthy?
Why should our neighbourhood be kept safe and healthy?
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Learners will be
expected to:
CP Knowledge 1- Identify Conversation -: Are students able to Introduction:
features that make a state the name of their neighbourhood Introduce the concept of ‘Safe/unsafe’ and healthy/unhealthy OR activate prior
community unsafe and and briefly describe their knowledge.
healthy. neighbourhood?
53 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Have students take turns to state where they live and use guided questions to get them to
describe the kind of neighbourhood they live in (do most houses have burglar proof bars? Guard
dogs? Is it safe to be out late at night? Is it clean? How often does the garbage truck pick up garbage?)
Therefore, using one word would you say that your neighborhood is…. (safe, unsafe,
clean)
Field Trip:
Product - ● Students take a mini field trip around their school community (where school is
Are students able to identify features of located) and observe the environment checking for the areas that are unsafe and
safe and unsafe communities from the unhealthy. Students will record their observations (remind students to bring along
pictures collected/taken during the their devices to take pictures).
field trip.
Discussion
● Using the language Experience Approach (LEA), have students state, report, and
Conversation: recall their observations made from field trip.
Are students able to report on the ● Project pictures from students so that they can be used to stimulate discussions
different locations that can be and memory.
considered safe and healthy from ● Students list/draw features of safe and unsafe communities and
unsafe and unhealthy in the healthy/unhealthy communities
neighborhood.
Seatwork/mapwork:
● Distribute sketch maps of the community showing locations that can be considered
Product: safe/unsafe. Let students draw smiley face/frown face emojis to identify safe
After viewing pictures of /unsafe or healthy/unhealthy communities.
neighbourhoods, are students able to Reflection:
differentiate between safe and healthy ● let students draw, write, make models, or do oral presentation to show the ways
neighbourhoods versus unsafe and they can keep their environment safe and healthy.
unhealthy neighbourhoods.
Conversation:
Are students presenting ideas that their
community and its members can take
to keep the community safe and
healthy?
54 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
CP Skills 1- Engage in Conversation: Are students able to Presentation:
actions to improve one’s suggest community projects they can Using information from the community trip, students in groups will brainstorm
community. undertake to improve the health and actions that they and community members can take to keep the community safe
safety in their community? and healthy.
Tally Chart:
Have students vote for which action they believe can work best to improve the
community. Get students to count votes and present diagrams.
CP Values 1-Appreciate Product: Community Service Learning project:
the positive benefits of Are students able to successfully ● The teacher guides students to engage in community projects such as: creating
helping to keep their implement a project in their and erecting signs, podcasts, clean-up campaign, planting of trees, distributing
communities safe and community such as: creating signs, flyers, health, and safety talk to other classes.
healthy. flyers etc. that promote practices that Reflective Thinking:
keep their community safe and healthy? ● Teacher guides students to write several sentences about what they have learned
about the benefits of their project in helping to keep their community safe and
Conversation: Are students able to healthy.
state the benefits of their project in ● Students role play ways to keep the community safe and the benefits to
helping to keep their communities safe community members.
and healthy?
Product: Can students write two
simple sentences about what they have
learned while doing the project?
55 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: Understand how our rights and responsibilities are important for building strong communities
Section 2 – Resolving Conflict in our Communities
Grade Level Expectations:
K-Identify examples of conflict in our communities and neighbourhoods.
S-Role play ways to resolve differences and arguments.
V-Appreciate the role of police and other community helpers in dealing with conflict.
Focus Questions:
1. What are examples of conflicts in the community?
2. What are some ways to resolve conflicts that arise in the community?
3. Who are persons that can help resolve conflicts in the community?
Specific Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum
Curriculum Outcomes
Outcomes
Learners will be
expected to:
CP Knowledge 2 - Conversation Read Aloud/Discussion
Identify examples Are students able to recognize and • Read the following scenario to the students (teacher may use names of students in the
of conflict in our explain that Paul and Jane are having a class):
communities and disagreement or a conflict? Paul and Jane were good friends. One day, after school, Paul took his bat and cricket ball and went over to Jane’s house
neighbourhoods. to play cricket. Paul said he would bat first and told Jane that she would field. However, Jane did not want to field,
Are students able to define the term she wanted to bat first. This led to a big argument between the two friends. Paul then took his bat and went back to
conflict? his home. Jane took her bike and started riding in her yard.
Get students to define conflict by probing them based on the scenario: What is happening between
Paul and Jane? What do we call a situation like this?
Invite students to provide examples of conflicts that may occur between or among classmates,
family members and community members.
56 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum
Curriculum Outcomes
Outcomes
Conversation:
Are students able to identify examples
of conflict in our classrooms, homes, Picture Inferencing/Conflict Scenarios:
and communities? ● Show various pictures to students to differentiate between conflicts and non-conflicts.
● Allow students to identify ways in which they think people can resolve the conflicts
Observation: identified in the pictures.
Are students able to distinguish ● Show students a video on conflict resolution https://youtu.be/Zm1NRbNsFmo
between situations that are conflict ● Let students take turns to share what they have learned about resolving conflict based on
and those that are not? the video.
Journaling:
● Have students w Write in their journals about one action they would take or have taken to address or solve conflicts
● in their homes, school, or communities.
●
Product: ● Provide a writ Prompt: I solve conflicts by...
Are students able to write in their
journals abouts ways they have solved
or can solve different conflicts?
CP Skills -2- Conversation: Group Work: Role Play
Role play ways to Are students able to brainstorm ways ● Place students in groups to role play different scenarios of conflict in the classroom, school,
resolve differences to resolve conflicts? and their community for example:
and arguments. ○ (Conflict at play: two students collide while running on the corridor, Jack borrows
Product: Wendy’s eraser without her permission and loses it break time,
Are students able to write what they ○ vehicle accident - both drivers argue about who is wrong and who is right,
have learned about resolving ○ neighbors are quarrelling over fruits or vegetables that were stolen by one of their
conflicts? children).
Are students able to demonstrate ways Developing Self-Assessment Skills
of resolving different conflicts? ● Guide students to create pupil made trivia questions on the topic.
Conversation: Developing Tools for Investigation
Are students able to determine when ● Place pupils in groups to create a survey/questionnaire/poll/interview on the topic to
it is suitable to seek the help of others, gather data from members of their communities.
57 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Specific Curriculum Outcomes Specific Curriculum
Curriculum Outcomes
Outcomes
including teachers, parents, police, and ● Have students represent data in the form of a pictograph/block or bar graph.
others community leaders to resolve
conflict?
Product:
Are students able to create questions
for self-evaluation?
Product:
Are students able to create questions
for survey/interview?
Product:
Are students able to represent data
using graphs and charts?
CP Values -2- Guided Learning:
Appreciate the role Students are provided with several examples of conflicts that range from mild to severe. Students
of police and other will be invited to share examples of when these conflicts may require outside help from police or
community helpers community leaders. teacher will engage with the students to help them see the value in seeking
in dealing with outside help when conflict cannot be resolved.
conflict.
Essential Learning Outcome: Understand how our rights and responsibilities are important for building strong communities
Section 3 – Governing the Community
Grade Level Expectations:
Learners can describe how our local community is governed.
Learners can gather information about different local services that are organized at our community level.
Learners appreciate the advantages of local community involvement to assist families to meet their needs.
58 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Focus Questions:
1. What do you think can happen if there are no leaders in a community?
2. What are the roles of leaders in a community?
3. How can members of a community get involved to help families in need?
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
Learners will be
expected to:
CP Knowledge – 3 Conversation Read Aloud/Discussion
Describe how our Are students able to describe the ● Read the story “The Upside Down Elephant”
local community is way the local community is http://mrjonathan.com/mxrm9files/AR/THE%20UPSIDE%20DOWN%20ELEPHANT.
governed. governed? pdf
● Question students based on the story to review the meaning of community.
● Question the students on the characteristics of Mr. Ghatak to deduce that he was a leader in
the community (Did Mr. Ghatak run away from the problem? Did he pass on the problem
to someone else? What did he do? So, then we can say that Mr. Ghatak was a….)
Observation
Are students able to identify Digital Seat Work
leaders in the community? ● Have students solve the digital jigsaw puzzle to reveal pictures of local leaders https://im-a-
puzzle.com/make-puzzle
● Or display a PowerPoint presentation of pictures of local leaders to initiate a discussion on
leaders and how these leaders play a role in governing the community.
● Record students’ responses on the board or on chart paper in the form of a graphic organizer
● Discuss with students which of the community leaders they think was able to get members of
the community to help the elephant.
● Identify some ways these leaders were able to get the community involved to help the
elephant.
59 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum
Outcomes
CP Skills - 3- Conversation Project: Building model communities
Gather information Are students able to provide ● Construct a model of a selected community and highlight the different local services that are
about different local examples of the local services that offered in the community, (club house, building that host after school programmes, soup
services that are are organized in a community? kitchen, recreation (steelpan, sports etc.)
organized at our ● Students are invited to bring materials such as cardboard and plant materials from their
community level. Product communities to include in their models.
Are students able to represent a ● Group students based on the communities that they are from to collect the various items
model of their community about from their communities.
different local services that are ● Gallery walk: the teacher can invite other classes, teachers, parents and members of the
organized at a community level? community to view the models and invite the students to share their thinking about their
models and how they represent services in their community.
CP Values - Observation: Group Work: Think-Pair-Share/Artwork/Role Play:
3Appreciate the From the scenarios, are students ● Present scenarios accompanied with pictures of families in need (babysitting, house fire,
advantages of local able to recognize families that need medical assistance, building a home, flooding…) to the students.
community help? ● Place students in pairs to think-pair-share on ways the community can get involved to assist
involvement to assist families to meet their needs.
families to meet their Conversation: ● Students are invited to share their Think-pair-share with other classmates.
needs. Are students able to articulate how ● Class can collaborate with local community service groups (Rotary, JCI, Kiwanis, Lions,
the community can get involved to Leos, Red Cross) to conduct community services.
assist families in need?
Essential Learning Outcome: Understand how our rights and responsibilities are important for building strong communities
Section 4 – Accidents at Home and in the Community
Grade Level Expectations:
K-List possible causes of accidents and injuries at home and in our community.
S-Investigate how community workers help keep families and children safe.
V-Appreciate the importance of following safety procedures.
60 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Focus Questions:
1. What are some examples of accidents and injuries at home and in our community?
2. Who are the people that help to keep families and children safe?
3. How can families and children keep safe at home or in the community?
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning
Outcomes Strategies Strategies
Learners will be
expected to:
CP Knowledge -4- Conversation: Guided Discussion:
List possible causes of Are students able to articulate the ● Show the class pictures and videos of various accidents that occurred in the home, class, or
accidents and injuries meaning of accident in their own community.
at home and in our words? ● Question students about what they see and what may have caused each incident.
community. ● Invite students to share their stories about accidents they have experienced.
Observation: ● Have students state in their own words what an accident means.
Are students able to name different ● Have students come up with causes of accidents.
types of accidents that can occur at
home and in the community? Group Work:
● Place students in pairs to observe pictures depicting an accident that will be likely to happen.
Conversation: Have students write in their own words what will happen next using scenarios such as: (a
Can students identify the causes of child standing at the edge of a stool trying to reach a glass on a high shelf, a child about to
accidents at home and in our touch a hot pot on a stove, a child running across the street to get a football whilst a vehicle
community? is approaching, a driver texting and driving…)
Product: Game:
Are students able to predict during ● Set up a scavenger hunt activity for students to find unsafe household items or situations
oral presentations what can happen that may create an accident (plastic knife on the table, empty bleach bottle, empty match
if safety procedures are not box, baby doll crawling towards small Legos blocks on the floor….)
followed based on given pictures or
orchestrated situations? Follow up activity: Home Investigation
● Students are asked to go home and look around their house and yards and identify at least
one potential hazard to share with the class the following day (or next class).
● Students take turns sharing with the class and provide examples of ways to address these
hazards.
61 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning
Outcomes Strategies Strategies
CP Skills - 4- Conversation: Discussion:
Investigate how Are students able to identify ● Together with students, identify some community helpers and who keep them safe using
community workers community workers who help keep pictures and videos.
help keep families and families and children safe using ● Record students responses on the board or chart, for example (nurses, doctors, police,
children safe. pictures and/or videos? dentist, garbage collectors, traffic wardens, bus conductors, teachers, security guards)
Are students able to dramatize the Roleplay
role of a community worker in Community workers roles in keeping us safe.
keeping families and children safe ● Place students into groups (pairs, groups of three) to research the roles or how these
and treating injured persons? workers help to keep them safe in their communities.
● Have community helpers give students information on how they can be contacted, their
locations, and the roles they play in the community.
Can students identify where these ● Let students role play community workers in action based on their research, for example:
workers are located within their helping the injured person (s) in the community, traffic warden crossing students across the
communities and how they can be road.
reached when they are needed?
CP Values - 4- Conversation: Discussion on safety procedures:
Appreciate the Are students able to list examples ● Lead a classroom discussion on the meaning of safety procedures, and their importance,
importance of of safety procedures? provide some examples such as: crossing the road, using the pedestrian crossing, using their
following safety devices online, playing with matches, taking medications not prescribed or prescribed.
procedures. Product: ● Let students take turns to share suggestions of safety procedures that they have adhered to
Can students make oral in the past, for example discarding a used match, calling an adult when the kettle is
presentations on the importance of whistling.
following safety procedures? ● The teacher gives examples of how the internet is also a place where we need to exercise
safety such as encouraging safe internet habits.
Product: ● teacher can share information from the following regional internet safety sources:
Are students able to show their - https://oicaribbean.org/internet-safety-day-2022/
appreciation for the importance of - https://safetyandsecuritynet.org/
having safety procedures and more - https://www.facebook.com/getsafeonlinecaribbean/
so following them by writing brief
reflections in their journals and/or
creating simple artwork depicting Journaling/Artwork
● Have students journal their understanding and appreciation of following safety procedures.
62 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning
Outcomes Strategies Strategies
safety procedures they should ● Or have students represent their understanding and appreciation of following safety
follow? procedures through artwork based on the presentation by resource person.
Essential Learning Outcome: Understand how our rights and responsibilities are important for building strong communities
Section 5 – Safety in the Community
Grade Level Expectations:
K-Recognize that children have the right to be safe in their community.
S- Describe ways that their community helps ensure that its members are safe.
V-Appreciate that family and community members are responsible for helping children feel safe and cared for.
Focus Questions:
1. How can children remain safe in the community?
2. Who helps to keep children safe in the community?
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning
Outcomes Strategies Strategies
Learners will be
expected to:
K5-Recognize that Conversation: Read Aloud/Discussion:
children have the right Do students have a basic ● Have students listen to the video of a Read Aloud “I Have the Right to be a Child” to
to be safe in their understanding of their rights? identify the rights that children have.
community.
Are students able to explain that they https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ERKhP7bQ6Os&t=45s
have the right to be safe in their
community? ● Question students based on the video: What is the meaning of rights? What are two
examples of rights that children have? What rights were mentioned about safety?
● Record students' responses on chart paper or on the board.
Product:
63 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning
Outcomes Strategies Strategies
Can students rewrite the specific ● Explain to students that just as they have rights at home and at school, they also have
right(s) that deals with safety in their the right to be safe in their community.
community?
Journal Entry:
● Have students make an entry in their journal (Today I learned that…)
Product
Can students write sentences in their
journals about what they have learned
about rights and responsibilities?
S5- Describe ways that Conversation: Guided Discussion:
their community helps Are students able to identify things ● Present pictures of various signs and marking used throughout the community to
ensure that its members done by the community to ensure its promote safety of community members, for example: warning and stop signs,
are safe. members are safe? pedestrian crossings, railings, garbage bins, traffic lights, sidewalks, safety signs on
beaches and lakes etc.
Observation: ● Ask students to identify similar measures implemented in their individual communities
Can students identify the personnel to keep its members safe.
responsible for the measures ● Together with students, discuss the reasons for the various signs and who in the
implemented by the community to community is responsible for ensuring that signs are adhered to, for example:
promote safety? lifeguards on the beach, traffic wardens at pedestrian crossings,
● Ask students who they think are responsible for employing these people in the
Product: communities.
Can students make oral presentations
of ways they think their community
ensures that its members are safe?
V5-Appreciate that Product: Community Service Project:
family and community Are students able to create signs and ● Students will be placed in groups.
members are posters that promote different safety ● Students and parents/guardians in collaboration with community safety personnel will
responsible for helping measures to protect children and create or repair signs or paint safety markings in their communities.
children feel safe and families in the community service ● Students will create scrapbook of pictures of the project to be presented to the class.
cared for. project(s)?
64 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Social Studies
Economic Decision Making
Essential Learning Outcome: Understand how our communities provide goods and services to meet our needs and wants
Essential Learning Outcome: Understand how our communities provide goods and services to meet our needs and wants
Section 1 – Human Resources
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
K-Identify people in the community that are resource persons
S-Categorize human and natural resources in your local environment
V- Appreciate the importance of respecting the value of our human and natural resources for meeting our basic needs
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will be expected to:
EDM Knowledge -1
Conversation: Concept formation:
Are students able to identify people in their community Provide students with culturally relevant pictures or videos
- Identify people in the community that as human resources? of people performing various jobs to generate a discussion.
are resource persons This activity can be done as a small group work or buddy
share.
Categorizing information: Can students categorize
people as human resources using samples of: Sample Video:
• Pictures https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ckKQclquAXU
• Videos
• Comprehension passages Sample Questions:
• Show and Tell 1. Who is depicted in the picture?
2. What job does the person shown do?
65 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Product: Using an assessment menu provide options 3. What do you think would happen if no one did this
for students to showcase their understanding job?
4. What skill(s) would be needed to perform this
job/activity?
Product: Can students use an assessment menu to
showcase their understanding by choosing one or
more of the following:
-Drawings See Figure 2 Definitions and main content
- Role play
- Match these
Students are given an assessment menu to choose which
- Cut/paste ( Scraping)
group/individual work they will complete.
- Projects/ poster
-Journals
Students share their work with the class.
- Presentation
Peer review should be encouraged.
_-Career day
–Resource person ( show and tell)
-Video recording
- Song or Dance or Poem
- Game- The Sims, etc
Figure 1 : Assessment Menu
EDM Skills -1 Conversation: Resource Person/Panel::
Can students identify resources used in the Encourage discussion of video and invite resource persons
environment to provide goods and services? to speak to students on how resources are used to complete
-Categorize human and natural daily tasks.
resources in your local environment. Sample Videos
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ajk-pvm5vfQ ( 0-
1:34)
66 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
After discussion students can be placed in small groups and
given different natural resources. They are to present at least
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tCqj9jKQaSs three (3) ways each resource can be used.
( 0-2:00)
https://wordwall.net/resource/27974143/natural-
resources Local Field Trip:
Sample Questions: The teacher prepares students to take a field trip to their
• What are the seven (7) resources identified in immediate environment. Students record what they observe
the video? as natural resources in their environment.
• Can you think of some uses of the resource As students experience the local environment, the teacher
identified? and accompanying adults encourage students to draw or jot
down words to illustrate/describe examples of natural
Product: Can students differentiate between human resources.
resources and natural resources?
.
Sequencing Sample Activity
Provide students with pictures and have them arrange Post-Field trip, the teacher invites students to share their
them to show the correlation between human resources, findings and works with students to explain, clarify and
natural resources and manmade resources. expand their understanding of the resources they observed.
Natural Resource + human Resource = Man Made
Resource
Needed:
Picture packets
paper glue
Exercise book
Teacher models how to arrange the picture in the
correct sequence before finally gluing them.
See Figure 3 Connection Between Resources
67 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Observation: Are students able to work Small Group Learning:
cooperatively with one another? Students are provided with a list of natural resources and
EDM Values - 1 work in pairs or small groups to highlight resources based on
Product: Do students appreciate the importance of their importance to meeting our basic needs.
-Appreciate the importance of
natural resources for meeting their basic needs in the Students write sentences to explain the importance of
respecting the value of our human and
community? protecting these resources.
natural resources for meeting our basic
needs
Create a conservation song, poem, skit, drawing or picture
folder about a resource and ways to protect it.
Product: Can students highlight reasons why natural
and human resources are important for meeting our Using the Minecraft game, students are expected to create a
basic needs? farm which should include a house and animal enclosure.
They will be expected to present their final product using
Flipgrid.
Students create a poster to highlight the value of both natural
and human resources.
Interview and Field Trips:
Students engage with resource persons based on the natural
resources available in their country.
Students ask questions and visit sites to get a better
understanding of the use of these resources.
Ex: Dominica Geothermal plant, LuceLEC power grid, local
f arms etc
Additional Resources and Materials:
What Are Natural Resources? | Types Of Natural Resources | The Dr Binocs Show | Peekaboo Kidz
68 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Cartoon for Kids‼️ Natural resources Science for Children
Figure 1: Assessment Menu
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Figure 2: Definitions
• Resources: any materials in the environment or skills, abilities that can be used by man to satisfy his needs and wants.
• Any material that is needed and useful by people.
• Natural: from nature
• Man-made: made by men
• Human: Human resources are the skills and talents people use to provide goods and services.
• Renewable: resources which can be used over and over again.
• Non-renewable: resources which can only be used for a limited time, they will run out. ( inexhaustible)
• Physical ( human, capital and technology)
69 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
• Computers, tablets, images, projector, Liveworksheets, quizlet, Kahoots, pear deck slides, nearpod, Quizizz, Minecraft
Human Resources: Human resources are the skills and talents people use to provide goods and services.
Human resources are important because we use our knowledge, skills, talents, creativity and time to turn natural resources into manmade resources.
Man-made resources are very useful and make life easier and safer.
Figure 3: Connection Between Resources
We human resources and natural resources to create manmade resources
70 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Human Resources + Natural resource = Man Made resource
Road builders pitch/ tar road
Essential Learning Outcome: Understand how our communities provide goods and services to meet our needs and wants
Section 2 – Resources: Our Land
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
K-Describe different uses of land in your community
S- Explain how land use affects the environment
V -Value the need to treat land with respect
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Learners will be expected to:
EDM Knowledge -2
Sample Activities Sample
-Describe different uses of land in Conversation: Are students able to identify the various Picture inferencing:
your community uses of the land in their community and how each
serves a specific purpose? The teacher shares a variety of pictures which depicts aspects of the
local community and environment such as,, homes, farms, hotels,
rivers, coastline, wharves, banks, quarries, industrial factories, Bridges,
Product: Small Groups work Roads and hospitals.
Can students create a model or draw a picture of a
feature of the land and identify its uses? This could be Sample Questions:
done during the class under the teacher’s supervision. • What are the various ways the land is used in each picture?
• Which pictures have natural resources and which have man
made resources?
71 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
• Which buildings can be used as living spaces?
• Which buildings can be used for business?
Through discussion, the teacher helps students to understand that all
these features are used by people.
Picture match:
Students will be given a list of land uses and pictures of land used for
commercial, agricultural, health and residential recreational activities.
They will match the pictures to their use.
Example: These can be personalized to the resources found in their
country.
The beach - fishing, recreation (Fun)
The parks or reserves- animal habitat
Quarry- Quarrying sand and stone
The bank- saving money
The medical facility eg. a clinic- caring for the sick
Plant nursery- growing plants
Farm -
(Sample Video)
https://www.youtube.com/shorts/l5NfUs59zqA
Subject Integration Read-A-Loud
The teacher gathers the students around a book pertaining to land
and its uses and engages in a read aloud to reinforce the
understanding that the land has many different purposes. The teacher
then engages the students in choral reading of the book.The book is
made available in the classroom library for independent reading.
72 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
EDM Skills -2 Sample Activity Sample Activity
-Explain how land use affects the Observation: Are the students able to identify that Students discuss the changes they notice in photos/pictures of an
environment their drawings/pictures and models show different area before and after land use.
local land uses? Example:
Conversation:
How did the man-made features change the natural
landscape?
How does this change affect the animals, people and
plants in the area?
Conversation: Are students able to identify the negative
before after
consequences of overusing, misusing the land?
Game: Students can play these virtual reality games to show different
land uses and discuss how the land use has changed the landscape.
• minecraft
• roblox
• Simcity 2000
• puzzles involving matching different land uses to their
environmental impacts
EDM Values -2
-Value the need to treat land with Conversation: Critical Thinking:
respect Can students recognize and list different conservation The teacher can draw upon several of the pictures in the class book
practices? that reflect different ways the land can be conserved.
Can students describe simple practices that contribute
to the conservation of land such as reusing materials,
reducing waste and planting new tees?
73 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
afforestation (Planting of
trees) recycling
cleaning
After viewing photos, engage the class in brief discussion on different
preservation strategies.
74 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
View the YouTube video “What is Land pollution - Video for kids”
to reinforce how land pollution might affect the land.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c0Ygm51cSjI
What Are Natural Resources? | Types Of Natural Resources | The
Dr Binocs Show | Peekaboo Kidz
Engage the students in a discussion of ways we destroy the land and
what we can do to preserve/protect the land.
What are some ways we can destroy the land and what can we do to
preserve/protect the land?
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Land: It is the solid part of earth's surface (the soil and its mineral resources) where production like farming and livestock management takes place.
Uses: farming, animal rearing, construction, mining
Tools for mining: Excavator, haul truck, bulldozer
Tools for Agriculture: shovel, rack, cultivator, wheelbarrow, tractor
75 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: Understand how our communities provide goods and services to meet our needs and wants
Section 3 – People in the Community: Community Workers
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
Learners can identify some of the people who live and work in the community
Learners cn illustrate the roles/ identity of community members using drawings or pictures
L earners appreciate the diverse range of people who make up my community
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Conversation: Are students able to identify Differentiated Instruction
Learners will be expected i ndividuals who live and work in their community? Include a stimulus/introductory activity to help students review concepts of
to: w orkers in their community.
EDM- Knowledge
3-
-Identify some of the people
who live and work in the
community
EDM- Skills-3 Product: Are students able to illustrate individuals Sample Activities:
-Draw pictures to illustrate who provide needs and wants in their community? Students are asked to draw a picture of someone who works in their
the roles of workers in community such as a police officer, shopkeeper, hotel worker, farmer,
the community Conversation: When students discuss the teacher, bus driver, cook, street vendor.
individuals in their community, are they able to point
out features that distinguish them from others? Or Students can be given a set of pictures which depicts community workers..
They will to choose one picture, colour it and write one sentence about the
role of the worker.
Students will display these pictures on a bulletin board titled, “People Who
Work in My Community”
76 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Students gather around the bulletin board and discuss the role each person in
the picture and how they provide community members’ with needs and
w ants.
EDM Values-3 Observation: Can students demonstrate their Research and Identify Roles:
-Appreciate the diverse range appreciation for the diverse roles and contributions
of people who make up my of individuals in their community through interviews Have students research and identify various roles within their community.
community and research? This could include occupations, cultural groups, service providers, etc.
Encourage them to think broadly and inclusively.
Product: Will students demonstrate an appreciation Collage Creation:
for the diverse roles and contributions of individuals Instruct students to create a collage that represents the diversity within their
in their community through a visually expressive community.
collage? Traditional: Students would have been previously instructed to bring at least
two pictures from their research.
These will be cut and pasted to create the class collage.
Digital Collage Creation:
Instead of traditional cut-and-paste collages, students use digital tools like
Canva, Adobe Spark, or Google Slides to create a visually appealing digital
collage. They can insert images, text, and shapes to represent the diversity in
their community
Emphasize the importance of inclusive representation. Encourage students to
include individuals from different genders, ethnicities, ages, abilities, and
backgrounds in their college.
Online Peer Feedback:
Use collaborative platforms like Google Classroom or Padlet for peer
feedback. Students can provide comments, ask questions, and offer positive
reflections on their classmates' digital collages.
77 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Create Thank You Cards
Students create a thank you card to give to different workers in the
community who meet their needs and wants.
Career Day
After viewing and discussing the people on their bulletin board, students are
invited to write a days of the week story, using the following story starter, that
explains the diversity of their community workers .
I knew my community was special because on Monday I saw (Name
community worker)….
I knew my community was special because on Tuesday I saw…
I knew my community was special because on Wednesday I saw…etc
Additional Resources and Materials:
Community Guest Speakers:
Invite community members representing various professions to share their experiences with the students. This can provide real-world insights and perspectives.
Virtual Field Trips:
Explore virtual field trips or documentaries that showcase different professions and work environments. Platforms like Google Arts & Culture or virtual tours of
workplaces can be engaging.
Children's Books:
Incorporate diverse children's books that highlight different careers and emphasize the importance of community. Examples include "The Berenstain Bears: Jobs
Around Town" or "Whose Hands Are These? A Community Helper Guessing Book."
Interactive Websites:
Use interactive websites and online platforms that allow students to explore different careers. Websites like Kids.gov or My Next Move offer interactive tools and
resources.
78 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Multicultural and Inclusive Media:
Integrate movies, TV shows, or online videos that portray diverse communities and the various roles within them. Discussing media content can be a powerful way to
address stereotypes and promote inclusivity.
Interactive Maps:
Explore interactive maps that showcase different cultures and professions around the world. Websites like National Geographic or UNESCO provide interactive
m aps that can spark discussions on global diversity.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Workers in our community:
• Police Officers: Ensuring public safety and maintaining law and order.
• Firefighters: Responding to fires and emergencies to protect lives and property.
• Nurses and Healthcare Professionals: Providing essential healthcare services in hospitals, clinics, and other healthcare settings.
• Electricians: Installing and maintaining electrical systems.
• Construction Workers: Building and maintaining infrastructure such as roads, bridges, and buildings.
• Retail Workers: Working in shops and stores, assisting customers and managing inventory.
• Chefs and Culinary Workers: Preparing and serving food in restaurants, hotels, and other food establishments.
• Postal Workers: Handling and delivering mail and packages.
• Librarians: Managing and organizing library resources, assisting patrons.
• Social Workers: Providing support and services to individuals and families in need.
• Artists and Performers: Contributing to the cultural and creative landscape of the community.
• Garbage Collectors/Sanitation Workers: Keeping the community clean by collecting and disposing of waste.
• Public Transportation Workers: Bus drivers, train conductors, and others who facilitate public transportation.
• Technology Professionals: IT specialists, programmers, and technicians contributing to the technological infrastructure.
• Environmentalists: Working to protect and preserve the environment.
• Journalists: Reporting news and information to keep the community informed.
• Military Personnel: Serving in the armed forces to protect national security.
• Psychologists/Counselors: Providing mental health support and counseling services.
• Entreprenuers/Small Business Owners: Contributing to the local economy through small businesses.
• Nonprofit Workers/Volunteers: Engaging in charitable and community service activities.
79 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: Understand how our communities provide goods and services to meet our needs and wants
Section 4 – Goods and Services
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
Learners can describe the goods and services available in your community
Learners Classify workers who provide goods and services
L earners appreciate that goods and services provide both needs and wants
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Learners will be
expected to:
EDM- Knowledge-4 Observation: Can students identify Sample activities
-Identify goods and the pictures which depict goods and Presentation and Discussion : Students view slides (Canva,Prezi,Adobe Spark) of
services available in my services and give reasons why they are different types of goods and services which are provided in the community.
community. considered goods or services?
Examples of goods: Farm produce, sand and stones, water, furniture, books.
Product: Can students conclude that goods Examples of service: dental check-up, hair grooming, manicure, vehicle repairs, swiping/
are physical items we get and services are landscaping.
things that are done to and for us?
Sample prompts to guide discussion: After each slide teacher can ask:
1. Where will you get this product?
2. If you were to buy this product what will you get?
3. Will you leave with an item or will something be done for you or to you?
Role Play: Teacher guides the children to role play a scenario involving the provision of
a good and a service For Ex: A nurse attending to a patient using a thermometer,an IV,
or a blood pressure monitor.
80 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Suggested Culminating Activities.
Students view the following video to highlight and reinforce the differences between
goods and services https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yxibq_vskRA
Worksheet correlates to the video.
h ttps://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/social-studies/132428
EDM-Skills-4
-Classify workers who Conversation: Can students differentiate Categorizing Concepts: Show and Tell
provide goods and between workers who provide a good or a Use of flashcards/ objects of different workers:
services s ervice? Students are placed in two lines and each is given a group of flashcards with
pictures/objects that represent goods and services. Children will use the strategy Show
and Tell to talk about the worker in their picture.
Group Activity- Career Simulation
Teacher assigns students careers. Those that provide goods and those that provide a
service.
Some students are assigned to be the buyers.
Possible careers:
Baker, furniture maker: Goods
Nurse, bus driver: Service
The consumers will choose to purchase the one good and one service.
A t the end the consumer ( buyer) will present what he she got from the transaction.
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes Are the students able to appreciate that need
are more essential than wants?
EDM-Values-4
81 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
-Appreciate that goods Product: Can students conclude that their Concepts Review: Review the terms needs and wants. Ensure that students can recall
and services provide both needs are greater than their wants and their that needs are things that we must have to survive, whereas wants are things that we
needs and wants needs are essential to their survival. desire that are not necessary for survival.
Subject Link: Link this a lesson to Composition using a prompt.
Prompt:
“If I were stranded on an island, what would I want to have with me? Why?
Write six (6) sentences about the prompt above to explain which good or service they
w ould want.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Workers and their skills:
Tailor- sewing
Hair stylist- designs hair styles
Mechanic- fixes vehicles
Masseuse- provides massages
Baker- makes breads and pastries
Fisherman- fish
Butcher- meat
Goods are objects that satisfy people's needs and wants.
S ervices are things people do for us that satisfy our needs and wants.
Essential Learning Outcome: Understand how our communities provide goods and services to meet our needs and wants
Section 5 – Jobs in the Community
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
Learners are able to identify types of jobs in the community
82 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Learners are able to compare the types of jobs traditionally done by males and females or both and discuss how this has changed
Learners appreciate that jobs can be done by both men and women
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Learners will be
expected to:
EDM-Knowledge-5 Conversation: Are students able to Sample Activitites:
name the types of jobs done in their Drawing upon the bulletin board activity, “People who work in my community” list all the
-Identify types of jobs community? jobs people are doing.
in the community
Name the job depicted in the picture on each slide:
https://www.liveworksheets.com/td1733755fb
M atch the name of the job to its picture https://www.liveworksheets.com/qx3195957tp
EDM-Skills- 5
-Compare the types of Speaking: Can children list Compare and contrast traditional and modern gender job assignments
jobs traditionally done tasks/chores that are considered male
by males and females or tasks and female tasks/chores which Show students pictures of traditional jobs done by men and women: For example
both and discuss how are done at home. secretary ( female), hairdresser (female) , fireman (men), barber ( men)
this has changed
Speaking: Can students distinguish Show pictures of different men and women doing non-traditional jobs. For example: nurse and
between jobs which are hair dresser (male); bus driver and engineer (women)
traditionally done by women and by Discussion: Students discuss the change in job assignments by comparing and contracting the
men in the workplace? past with the present.
Sample discussion questions
a. What is the difference between the first set of photos shown and the last set?
b. What job is this person doing?
b. Do you know anyone who does this job?
83 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
b. Is the person a man or a woman?
b. Do you think a man/woman should be the only one doing this job? why?
b. Do you think a man/ woman does it better?
EDM-Values-5
-Appreciate that jobs Product: Are students able to share Sample Activities:
can be done by both the reasons why all jobs can be done Role Play:
men and women by both men and women? I Want To Be A Construction Worker - Kids Dream Job - Can You Imagine That?
Imagine That: Children watch the video above then draw what they want to be when they grow
Are students able to appreciate that as up. Write a sentence about the drawing and why they want to be what they choose.
long as one has the skill, talent,
education and aptitude they can do Role play to illustrate that all jobs can be done by both men and women.
any job?
Discussion: Engage students in a discussion to explain why both sexes can partake in all jobs.
Show and Tell:
Children come dressed in their career choice and tell who they are and explain what this job
does.
Sing And Dance: When I Grow Up.
When I Grow Up | Kids Songs | Super Simple Songs
Teacher plays the video “When I Grow Up” for the class. Students are encouraged to sing along
and take turns adding what they want to be when they grow up.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
A job is a person's role in society. It is an activity, often regular and o performed for payment.
Types of jobs:
Nurses, doctors, carpenters, mechanic, shopkeeper, lawyer, police,
84 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Male dominated careers:
Construction, carpentry, mechanic, police, firemen, fishermen, secondary teacher
Female dominated careers:
Nurse, secretary, primary teacher, seamstress, domestic workers, receptionist
J obs done by both male and females: Doctors, lawyers
Essential Learning Outcome: Understand how our communities provide goods and services to meet our needs and wants
Section 6 – Work Place Rules
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
Learners understand that rules help workers in the workplace
Leanrers recognize how to safely follow appropriate rules when carrying out jobs
L earners appreciate the importance of rules and laws in protecting our rights
Specific Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum Strategies
Outcomes
Learners will be
expected to:
EDM- Products: Are students Rules:
Knowledge-6 able to choose Class reiterates rules created at the beginning of the school year and says why they are needed or were created.
appropriate rules for job
-Understand that sites that help create safe Read Aloud:
rules help workers and productive working Read a story book about why rules are important.
in the workplace e nvironments? Sample books:
• DW’s guide to perfect manners by Marc Brown
• DW’s guide to Preschool by Marc Brown
85 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum Strategies
Outcomes
• School rules by Robert Munsch
Have a discussion on what they observe from the book:
• What was the environment like before the rules?
• Why was it necessary in the story to create rules?
• What was the environment like after the rules were implemented or put in place?
• Why do you think rules are important or necessary?
Technology-Enhanced Learning
Use an interactive whiteboard or projector to display pictures depicting safety hazards and safe work practices.
Teachers and students walk around the school grounds and identify hazards which can be used to create a short
video or presentation highlighting the importance of workplace safety rules.
Arts Integration:
Share several examples of work environments where the children’s parents might work, such as hotels, stores,
government offices, construction job sites, farms.
Have students draw pictures and design some rules for selected work environments that would assist in keeping
workers and clients safe and that would lead to productive work environments.
S tudents provide feedback on the safety measures highlighted by their classmates.
EDM- Skills-6
- Recognize how Conversation: Discovery and dicussion:
to safely follow Are students able to Through probing teacher discovers some tasks that parents or elder siblings do at home that require alevel of safety
appropriate rules contribute to a discussion measures. Through guided questioning teacher draws out the safety measures employed to protect the family
when carrying out on the measures family members when carrying out that task. If none is given teacher supplies the measure.
j obs For example:
86 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum Strategies
Outcomes
members take when doing
Possible task Possible safety measure Why
tasks at home?
sewing use of a thimble
Are students able to
contribute to a discussion
gardening use of gloves
on some of the safety
equipment used by dusting gloves and masks
selected workers?
Product: Are students
Sample Activities:
able to represent
Students can be given a worksheet with pictures of different jobs, the tools and words to fill in the blank.
effectiveness of rules for
workplace safety and
Fill in the Blanks
productivity?
Fill in the blanks with the most appropriate answer from the wordbank given.
If I were a doctor, I'd wear gloves to dress your wound.
If I Were a builder, I'd wear a hardhat on my head.
If I Were a painter I'd wear a mask to keep the fumes away.
If I Were a chef I'd wear an apron to keep my clothes clean
If I were a fireman, I'd wear my fireproof gear to put out a burning building.
If I were a fisherman, I’d wear my life vest to sail the sea.
If I were a roofer, I'd wear my harness to secure me to the roof.
If I were a footballer/ cricketer, I’d wear my shin guard / pads to protect my feet.
87 | Page
Grade 2 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Inclusive Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
Curriculum Strategies
Outcomes
If I were a welder, I'd wear my welding mask to protect my eyes from the sparks.
If I were an astronaut, I’d wear my spacesuit so I could breathe in space.
Online Options:
Google forms
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1M6iQm4c6UWqlDAj-fK9U3B98f57HsLoLeVphubuM07k/edit
After you have accessed the Google Forms quiz, make a copy of the quiz. If you want, make the necessary changes
in your copy to share with your class. Do NOT edit the ORIGINAL. This quiz can also be printed.
Complete a quiz in Quiziz
https://quizizz.com/admin/quiz/6553b61d3501b1b71e4a2ea8?at=6553b61db1dc247b7487cfad
EDM-Values-6 Conversation: Are Conversations: Students discuss among themselves the positive outcomes of the creation of these rules for worker
students able to safety and for creating a good workplace environment.
-Appreciate the determine how classroom
importance of and workplace rules Students view the following videos to help them appreciate the importance of rules.
rules and laws in contribute to a safe and
protecting our productive working https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WB3zolACjuI- why are rules important
rights environment?
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CqH2QYt6oOc discuss safety rules
88 | Page
