March 2024
OHCP Grade 3 Language Arts
INTRODUCTION TO THE OECS HARMONISED PRIMARY LANGUAGE ARTS CURRICULUM
The design and content of the OHPC Language Arts curriculum provide teachers with opportunities to not only reflect on the best of existing
practices, but also opportunities to learn about and implement evidence-based shifts in pedagogy that ensure all learners have the best possible
chance to succeed.
As with any new curriculum there will be questions. Frequently asked “up front” concerns are addressed below as part of the Introduction
which provides an overview of implementation of the Language Arts OHPC.
I. Frequently Asked Questions
1. If I were to peek inside a Primary School classroom using the curriculum, what would I see?
The chart below provides an overview of the wide range of daily learning opportunities included in the Language Arts OHPC.
Examples of Daily Opportunities to Engage in Language Arts Learning
Listening and Speaking Reading and Viewing Writing and Representing
Learners have daily opportunities to: L e a r n e r s h a v e d a i l y o p p o r t u n ities to: Learners have daily opportunities to:
- discuss topics of Learner interest. - browse through a wide range of - explore formal and informal writing in
- listen, reflect on and contribute to paper-based books, magazines, digital various genres throughout the day.
stories, poems, nonfiction, music, texts, etc. on topics of interest. - co-construct or independently write on
conversations, etc. - engage in reading throughout the day. topics of interest using various genres.
- participate in lessons that build
- interact with engaging texts, and
- apply writing lessons in various genres to
strategies in listening and speaking. demonstrate understanding of
lessons that build reading skills and
- view listening and speaking as a tool to organisation, ideas style, form, and
strategies.
communicate with peers, the conventions.
- share reading with small groups of
community and the world. - share writing with peers and the
peers.
community.
Throughout the day, Learners receive regular feedback from the teacher about progress made and the next steps of learning.
1
2. Will this curriculum improve the literacy rates for all Learners in OHPC?
This curriculum reflects the principles and practices of international research about equitable and effective instructional practices
that increase learners’ levels of engagement and learning success.
3. Does instruction designed from this curriculum provide an equitable learning experience for all Learners?
Yes. Suggestions to differentiate instruction for Learners who excel, Learners who make average progress and Learners who
struggle are provided.
4. Does this curriculum recognise and celebrate the culture and context of the OECS?
Yes. Teachers will find local images, stories, songs, poetry to use as anchors or prompts throughout the curriculum. Home and
community languages and knowledge are valued as foundational building blocks to learning and ensure the culture and context of
OHPC are visible, valued and preserved.
5. How do the strands of Language Arts connect?
While Speaking and Listening, Reading and Viewing, Writing and Representing are presented as different strands, teachers know
that learning about one strand supports learning about other strands. Strands may be taught independently or integrated with other
strands in Language Arts AND among the other strands.
6. Does the curriculum provide opportunities to integrate Language Arts with other subject areas?
Yes. The use of local, national, and international images, nonfiction, poetic, visual and lyrical texts provide anchors to connect
Language arts learning with the content of all other subject areas. For example:
a) The leaf of a flamboyant tree can be used as an anchor to teach descriptive language (Language Arts), plant study (Science),
symmetry (Mathematics and Art) and food study (Health &Wellbeing).
b) A science experiment focussed on the states of matter can be used as an anchor for interpreting cyclical diagrams (Mathematics),
descriptive language in Language Arts and representing the states of matter in artistic formats (the Arts).
2
II. Creating Welcoming, Learner Responsive and Engaging Classroom Spaces for Language Arts Learning
Responsive classrooms provide opportunities and learning spaces for learners to work in small groups or individually, etc. Every classroom
should be a space that invites learning. This includes:
➢ a classroom library with books, magazines, pamphlets, etc. of all genres.
➢ walls with Learner and teacher generated poems, stories, schedules, and reference information (Word Wall, What We’ve Learned,
Classroom Rules, etc.) written in large font for ease of viewing throughout the room.
➢ a space for multi-subject exploration (realia table, writing table, science space, math manipulatives, etc.).
➢ learning centers that invite Learners to explore writing, reading, listening and technology.
➢ Opportunities to use the school outdoor space and community as learning spaces.
III. Using Formative Assessment as an Opportunity to Observe Learner Learning
There are many opportunities to observe learners learning, to assign tasks for Learners to demonstrate learning, and to provide feedback to
Learners. The OHPC provide teachers with a wide range of formative assessment strategies to inform these observations, such as grade
level rubrics and checklists, graphic organizers, opportunities for visual, oral, and written displays of learning and quizzes. Suggestions for
self-assessments encourage learners to monitor their work and use fix-up strategies as needed. Suggestions for peer assessments provide
opportunities for peer collaboration about the focus of learning and not on judging a peer’s learning.
An important part of teacher observations of learning is feedback: sharing information about what has been accomplished and how these
accomplishments provide the foundation for the next steps of their learning.
3
ESSENTIAL LEARNING OUTCOME 1 Listening and Speaking
Introduction to the Strand: Language is the foundation of communication and the primary instrument of thought. The study of Language Arts
provides access to multiple and inter-related oral, aural, written, and visual ways of representing, exploring, problem-solving, communicating, and
sharing meaning. Through listening, speaking, writing, representing, reading, and viewing a wide range of text and text form, the student continues to
develop an awareness of culture, personal identity, and the strategies needed to participate, communicate, and reflect critically on thought and action.
Strand: Listening and Speaking are foundational for all learning. The strategies and skills of listening and speaking allow learners to contribute
meaningfully to social environments. As learners receive, reflect on, and communicate ideas, they develop increasing proficiency in cognitive
organization, critical thinking, and problem solving. Listening and speaking strategies and skills are foundational for the development of reading,
viewing, writing, and representing.
Grade Three Expectations for Speaking and Listening:
For pleasure and personal growth
continue to listen to and appreciate messages of music, stories, information, conversation and environmental sounds for personal enjoyment.
further develop an awareness of how purposeful oral language provides a receptive or expressive venue for sharing emotions.
reflect on and identify personal strengths as listeners and speakers, areas for improvement and the strategies they found most helpful in oral
communication.
To form and foster relationships
understand and practice how listening respectfully and responding with empathy impacts communications and builds positive relationships.
listen, understand, and respond respectfully to others, considering variations in language and background experience.
speak fluently and confidently in a range of contexts and with a range of audiences.
tell stories and share information in ways engaging to a variety of audiences.
make relevant comments and ask questions to clarify understanding during conversations.
continue to develop understanding of the purpose, impact and use of Home Language(s) or Standard English for a variety of oral language
purposes and activities.
To develop and serve as cognitive tools for engaging in and sharing learning
observe, practice, and modify how tone, fluency and intonation impact meaning and mood.
further develop and apply listening comprehension strategies with increasing independence.
use critical listening strategies to search for meaning within and beyond the words they hear.
4
begin to apply multi-subject vocabulary with intent and meaning.
increase the complexity and meaningful use of oral word analysis.
present ideas and oral reports in a logical, appropriate sequence in an oral presentation.
reflect on and identify their strengths as listeners and speakers, areas for improvement and the strategies they found most helpful in oral
communication.
Essential Learning Outcome 1: The learner will explore, use, and critically apply oral language for pleasure, personal growth, to foster
relationships and to develop an appreciation and celebration of culture and oral languages.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
By the end of Grade 3 the learner Gathering information through Teacher The information below provides teachers with
will be expected to: Conversation, Observation and Products (COP) suggestions for outcome-based learning strategies.
Please note that teaching suggestions and
Listen and speak for pleasure and Before classes begin, create an electronic or hard information are available in the Additional Resources
personal growth copy Observation of Student Learning Journal to and Materials and the Additional Useful Content for
1.1 Engage with and share various record brief, dated comments about learner progress the Teacher sections that follow this 3-column table.
genres of music, oral poetry, artwork, thus far and to determine next steps for instruction. For suggestions to differentiate listening strategies
and oral stories that have been chosen The sample page below provides multiple for the range of learners in a Grade 3 classroom,
for pleasure. opportunities to record a learner’s progress visit: https://www.teachspeced.ca/listening-
throughout each month in each strand of Language comprehension-skills
Arts. At the end of each month and at the end of
1.2 Experience and enjoy playful use
each term, the teacher has a concise overview of each
of language, to communicate e.g.,
learner’s progress to date. Teacher notes may be brief Listen and speak for pleasure and personal
telling jokes, asking riddles, singing
songs, composing rhymes and verses.
and point form. growth
Student Name Month Active Listening: A Reminder (Introduction to
1.3 Respond to oral/aural language Speaking and Reading and Writing and all SCOs) Begin the year with a reminder of the
through improvisational drama Listening Viewing Representing
importance of listening. Ask the learners to share
and/or artwork.
Date: Date: Date:
Focus: Focus: Focus: their ideas about why we listen actively, respectfully,
Progress: Progress: Progress: and carefully. As learners to provide their ideas, write
Next steps: Next steps: Next steps:
5
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.4 Listen attentively and critically to Date: Date: Date: them on a chart for future use as a “What Do Good
Focus: Focus: Focus:
fiction and nonfiction text and music Listeners Do? anchor chart.
Progress: Progress: Progress:
to demonstrate understanding of: Follow this discussion with the question, “What does
Next steps: Next steps: Next steps:
- the mood Date: Date: Date: active listening look like?” Provide learners with the
- main idea Focus: Focus: Focus: option to respond in various ways:
Progress: Progress: Progress:
- some supporting details Next steps: Next steps: Next steps: ● role play
Date: Date: Date: ● drawing
1.5 Continue to develop strategies to Focus: Focus: Focus: ● oral words
Progress: Progress: Progress:
describe, share, and discuss thoughts,
Next steps: Next steps: Next steps:
feelings, and experiences with peers. Calypso Tent (ELO 1.2)
Listen to local calypso music. After a listening to a
1.6 Ask and respond to questions to CONVERSATIONS few songs, groups of learners choose a song and
clarify information and to explore Engage a learner in a conversation about a recent demonstrate how to respond to the song by:
possibilities or solutions to problems. school or community event that both you and the ● moving with the beat of the music
learner have experienced. Provide an opening ● sharing ideas about how the music makes
sentence about the event and then ask the learner to them feel
1.7 Listen critically for subtle
share something else that happened. Take turns ● Sharing ideas about the meaning of the song
messages in conversation, music, and
environmental sounds.
providing more information with the learner until the
entire event is reported on. Such topics can be
(family, rivers, beach, carnival, La Rose, Solo songs,
1.8 Create and use oral instructions
bamboo bursting, etc.)
describing how to make or do
Listen and make notes about:
something.
- the learner’s choice of language
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Hgoh3A_27g
- how the learner constructs thoughts
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lcDG3Q3aeyQ
1.9 Discuss solutions to local, regional - sequencing of events
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yDrJzvuwyfQ
and world events by extending use of
questioning to consider: why? how?
when? what if? what else?, etc. Dramatic/Role Play (Readers Theatre)
Provide situations such as giving a compliment, an
Integration - Music
apology, verbal invitation, etc. for students to practice
Listen and speak to form and This activity integrates with Music in cases where
foster relationships
appropriate actions which correspond to effective
they have to identify the mood and message of
6
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
nonverbal and verbal cues in listening and speaking different genres.
tasks/activities for example,
1.10 Demonstrate understanding and
Puppetry for listening and speaking (SCO 1.2,
use of conversation courtesies during
As learners are engaged in conversations, observe, 1.3)
peer group work, class discussions
and play.
and make notes about: After a teacher Read Aloud of a local folk story,
nonverbal reactions and responses: provide opportunities for learners to create simple
-body posture popsicle stick puppets to retell local folk stories. As
1.11 Use vocabulary that shows
respect for all people.
-eye content each learner presents their versions of the story,
-facial expressions gather information about the components of a story
-hand movements and record observations using a fiction checklist as
1.12 Listen attentively and build on
suggested below.
others’ ideas with increasing
verbal reactions / responses:
confidence in group and class
- responding on topic
discussions and individual
presentations.
- waiting to speak without interrupting
- clarity of expressive language
1.13 Continue to develop
Follow the Leader
understanding of point of view
without expressing judgment.
Listen to and follow as the teacher or classmate gives
many step instructions to make a structure or
complete a task. Once the instructions are over the
1.14 Explore ideas and feelings by
level to which the object or task is complete serves as
asking respectful questions and
listening with minimal interruption.
the assessment. The learner should be given an
opportunity to review their work and describe the
process.
1.15 Use and respond to verbal and
nonverbal cues respectfully.
OBSERVATIONS
What to Observe during formal and informal
1.16 Develop confidence in asking for opportunities for learners to speak and listen
assistance from peers and adults.
7
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.17 Retell stories and events with Throughout the year and the term, choose one or
peers and engage in follow up two focus points from the list below to observe
conversations. learner growth in speaking and listening
● learner’s choice of spoken language
● learner’s comfort switching from home
Listen and speak to develop
language to Standard English
appreciation and celebration of
culture and oral languages
● understanding of how we “share” a
conversation
● comfort level asking questions
1.18 Share relevant ideas, opinions, ● oral responses to literal W 4 + H questions,
and feelings on topics of personal and such as: Who? What? When? Where? How?
social interest using both Standard ● oral responses to questions to demonstrate
English and Home Languages. deeper understanding, such as: Why, What if?
How do you know? etc.
1.19 Develop an appreciation for ● use the correct word order to create a question
various forms of language and their ● level of understanding when following
appropriateness to different directions
situations. ● Motivation
● Cooperation
1.20 Use thoughtful, respectful, and
● Communication
non-hurtful vocabulary.
● Ability to work independently
1.21 Continue to develop oral https://liquidliteracy.com/2014/03/14/retelling
Somebody / Wanted / But / So
comprehension strategies to -stories-of-author-chris-van-allsburg/
These four simple words provide learners with a
determine word meanings. framework to describe the events in a story or a news Let’s Translate (ELO 1.1, 1.2, 1.3)
item in sequence. After reading a story aloud, learners
1.22 Participate in the sharing of then share their thoughts as the teacher completes a Listen to folk stories from resource persons in the
culturally relevant songs, raps, drama, rubric, such as the one illustrated below community. As learners orally summarise the stories,
and poetry with fluency, rhythm, and encourage them to use the language and then
pace. Name: translate these summaries of local creole stories into
Standard English.
Title: The Singing Competition
8
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.23 Continue to develop On another day, reverse the focus of this activity and
understanding of how and when to invite community members, a student from an older
Complete Partial Beginning
adjust volume, projection, facial grade, the principal, etc. to tell a story in Standard
expressions, gestures, and tone of Somebody the girl in a English. Learners listen and summarise the story in
voice to the speaking occasion.
blue dress
their Home Language(s).
Wanted to win
1.24 Continue to develop meaningful
But she made a
language use and conventions of oral
mistake
language(s) as appropriate to the
context and purpose: So she was very
disappointed
- word order
decided to
- increasingly varied vocabulary practice more
and get more
choices for nouns, verbs,
lessons http://www.saintluciancreole.dbfrank.net/dictionary
adjectives, adverbs
/KweyolDictionary.pdf
- use of descriptive language
This brief SWBS overview provides the teacher with
(similes, beginning use of
information about which events had the greatest Listening and discuss (SCO 1.4)
metaphors)
impact on the learner and which were somewhat Throughout the year, provide opportunities for
- use of affixes
overlooked. The teacher is now able to think about learners to listen with an intentional focus:
- subject and verb agreement
how to provide support for listening to details - to share ideas about music
correctly in delivering spoken
throughout the beginning, middle and end of a - the share what was learned in another subject
messages and in planned oral
listening experience. - to share opinions about recent community,
presentations.
country or world events
PRODUCTS Share a video of learners listening, such as
During the Speaking and Listening strand, assessment https://youtu.be/W3SI0XSb1_k and chat with the
“products are based on speaking and listening. Use of learners about what effective listening looks like.
listening and speaking rubrics to rate oral Following this viewing, ask the learners a question
presentations in terms of active listening skills, ability about what they listened to and encourage learners to
to communicate ideas as they attempt to express their respond and ask their own questions.
thoughts and ideas provide information about Questions include:
progress and next steps. . What did you think of . . . ?
9
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Why do you think . . . ?
Can anyone add to this idea?
Do you agree? Why or why not?
https://www.readingrockets.org/classroom/classroo
m-strategies/listen-read-discuss
INTEGRATING THE SUBJECTS
This ILS may be applied in any subject area.
Providing time to discuss new learnings deepens
understanding, promotes language use, and builds
respect among learners.
Listening well leads to learning:
Use a Think Aloud at the beginning of the day,
before or after recess or lunch to engage learners in a
conversation about a topic of interest. With each
Adapted from:
Think Aloud, the teacher demonstrates how to use a
https://www.scusd.edu/sites/main/files/file-
attachments/book_4_grade_2_speaking_and_listening_checklist.pdf comprehension strategy, a teacher:
● Thinks about back ground knowledge
Peer Assessment ● Makes predictions
In groups, students share/perform their own poems
● Makes connections
(created during writing class,)calypso lyrics, or local ● Creates visualizations
community happenings Peers listen and provide
● Summarizes or synthesizes what was heard
feedback through an icon: Sample topics include:
- a recent community sporting event
- a popular piece of music
Here’s what you did really well! - an interesting environmental sound
- etc.
10
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
After each demonstration, provide opportunities for
learners to share their use of listening comprehension
Here’s what we’d like to know strategies.
Establish listening centers with recordings of music,
sounds, etc. for learners to practice these listening
Student Self-assessment
comprehension strategies with peers.
Create anchor charts with criteria for active listening
and speaking, have students routinely reflect and
Di Kwik (ELO 1.1, 1.3, 1.4)
evaluate how they collaborated or worked with a
Invite cultural groups and individuals to perform
team on a project/group work task. Discuss how they
aspects of our local culture (singing, dancing, role-
could improve their team effort.
playing, storytelling) After the performance,
encourage learners to ask questions and/or respond
to questions posed by the performers. In the days
that follow, remind the learners about the
performers’ visit and ask a specific question about
the performance.
Integration - Social Studies
This activity integrates with the topic of culture and
ethnicity in Social Studies. Students can connect the
influence of the ethnic groups on our culture.
Let’s Explore It (ELO 1.8)
Provide opportunities for learners to visit local
artisans or view videos about the creation of hand
made products. As learners listen and watch, they
Sample of an anchor chart
have the option to illustrate, record or make notes
https://www.teachthis.com.au/products/active-listening-checklist
about the process.
This example provides a lot of information in a short
period of time. Encourage learners to view the video
11
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
a few times, each time gathering more information
and realising that it’s important to listen very
carefully.
If the object created is created with simple materials,
provide the materials for the learners to refer to their
notes or memory to recreate the object.
Making Pastelles
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X6UmbaZJV
Ng
BRAIDING THE STRANDS:
During Writers Workshop, learners write expository
pieces with the information gathered.
Press Conference (ELO 1.9, 1.5, 1.6)
Organize a press conference with local persons
representing, community organisations, news outlets,
restaurants, etc. to ask questions relevant to local,
regional and world problems. Learners record and
12
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
review the interviews and share what they learned
with peers
https://englishspeakingcourse.net/daily-use-wh-
question-words/
Listen and speak to form and foster relationships
Communication Etiquette (ELO 1.10, 1.12, 1.13,
1.14, 1.23 )
Discuss proper listening and speaking courtesies
throughout the year by demonstrating and providing
opportunities to explore empathy, proper listening
and speaking in groups.
Suggestions to anchor these communication etiquette
activities include:
13
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://biglifejournal.com/blogs/blog/key-
strategies-teach-children-empathy
Let’s be welcoming and respectful (ELO 1.11,
1.15)
Talk about proper titles to address various persons in
society. Provide learners with a variety of scenarios
and in pairs, they practice addressing each other and
have a respectful conversation. Examples:
● A visitor from the community visits the class
to share a story
Learner 1 plays the role of the teacher
Learner 2 plays the role of the person
thanking the visitor.
● A new student arrives in the school
14
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learner 1: meets the new student at the
school entry and shows / explains how to get
to the classroom
Learner 2: the lunch monitor showing the
new student the lunch routine
● Learner 1: an 8-year-old watching cricket (or
netball, football, or track competition) and
the referee makes an unpopular call
Learner 2: the referee talking to Learner 1
listen and speak to develop appreciation and
celebration of culture and oral languages
Respectful Feedback (SCO 1.18, 1.20)
https://www.3rdgradethoughts.com/2017/03/team-
talk-accountable-talk-in-classroom.html
Provide a demonstration of how to provide feedback
to peers after presentations or when responding to
conversations. View a video of grade three learners
during a presentation:
15
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EGu3VpBuMa
U
After the presentation, demonstrate how to provide
feedback that begins with a positive statement and
then adds a “gentle” suggestion about how to build
on this success. Choose another video; peer groups
discuss how to provide feedback and share their
ideas.
Welcome Songs (SCO 1.22)
Welcome learners to the class each day with music
and song. Encourage learners to sing along or simply
enjoy the music. Take a minute to chat about the
beat of the song, the mood, and the meaning of the
song. Acknowledge local vocabulary and phrases. Co
create a Home Language vocabulary and phrase chart
with learners and add to it throughout the year.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS
Refer to this chart during poetry writing projects.
St. Lucia Folk Music
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLY3Ap9szfw
RRTip4Yp12J-YETEJjY9LU7
16
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Does this sound correct? (SCO 1.24)
Advise learners that you are planning to make some
mistakes when you talk to the class. Their task is to
listen to you carefully and put up a light hearted
“oops” card when they hear an error. Each time you
engage the learners in this activity, focus on one
language structure, such as:
● subject verb agreement
● plurals
● word order, etc.
https://www.cardly.net/merchantsofnonsense/oops
-5409
17
Additional Resources and Materials
In Essential Learning Outcome 1 the learner will explore, use, and critically apply oral language for pleasure, personal growth, to foster relationships
and to develop an appreciation and celebration of culture and of oral languages.
Listening Comprehension strategies are similar to reading comprehension strategies: https://blog.listenwise.com/2017/04/8-components-listening/
An interesting set of videos that enhance the listening experience is available at:
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3XGNP_SzcI8 (Following directions)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6vTsyJZbkug
18
- https://youtu.be/OILvbpWxyuIListening and Following instructionas
Speaking and Listening Lesson Tips: Visit https://www.twinkl.ca/teaching-wiki/active-listening for a wide range of tips, activities, and
suggestions that provide the foundation for engaging lessons in this ELO.
Drama: Drama can be an excellent technique for fostering speaking and listening abilities in a variety of situations, such as language instruction and
everyday conversation. Drama has a number of advantages in this regard, including, enhanced communication, listening and observation skills.
For suggestions about how to use Readers’ Theatre to develop speaking and listening, visit:
https://www.colorincolorado.org/article/readers-theater-oral-language-enrichment-and-literacy-development-ells Also visit:
Visit http://www.teachingheart.net/readerstheater.htm
Listening and Speaking Games and Activities
Games are excellent tools for fostering learners’ listening and speaking skills. Literacy games can boost learners’ vocabulary, phonemic awareness, and
comprehension of texts. The websites below share some engaging listening and speaking games and activities.
https://www.esparklearning.com/blog/7-engaging-listening-activities-for-small-groups
Storytelling Activities to Engage Learners
Storytelling encourages enthusiasm for listening, speaking, reading, writing, and learning. This website provides suggestions on how storytelling can
be incorporated into the classroom in meaningful ways.
https://thecolorfulapple.com/2021/01/storytelling-activities-for-the-classroom/
Read Aloud and Active Listening
Reading aloud to learners helps with the development of their listening and thinking skills. Storyline Online is an excellent resource for the facilitation
of reading aloud.
https://storylineonline.net/
At the grade 3 level, these resources can be utilized to support classroom instruction and aid learners in developing their speaking and listening
abilities. This site also provides teachers with subject-integrated lesson plans.
PBS Learning Media: This website provides a range of speaking and listening resources including videos, lesson plans, and interactive exercises that
connect to other subject areas.
Visit: https: //www.pbslearningmedia.org/subjects/english-language-arts-and-literacy/speaking-and-listening/?selected_facet=grades:3-
5&student=true&rank_by=recency
19
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Building respectful interpersonal relationships: Visit https://biglifejournal.com/blogs/blog/key-strategies-teach-children-empathy for
information about empathy and a range of opportunities to teach and enhance learners understanding and use of empathy in their relationships.
Supporting and Assessing Listening and Speaking
The following are activities/strategies that could be employed to support and assess learners listening and speaking: Talk Tickets: These are cards
made by teacher/teacher and learners that buys learners turns to speak in small group discussions. The purpose is to avoid any one learner
dominating the discussion and to have more learners active in the discussion.
The Author's Chair: Learners are given the opportunity to read aloud their work. This is done with the learners sitting at the front facing the class.
Elevator Talk: This is a pre-writing strategy that allows learners to speak on what they are about to write on. This could be done in pairs or small
groups. The speaker is given feedback from his / her listening peers.
Speaking Rubric and Checklist: This is a checklist that uses a point system for the different elements.
For more information on the above strategies / activities the following link may be accessed: https://www.knoxeducation.com/3rd-grade-listening-
speaking
Interviewing your classmate: Works best with a new class or a fresh set of learners but can be designed to otherwise promote oral communication. The
teacher facilitates the writing of the questions to be asked by the interviewer.
For more information see the following link: https://www.kidsworldfun.com/learn-english/grade-3-english-speaking-and-listening-activities.php
Definitions of key terms
Self-monitoring
Self monitoring allows students to listen to themselves and focus on what they hear or read. When students self-monitor they take responsibility for
their own learning and acquire intrinsic motivation. Some of the activities within this document require that students monitor themselves as they
listen and speak. See below for some steps that will help you aid students to self-monitor as they listen.
Self-monitoring steps while listening to reading
1. Pay attention as you are reading.
2. While you are reading, if you realize that you don’t understand what is happening or if what you said doesn’t make sense – pause.
3. Think about what is confusing.
4. Back up to the part before.
5. Look at the words on the page before or after the sentence before.
6. Look at the pictures or images or charts (if available).
7. Think about what is happening or what the author is describing in this part.
8. Change what you said before or revise your thinking.
9. Think, “does it make sense now?”
20
https://literacydoc.com/monitoring/
Critical listening
Critical listening allows students to listen for specific information. They are able to decide which information is relevant to a discussion or for a
response. They can identify fact from opinion and distinguish between useful and useless information.
Critical listening is also an essential component of this document. See below for some tips on how to aid students to become critical
listeners.
Recognizing the Difference between Facts and Opinions. ...
1. Uncovering Assumptions. ...
2. Be Open to New Ideas. ...
3. Rely on Reason and Common Sense. ...
4. Relate New Ideas to Old Ones. ...
5. Take Notes.
https://open.lib.umn.edu/publicspeaking/chapter/4-5-listening-critically/
Active listening
Active listening is a communication skill <https://www.verywellmind.com/communication-in-relationships-why-it-matters-and-how-to-improve-
5218269> that involves going beyond simply hearing the words that another person speaks but also seeking to understand the meaning and intent
behind them. It requires being an active participant in the communication process.
Active listening techniques include:
● Being fully present in the conversation
● Showing interest by practicing good eye contact
● Noticing (and using) non-verbal cues
● Asking open-ended questions to encourage further responses
● Paraphrasing and reflecting back what has been said
● Listening to understand rather than to respond
● Withholding judgment and advice
In communication, active listening is important because it keeps you engaged with your conversation partner in a positive way. It also makes the
other person feel heard and valued. This skill is the foundation of a successful conversation in any setting—whether at work, at home, or in social
situations.
When you practice active listening, you are fully engaged and immersed in what the other person is saying.
Active Listening: Techniques, Benefits, Examples (verywellmind.com)
21
Useful websites
Oral language development is critical to the development of print literacy. The website below provides a wide range of resources that are helpful for
the development of learners’ literacy skills. The article that is highlighted focuses on ways in which teachers can facilitate the honing of learners’
speaking and listening skills.
https://www.readingrockets.org/topics/comprehension/articles/speaking-and-listening-content-area-learning
OHPC Guide to Begin Planning an Integrated Unit of Study
In addition to the suggestions in the body of the Grade Three OHPC Template, this sample planning template for a curriculum based Integrated
Unit of Language Arts and Social Studies may be useful as a guide to begin developing the focus and topics covered in the unit.
Sample Planning Template for Integrated Unit (Language Arts and Social Studies)
THEME: How different ethnic groups helped to shape our language and culture
Subjects Specific Learning Outcomes
Language ELO 2-Essential Learning Outcome: Learners will SCOs: 2.4, 2.5, 2.8, 2.9
Arts demonstrate a variety of ways to use background knowledge 2.4 continue to respond critically to texts by asking and
and interests to select and engage critically with a range of formulating responses to questions such as:
culturally diverse paper-based, visual, and digital texts for -what if?
pleasure and personal growth. -is it possible that . . .?
-what else?
-what was the author trying to tell us?
-do I agree / why?
2.5 choose and apply a range of human, paper based and digital
sources of information e.g. community experts, online searches,
web and text-based reference materials, etc.
2.8 continue to make connections between the vocabulary of
Home Language(s) and Standard English.
2.9 become increasingly aware of the history and roots of local
language(s)
22
Social Essential Learning Outcome: To understand the ways in K-Identify the earliest inhabitants of our island
Studies which our island’s peoples nurture respect for diversity. S-Use digital tools to investigate the evidence of early
settlements of Indigenous peoples
V-Appreciate Indigenous cultures and respect their views of the
environment and society
K-Recognize the importance of our local island dialect(s)
K-Recognize the cultural contributions of various peoples to
our food, religion, dress, arts, language, and economy
Beginning date: End date: (Duration: 3 weeks)
Culminating project: Learners will work in groups to plan a collaborative presentation. They will present on the positive impact of the ethnic
groups i.e. Amerindians, Europeans, Africans, Indians, on the language, food, clothing and music of their country.
Sample Materials to anchor and support lessons:
- Expressive drawings and or pictures of different ethnic groups
- Food
- Music
- Literature from social studies text and online sources
Overview of lessons:
Language Arts ELO 1 is speaking and listening and ELO 2 is focused Social Studies (Teachers will refer to the SCOs and ILS for ideas
on Independent Reading the section below can provide an example of to a 1-2 sentence overview of each proposed Social Studies
how to combine the two. curriculum based lesson to include in the theme.)
During Independent Reading, learners will choose from locally written books to read
and share their impression of the book orally. (Teachers will refer to the SCOs
and ILS for ideas to insert 1-2 sentence overview of each proposed
Language Arts curriculum based lessons to include in the theme.)
Overview of formative assessments
Conversations: 2.8- continue to make connections between the oral and text-based vocabulary of Home Language(s) and Standard English, by
critically analysing major similarities and differences between the two.
2.4-Listen to a poem written in local Creole/dialect and answer questions orally.
Observations: 2-9 Use a checklist to observe students’ oral and reading competency in the use of Standard English.
23
Checklist:
● Learner’s oral language matches expectations at this developmental level. Yes/ Some evidence / Not yet
● Learner speaks clearly and fluently demonstrates competency in his or her enunciation Yes/Some evidence/ Not yet
● Learner’s oral vocabulary matches expectations at this developmental level. Yes / Some evidence/ Not yet
● Learner’s use of the Standard Variety matches expectations at this developmental level to ask questions Yes/Some evidence/No
● Learner’s use of the Standard Variety matches expectations at this developmental level to answer questions Yes/Some evidence/No
● Learner code switches depending on audience and purpose Yes /Some evidence/ Not yet
Products: Learners will be required to bring to class one sample/example of the home language collected from home, the neighborhood or social
media. The sample could be spoken, written or audiovisual and can be taken from different sources: individuals’ speech, radio, television, social
media, posters, advertisements etc.
24
ESSENTIAL LEARNING OUTCOME 2 Reading and Viewing
Introduction to the Strand: Language is the foundation of communication and the primary instrument of thought. The study of Language Arts
provides access to multiple and interrelated oral, aural, written, and visual ways of representing, exploring, problem-solving, communicating, and
sharing meaning. Through listening, speaking, writing, representing, reading, and viewing a wide range of text and text forms, the learners continue to
develop an awareness of culture, personal identity, and the strategies needed to participate, communicate, and reflect critically on thought and action.
Grade Level Expectations for Reading and Viewing:
Read for pleasure and personal growth
select and read a variety of materials with fluency at the early to transitional levels
participate in independent reading with a book chosen to provide just the right amount of challenge
explore texts of interest that may be difficult, but still informative
reflect on and identify their strengths as readers, areas for improvement, and the strategies they found most helpful before, during and after
reading
Use background knowledge
further, develop a connection to a range of favourite authors
use knowledge of the author’s craft, topic, or genre as a foundation to predict and confirm the purpose and meaning of new readings
interact meaningfully with a wide range of genres and text forms
read and demonstrate an understanding of a variety of Early to Transitional-level literary, graphic, and informational texts using a wide
range of strategies to construct meaning
use different sources to find information e.g., reference texts, encyclopedias, the internet
identify significant elements and meaningful details to construct meaning
respond to what is read with critical thought in a variety of ways
Develop vocabulary
continue to notice and apply new vocabulary gathered while reading a wide range of genres
predict the meaning of unfamiliar words with more strategic use of background knowledge, context, text and word work
Recognise and use language structures
recognize a variety of text forms, text features, and stylistic elements and demonstrate an understanding of how they help communicate
meaning
notice the similarities between paper-based and digital language and organizational structures
Apply graphophonic elements meaningfully
use existing knowledge of words and meaningful word-solving strategies to read with automaticity and fluency
use reading as a resource for building knowledge of writing conventions
25
Essential Learning Outcome 2: Learners will demonstrate a variety of ways to use background knowledge and interests to select and engage
critically with a range of culturally diverse paper-based, visual, and digital texts for pleasure and personal growth.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
By the end of Grade Three, the learner Using Conversations, Observations and The focus of ELO 2 is Independent Reading: a
will: Products (COP) to provide teachers with daily opportunity to apply the reading strategies
information during Independent Reading Time: learned thus far with self selected books of various
Read and view to interact with to determine learning prior to instruction, genres and formats.
understanding and critical thought to a observe learner progress during and after learning
wide range of genres and text forms and to plan next steps for mini lessons that Suggested Learning Strategies for
using comprehension strategies. precede Independent Reading. Independent Reading Time
2.1 Continue to choose and engage with a CONVERSATIONS Read and view to interact with understanding
range of literary, visual, graphic, and As learners are engaged in Independent Reading, and critical thought to a wide range of genres
informational texts for independent reading. pause and chat with a few each day. Have a and text forms using comprehension
conversation with learners about the following and strategies.
2.2 Apply knowledge of the of fiction, record their responses in the Observation of
poetry, and nonfiction genres to guide Student Learning Journal.: Refreshing our memory: What is Independent
independent understanding of visual and - Why they chose text. Reading Time? (SCO 2.1, 2.2)
text-based information. - How they know it’s a just right text for Begin the school year with a reminder of the
Independent Reading. purpose of Independent Reading. It always begins
2.3 Known comprehension strategies during - When they come to a difficult word, what do with a brief mini-lesson which is followed by an
independent reading: they do? opportunity for learners to choose something to
- determining the main idea - What the text is about? read as they practice what they have learned in the
- making connections - Are there any interesting words or phrases? mini lesson. After reading, they complete a short
- predicting - Would the learner recommend the text to a reading response.
- visualising friend?
- inferring Remind students of how to choose a book:
- analysing OBSERVATIONS: - Something of interest
- synthesising - Just the right amount of challenge (5 finger
Oral Reading Records: rule)
26
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.4 Demonstrate understanding of texts read As learners are reading independently, choose After this reminder, learners demonstrate how to
independently through a variety of oral, two or three learners each day to complete an choose, read, and respond while respecting the
written, visual responses such as: oral reading record (Running Record). Once other readers in the classroom.
- artistic representations (visual complete, have a conversation with the learner
arts, song, dance) about their progress and next steps. Practising Reading Comprehension
- discussions Strategies (SCO )
- graphic organizers Begin each independent Reading lesson with a
- oral and written responses to brief reminder lesson including regular reminders
questions about using the reading comprehension strategies
they have learned throughout Primary School.
2.5 Continue to respond critically to texts by After the lesson, learners read independently and
asking and formulating responses to complete a brief oral, written or visual reading
questions such as: response focussed on the topic of the mini lesson.
- what if? Visit
- is it possible that . . .? https://www.scholastic.com/teachers/teaching-
- what else? tools/articles/five-minute-reading-responses-
- what was the author trying to tell class.html for suggestions of 5 minutes reading
us? responses focussed on comprehension strategies.
- do I agree / why?
I think while I read (SCO 2.5)
https://www.louisianabelieves.com/docs/default
2.6 Describe how the sequence of events Use a Teacher Read Aloud/Think Aloud to
-source/louisiana-teacher-leaders/fi4-handout-
and setting of fiction and nonfiction genres demonstrate how to think beyond the words on
assessment-data-collection-rti-running-record-
impacts the plot or the event described. the page. During the Teacher Read Aloud/Think
info.pdf
Aloud, pause occasionally and think aloud by
2.7 Apply knowledge of characterization by: saying, “When I read this section, I’m wondering
Observing Home Language Use
- describing the character’s attributes about . . . or I’m thinking about . . . maybe the
Provide learners with a set of Standard English and
(traits, motivations or feelings); next thing to happen might be . . . etc.” Challenge
Creole/Kweyol texts written in local language(s)
- using evidence from the text to the learners to ask similar questions as they read.
with local expressions and vocabulary. (For
support generalizations about the After they’ve read, provide them with an “I think
example, ah’ go go’/I will go) As learners read
character; notes” page and direct them to complete on
independently, observe and chat with them about
section of the page each day. Samples include:
the meaning of the words and phrases. Use the
Observation of Student Learning Journal to make
27
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
- comparing and contrasting characters notes about the learner’s understanding of text
within a selection or between/among presented in Home Language(s) or Standard “I THINK” NOTES
two or more selections; English.
- explaining how the actions of
I’m I think this This
characters contribute to the sequence
wondering will happen happened
of events describing the impact of a PRODUCT:
about . . . next because . .
character’s response to a problem, the Genre Checklist: Provide the opportunity for
character’s goal, and what the learners to demonstrate what they are learning
character says or thinks. about the difference between fiction and
nonfiction books. A checklist based on the chart
This reminds When I read I think the
Read and view to develop vocabulary below may be used to assess the information
me of . . . this, this is the author wants
based on the features of the texts.
picture I had us to know
2.8 Continue to make connections between
in my mind . . that . . .
the vocabulary of Home Language(s) and
.
Standard English.
2.9 Become increasingly aware of how local
texts use the history and roots of the local
Local Language Storytelling: (SCO 2.1 - 2.4)
language(s).
2.10 Continue to develop reading vocabulary
through reading a range of genres, authors,
and topics.
https://mrswintersbliss.com/wp-
content/uploads/2019/05/chart-pic.jpg
2.11 Extend reading vocabulary with
increasing independence through the
Book Review: Provide Learners with a template
application of
to review and comment on the book, story or Ensure that books, images, poetry, lyrics posters
- antonyms
article they are reading. This review serves to or videos from the local culture and language are
- synonyms
create an ongoing record of the learner’s reading available in the classroom for Independent
- homophones
comprehension. Once a week, schedule time for Reading Time. In addition to reading a book,
- homographs
learner’s to independently reflect on what they’ve learners may wish to visit wall displays and “Read
Around the Room” After learners choose a book
28
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.12 Use a paper-based or digital dictionary read during the week and write 3-5 notes about the (or the room) to read, provide opportunities for
and thesaurus with increasing independence. story or information and why they are enjoying it. learners to respond to the text through discussion,
illustrations, or written response to share their
2.13 Continue to independently apply Character Analysis: As a response to connection with the text with local events,
common prefixes and suffixes to determine Independent Reading of fiction or poetry, learners settings, language etc. See the additional resources
meaning of new vocabulary. read complete character analysis chart. Such as the section for suggestions of Reading Responses.
one provided below.
Genre Exploration: (SCO 2.1 – 2.4)
2.14 Apply cross-curricular vocabulary to
enhance understanding of texts read during
Character analysis Evidence
independent reading.
The character was
identified.
2.15 Apply knowledge of the change in tense
(-ed), number (-s), and degree (-er and –est) The character was
signified by inflected endings to decode described, or the trait was
words. identified.
2.16 Identify and apply figurative language to At least ONE bit of
enhance understanding of a text. evidence was given to
support the trait.
Begin the school year by creating a reading chart
Read and view to recognise and use
with various genres and different subgenres within
language structures
This chart may be adapted for a variety of topics a genre. This chart provides an example of the
different subgenres of fiction. Throughout the
studied in reading and viewing.
2.17 Continue to demonstrate understanding
year, as learners experience various subgenres,
of how word order impacts meaning.
Self Assessment: they can add titles to the chart.
2.18 Apply knowledge of how personal
Planning to share: As a response to Independent
reading fluency impacts understanding.
Reading, provide occasional opportunities for
Read and view to develop vocabulary
learners to share information about what they have
read through an oral presentation. Provide learners
Language Contrasts: (SCO 2.8 - 2.9)
29
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.19 Develop an awareness of how word with a presentation rubric to assist in the
choice, phrasing and punctuation may be development of the presentation’s planning. This Inclusive Learning Strategy provides
used in positive or negative ways. opportunities for
BRAIDING THE STRANDS
Speaking and listening
INTEGRATING SUBJECTS
(SOCIAL STUDIES: LOCAL
CULTURES)
Before reading books written in local languages,
Assessment and Rubrics - Kathy Schrock's Guide
talk about the importance of preserving the home
to Everything
language. Invite learners to view and listen to
Saint Lucian Creole Language.
Listening to my reading Encourage Learners to
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IbOdiSON
tape record their reading of a familiar passage,
kOg
listen to the passages, and think about:
-Do I sound like a storyteller?
As learners read their chosen books, encourage
-Do I read with expression?
them to search for words and phrases and explore
-Do I read quickly, slowly, or just right?
the similarities and differences between their
-Does my reading share the story well?
home language(s) and Standard English. Next,
discuss how other simple words or concepts are
Peer Assessment
expressed differently in their language as in the
Each week, choose a word work component that
table below.
has been taught. Each day, during Independent
Reading, learners individually find a few examples
of either homophone, homographs, prefixes,
30
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
suffixes, etc. in their Independent reading Standard English Home Language
materials.
The boys. ‘De boy an’ dem’.
My classmate and I found these homonyms:
Father, Jesus/God "Puppa
Jeezas/Gawd"
A homonym I knew before:
My head is hurting. Mi/Meh head
A homonym I learned:
hurtin’.
Vocabulary Mapping: (SCO 2.10, 2.11, 2.13)
Create a word map with ONE central English
word chosen from an Independent Reading book.
It would be ideal to select a word that is often used
by the learners in their home language (for
example, the word ‘foolish’).
Have learners brainstorm for words and phrases
in their home language(s) related to the English
word (for example stupidee’, ‘loco’, dunce, ‘dotish’).
Write them and discuss the connections. Use
vocabulary mapping to extend descriptive
vocabulary, affixes, etc. During Independent
31
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Reading time, learners will search for a word in
their text and create their own word map.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS As
learners build their reading vocabulary, encourage
them to use their new words in their writing.
Synonym chains (SCO 2.11): Ask a learner to
choose a noun, verb, adjective from a book just
read; for example, home. Work with the learners to
generate a chain of synonyms or words that are
similar in meaning Choose a Digital “Smart Art”
image and enter the synonyms as they are created.
home
After this shared learning experience, learners
choose another noun and create another synonym
chain.
This activity can be replicated with antonyms,
homophones, homonyms, etc.
32
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
INTEGRATING SUBJECTS
Online Thesaurus Exploration
(SCO 2.12)
Assign learners a word from Social Studies,
Science, Mathematics, Healthy Living or the Arts
and review how to use an online dictionary or a
thesaurus. Discuss how these tools help learners
to understand the meaning and use of the chosen
words. In follow-up lessons introduce how to use
these tools to learn word origins. Learners choose
words from their Independent Reading or subject
area reading and investigate a word’s origins.
Read and view to recognise and use language
structures
Sentence Strips (SCO 2.17): Review the
importance of word order by choosing a few
sentences from a Teacher Read Aloud book and
write the sentences on sentence strips. Cut the
sentences into individual words, phrases, or
chunks. Learners put the sentence back together
in a meaningful order and then read it fluently.
NOTE: Sometimes, there may be more than one
meaningful order. As learners read their Independent
Reading books, they choose 3 sentences, write
them, cut them up and ask a peer to put the
sentence in order. Once complete, peers go to the
book and compare their sentence with the text. If
the sentence has been put together differently than
in the book, learners discuss if it is or isn’t still
meaningful.
33
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Partner Reading: (SCO 2.17) After Independent
Reading Time, Pair learners to take turns reading
a short selection from their book to each other.
Learners choose a book they are comfortable
reading and use this opportunity to practice their
fluency (phrasing, expression, and rate appropriate
to the mood and content of the text). This allows
for peer support and practice.
Notice and fix (SCO 2.18) Review fix up
strategies with the learners. Project a short passage
and make an intentional error. Pause and
demonstrate how to notice and fix up the error.
- I notice when something doesn’t seem correct
- I reread the sentence and think about what
would make sense
- Then I check the letters to be sure I have
chosen the correct word
- Then I check to be sure the sentence makes
sense
As learners read independently or peers share
their reading, encourage them to practice the
independent fix-up strategies they have been
learning. You may wish to review these at the
beginning of the year with reminders throughout
the year.
In Essential Learning Outcome 2, learners will demonstrate a variety of ways to use background knowledge and interests to select and engage critically
with a range of culturally diverse paper-based, visual, and digital texts for pleasure and personal growth.
34
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES AND MATERIALS FOR ELO 2
These resources are related to comprehension:
Suggestions for Reading Responses for Independent Reading Time
Choose responses that can be completed in fewer than five minutes: Some examples from
https://www.upperelementarysnapshots.com/2015/03/making-most-of-independent-reading-time.html
include:
Learners complete a comprehension strategy response related to the text read on a 2x2 piece of paper and tape it to the Response chart.
Other response topics include: This connects to . . . ; I think the next part of this book will tell me about . . . , This picture shows….
a. Comprehension skills/Strategies: determining main idea, making connections, summarizing, predicting, inferring,
analyzing
https://www.readingrockets.org/topics/comprehension/articles/key-comprehension-strategies-teach
b. Teaching Comprehension. Find out about strategies such as graphic organizers and questioning:
https://www.readingrockets.org/topics/comprehension/articles/seven-strategies-teach-students-text-comprehension
These are resources which aid students to understand the role that characterization and word choice (figures of speech)
play in understanding what they read.
c. Characterisation story maps
https://www.readingrockets.org/classroom/classroom-strategies/story-maps
FREE Digital Resources for Independent Reading: visit: https://childrenslibrarylady.com/free-online-books-children-part-1/
ADDITIONAL USEFUL CONTENT KNOWLEDGE FOR THE TEACHER:
ELO 2 provides learning and assessment strategies for Independent Reading Time, which is scheduled for 15-20 minutes each day.
During this time:
1) The teacher provides a very brief (2-3 minute) “reminder mini lesson” about a learning to read topic taught recently.
2) Once the lesson is taught, learners choose a book of interest that reflects their Independent Reading Level.
3) As learners read, the teacher circulates and conferences with learners, asking questions about the topic, the events, etc.
4) The teacher may also ask a student to read a paragraph or two aloud (just to the teacher, not to the class).
5) After reading, the learners complete a brief reading response focused on the topic of the reminder mini lesson.
The following resources will support reading and viewing instruction. These resources provide useful websites, readings, and definitions for teachers
to promote independent Reading among learners.
35
1.What is the best way to help your students excel in reading and all of its related skills of literacy? In this publication below top educators and
librarians throughout the region tell how to make the most of the resources in your school’s library. Their advice: Connect your classroom to the
library and everyone benefits.
TeachersResourceGuide_BestPractices.pdf (handsacrossthesea.org)
Key terms related to ELO 2
1.Comprehension Strategies
Reading and viewing are essential skills which call on students’ ability to understand/comprehend what they read and or view. Students’ ability to
comprehend what they read and view is enhanced by their possession of the following comprehension strategies:
1. Making Connections: Connect what is being read to self or world
2. Inferring: Use your knowledge of what is read to bring understanding to the author’s work
3. Visualizing: Creating mental images from written text
4. Asking Questions: Ask questions to gain a better understanding of the text
5. Determine Importance: Thinking about what is most important
6. Synthesizing: Putting different ideas together to form a new idea
7. Monitoring Understanding: Keeping tabs on your own understanding of the text being read
8. Using Fix-Up Strategies: Applying different strategies when you are stuck
2. Comprehension
Comprehension is a key component of reading. If students are able to decode (call the words) but are unable to comprehend, then reading has not
taken place. See the websites below for some lesson plans on the teaching of comprehension.
https://www.freereading.net/wiki/Comprehension_Activities.htm
3. Fluency
36
Fluency is defined as the rate or pace at which students read. Finding an appropriate pace is essential to comprehension. If students read too slowly
the information may be lost from their short-term memory. If they read too quickly they may miss key information.
-The website below contains 21 engaging activities designed to enhance students’ fluency.
https://natalielynnkindergarten.com/reading-fluency-activities/
-This website contains interesting books from level one to five which can be used in read aloud activities to aid student fluency.
https://digitallibrary.io/find-your-reading-level/
4. Fact vs. fiction
Students’ ability to distinguish between fact (truth, authenticity) and fiction (made up, fabrication, concoction) is an essential part of their reading
ability. See below for a website which provides information which shows the difference between the two words.
https://www.differencebetween.com/difference-between-fact-and-
fiction/#:~:text=Fact%20vs%20Fiction&text=Fact%20is%20a%20true%20happening,short%20stories%20are%20called%20fiction.
Figurative Language c. Figurative Language
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YlfzDvrhzuU
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
The links below offer information on how and or why curriculum integration should proceed.
https://education.alberta.ca/media/563581/guidingprinc_curr2007.pdf
https://www.teachhub.com/classroom-management/2012/08/awesome-lesson-ideas-to-integrate-science-across-the-curriculum/
https://www.studocu.com/ph/document/west-visayas-state-university/bachelor-of-special-needs-education/activity-2-integrated-
curriculum-in-the-primary-grade/24055339
The following could be used to integrate the curriculum:
● The use of thematic units
● Project learning
● The use of technology and multimedia resource
Plan cross curricular discussions and activities.
37
ESSENTIAL LEARNING OUTCOME 3 – Reading and Viewing
Introduction to the Strand: Language is the foundation of communication and the primary instrument of thought. The study of Language Arts
provides access to multiple and inter-related oral, aural, written, and visual ways of representing, exploring, problem solving, communicating, and
sharing meaning. Through listening, speaking, writing, representing, reading, and viewing a wide range of text and text form, the student continues to
develop an awareness of culture, personal identity, and the strategies needed to
participate, communicate, and reflect critically on thought and action.
Strand: Reading and Viewing: The purpose of Reading and Viewing instruction is for pleasure and personal growth and to develop readers who
enjoy and interact meaningfully with a wide range of genres and text forms. Meaningful interaction with texts is developed through learning how to
access and build on background knowledge and use the information provided by various sources for meaning, developing vocabulary, recognising,
and using language structures and meaningful application of graphophonic elements of the text.
Grade Level Expectations: Grade Level Expectations for Reading and Viewing:
Read for pleasure and personal growth
select and read a variety of materials with fluency at the early to transitional levels
participate in independent reading with book chosen to provide just the right amount of challenge
explore texts of interest that may be difficult, but still informative
reflect on and identify their strengths as readers, areas for improvement and the strategies they found most helpful before,
during and after reading.
Use background knowledge
further develop a connection to a range of favourite authors
use knowledge of author’s craft, topic, or genre as a foundation to predict and confirm purpose and meaning from new readings
interact meaningfully with a wide range of genres and text forms
read and demonstrate an understanding of a variety of Early to Transitional level literary, graphic, and informational texts using a wide range
of strategies to construct meaning
use different sources to find information e.g., reference texts, encyclopedias, the internet
identify significant elements and meaningful details to construct meaning and respond to what is read with critical thought in a variety of
ways
Develop vocabulary
continue to notice and apply new vocabulary gathered while reading a wide range of genres
predict the meaning of unfamiliar words with more strategic use of background knowledge, context, text and word work
Recognise and use language structures
recognize a variety of text forms, text features and stylistic elements and demonstrate understanding of how they help communicate meaning
notice the similarities of paper based and digital language and organisational structures
38
Apply graphophonic elements meaningfully
use existing knowledge of words and meaningful word solving strategies to read with automaticity and fluency
use reading as a resource for building knowledge of writing conventions
Essential Learning Outcome 3: Students will interact meaningfully with a variety of genres using background knowledge, comprehension strategies,
vocabulary, and graphophonic cues.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Suggestions for Formative Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
By the end of Grade 3, the Grade 3 learner Strategies for ELO 3 that provide information ELO 3 focuses on how the strategic use of
will be expected to: about learning. multiple sources of information work
together to build learners’ understanding and
Read and view to interact meaningfully Formative assessment provides opportunities for application of text-based information.
with a variety of genres using background the teacher to gather information through COP:
knowledge and comprehension strategies Conversation, Observation and Product. It Throughout the year, demonstrations such as
allows teachers to determine learning prior to a Teacher Think Aloud, provide
3.1 Continue to apply knowledge of the instruction, observe learner progress during and opportunities to practice the strategy and
organizational structure of fiction, nonfiction, after learning and to plan next steps for instruction. respond to text. Some suggestions for ELO 3
and poetry genres to guide understanding of ILSs include:
visual and text based information. CONVERSATIONS
Read and view to interact meaningfully
3.2 Continue to apply and combine Provide learners with regular opportunities to with a variety of genres using background
comprehension strategies listed below to demonstrate their understanding (See SCO 3.2) of a knowledge and comprehension strategies
demonstrate understanding of literary, visual, text through conversations. Provide the learner with
graphic, and informational texts: a strategy card and chat with them as they respond For teachers interested in developing digital
- determining main idea according to the cue on the card for the reading opportunities for reading comprehension
- making connections strategies. For example:
- predicting Visit:
- visualising - Making connections: When I read this, it https://www.edutopia.org/article/adapting-
- inferring reminded me of . . . reading-comprehension-instruction-virtual-
- analysing - Predicting: Now that I’ve read this far, this is learning/
- synthesising what I think will happen next
- Inferring: Based on the picture and what I’ve
learned so far, I think . . .
So many types of books! (SCO 3.1)
39
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Suggestions for Formative Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.3 Demonstrate understanding through a Ensure that throughout the term and the year,
variety of oral, written visual responses such Fluency: As learners read aloud to you (not to the learners have opportunities to learn about and
as: class) listen to and observe their fluency using interact with a range of genres presented in
- artistic representations (visual arts, Rasinski’s Fluency Rubric various ways. Each term, focus on the
song, dance) assigned genres and choose anchor texts to
- discussions demonstrate how each genre is constructed,
- graphic organizers then invite the learners to engage with peers
- oral and written responses to in a digital or paper-based search for their
questions own examples of the genre. Once examples
are found, peer groups share how they know
3.4 Continue to respond critically to texts by each example represents the genre.
asking and formulating responses to
questions such as: Fiction: paper based and digital storybooks,
- what if? novels, short stories, paragraphs, etc.
- is it possible that . . .?
- what else? Nonfiction: newspapers, community bulletins,
- what was the author trying to tell us? nonfiction books on topics related to other
- do I agree / why? subject areas, etc.
https://www.landmarkoutreach.org/strategies/oral
Poetry: limericks, stories written in poetic
3.5 Choose and apply a range of human, -reading-fluency/
form, spoken word, songs, etc.
paper based and digital sources of
information e.g., community experts, online
What are the Reading Strategies? SCOs
searches, web, and text-based reference
3.2,- 3.7)
materials, etc. OBSERVATIONS
At the beginning of the term and throughout
3.6 Describe how the sequence of events and Engaging with the Text: Observe how the
each term, review how our brain works to
setting of fiction and nonfiction genres learners behave while reading on their own. Pay
allow us to understand. Each day for 7-10
impacts the plot or the event described. attention to their posture, how long they can stay
days, share one image from a poster such as:
focused, and how well they engage with the reading
3.7 Apply knowledge of characterization by: material. Take note of whether they use strategies
- describing the character’s attributes like using context clues or sounding out unfamiliar
(traits, motivations, or feelings); words in the Observation of Student Learning
Journal.
40
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Suggestions for Formative Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
- using evidence from the text to
support generalizations about the Oral Reading Record: Diagnosis of learners at the
character; start of the school year and throughout the year is
- comparing and contrasting characters crucial. As such, administer a Running Record (oral
within a selection or between/among reading record) to all learners at the beginning of
two or more selections; the year and at regular intervals throughout the year.
- explaining how the actions of Learners who require additional support will
characters contribute to the sequence participate in a Running Record more frequently.
of events (See Useful Content Section for support)
- describing the impact of a character’s
response to a problem, the character’s
goal, and what the character says or
thinks
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/one-
Read and view to develop vocabulary
strategy-teaching-reading-classroom-
practice-melvin-goh/
3.8 Continue to make connections between
the texts using vocabulary of Home
Demonstrate through a think aloud how to
Language(s) and Standard English to become
activate each type of thinking to make
https://www.mrsjudyaraujo.com/wp-
increasingly aware of the history and roots of
meaning. In Grade 3, learners will be ready to
content/uploads/104886957.png
local language(s).
understand that some comprehension
strategies can be combined. After the
Illustrating what I read:
3.9 Continue to develop reading vocabulary
demonstration, assign a passage for learners
Shift from written responses to visual responses.
using accompanying images in a range of
to read (remember to differentiate passages
Assign a 1-minute rough sketch for learners to
genres, authors, and topics.
when necessary. As learners read silently, they
provide as much information as possible. While the
practice the strategy. After reading, learners
quality of the sketch may be rough, the learner
3.11 Extend reading vocabulary through the
share what they noticed and sometimes write
should be able to use the sketch to describe what
application of
or draw a response about the strategy. For
the day’s reading was about. As the learner
- compound words
example:
describes the illustration, ask follow up questions.
- adjectives
After the conversation, provide the learner with
- antonyms When I was reading, I made a picture in my
feedback. This simple assessment is applicable to all
- synonyms head of two dogs playing in water. I could see
subject areas.
41
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Suggestions for Formative Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
- homophones how much fun they were having chasing a
- homographs bird. When they came out of the water, I
PRODUCTS visualised them shaking their fur to dry out
3.12 Use a paper based or online dictionary, their wet hair.
thesaurus or online vocabulary games to learn Review Reading Response Journals frequently and
the meaning and other features of known and provide learners with feedback about: Predicting: Do these connections add up?
unknown words. ● their thoughts, questions, and reactions to (SCO 3.2, 3.3, 3.4)
books they read independently.
3.13 Continue to apply common prefixes and ● Their summaries, comprehension, and their Build on learners understanding of
comprehension strategies such as connecting
suffixes to determine meaning of new opinions about the text.
vocabulary. See the Additional Resources Section for and predicting. As you read aloud a story to
the class, create a list of the major events.
Reading Response.
3.14 Extend vocabulary by applying technical After three events are gathered, create a
mathematical algorithm to make a prediction
terms encountered during cross-curricular Self Assessment
learning. Vocabulary: The rubric below provides learners of what will happen next.
with an opportunity to notice and analyse unknown
3.15 Apply knowledge of the change in tense words and develop vocabulary building strategies. ’ Event+event+event = our prediction
(-ed), number (-s), and degree (-er and –est)
Invite learners to explain their prediction.
signified by inflected endings to decode
Continue reading and check if their prediction
words.
is correct. If so, discuss why; if not, search for
3.16 Identify and apply figurative language to additional information.
enhance understanding text.
After this demonstration, learners read, make
connections and predictions, and write their
Read and view to recognise and use
own predictions using the algorithm format
language structures
above.
3.17 Continue to demonstrate understanding
of how word order impacts meaning.
Inferring - reading between the lines
3.18 Apply knowledge of how reading fluency
(SCO 32., 3.4 3.7)
impacts understanding.
42
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Suggestions for Formative Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.19 Participate in shared reading https://knilt.arcc.albany.edu/images/0/0e/Vocabu Simplify the concept of inferring by reading a
opportunities (drama, role -play, reading lary_Student_Selfassessment.pdf short passage that provides information that
lyrics while singing, etc. to Self Assessment for Fluency builds on the learners’ prior knowledge, for
- enhance fluency example:
- guide intonation This tool is best used after the concepts of reading
fluency is explained and taught. Consider the The dog was so excited to see his owner,
- convey the mood and intent of the
Gradual Release of Responsibility – I do, We do, Artesia, that he ran through the huge puddle
text
You do – before learners begin self-assessing on to greet her. Artesia, who was wearing a new
- demonstrate expression
their own. dress looked worried. Make an inference
about why Artesia looked worried.
3.20 Develop awareness of how word choice
Fluency Checklist
and phrasing may be used to describe in
After 2 or 3 examples, share this image with
Accuracy
positive or negative ways.
I read the words that are on the page the learners and discuss how applying their
own knowledge to the author’s information
I don’t add words
3.21 Further develop understanding of the
I don’t skip words allows us to infer. Learners then complete the
purpose and use of:
I don’t leave out endings What I know, What I learned and What I
- Nouns
inferred organizer below.
- Verbs
Rate
- Adjectives
I don’t read too slowly
- Adverbs
I don’t read too quickly
- Pronouns
I read evenly
Read and view to interact with and
Prosody/Expression
meaningfully apply Early/Transitional
I read in chunks
graphophonic cues to a variety of genres
https://missmacsclassroom.wordpress.com/
I pay attention to punctuation
and text forms
2018/08/07/reading-between-the-lines-
My voice goes up and down as appropriate
making-inferences-and-drawing-conclusions-
3.22 Continue to apply background
reading-strategies/
Peer Assessment
knowledge and context clues to read
When a group of peers is reading the same book,
irregularly spelled words.
After these examples and discussions, learners
encourage them to create a collage of sketches,
read a passage and practice making
icons, clipart, etc. to reflect the book’s events.
inferences. Choose selections from classroom
When the collage is finished, peers share their
texts or visit sites such as
43
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Suggestions for Formative Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.23 Apply knowledge of roots and affixes to collages and note when events were included and https://softschools.com/literature/workshee
decode unknown words. which may be missing. ts/inference_worksheets/3rd_grade_inferenc
e_practice_short_passage.pdf for examples.
3.24 Continue to monitor (self check) reading 3-2-1 After reading a piece of nonfiction, learners
for unknown words and use a combination of share 3 things learned, 2 interesting things, and 1 Encourage learners to apply these strategies
cues (meaning, grammar, and graphophonic) question they still have. while reading different genres
to solve unknown reading vocabulary with
automaticity. Comparing and Contrasting well known
stories (SCO 3.7)
3.25 Continue to apply grade-level phonics
and word analysis skills with increasing Teacher Reads Aloud and learners read
automaticity: and/or view two versions of the same story
- the letter order, various sounds of (Cinderella) and discuss how the differences
vowels, vowel patterns (ou/ow, oi/oy, and similarities among
oo, aw), and some consonants (c,g) characters in the same story in
- the sounds of common digraphs and two different languages (Korean
diphthongs and English Cinderella stories)
- complex letter pattern contribute to the story.
- words with silent letters Use Venn diagrams or T-charts
to help learners organize their comparisons.
3.26 Decode new and unfamiliar words using: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XTxZp
- affixes Bcldpc
- syllabication Comparing Korean and English version of
- inflectional endings Cinderella.
https://www.schoolnet.org.za/teach10/resou
rces/ap/assessment_strategies/gln/ap_classif
ication.htm
44
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Suggestions for Formative Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
Search for fairy tales of trickster fables
throughout the world for a variety of
examples.
Read and view to develop vocabulary
INTEGRATING SUBJECTS:
Create a classroom chart of new
vocabulary that is introduced
during Social Studies, Science, Mathematics,
the Arts, etc. Schedule opportunities for
learners to use online or paper-based
dictionaries and thesauri to learn more about
each term by participating in “quick
searching” for meanings, synonyms, and
antonyms. For
example:
Searching for alternates
to the word River
(from a thesaurus).
Seaching for the
meanings
and uses of
the word
Subtract
(from a
dictionary)
By comparing these synonyms, learners gain a
deeper understanding of the topic and
enhance their vocabulary. Repeat this activity
45
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Suggestions for Formative Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
with adjectives (Mountains as large, gigantic,
huge, etc.)
Discovering how words work together (SCOs
3.9-)
Ensure that lessons in word work are always
connected to words presented in sentences or
within the context of a paragraph. Use
unusual words to demonstrate how context
clues can help figure out the meaning of an
unknown word.
For example:
The comestibles, including a huge pizza, a
cake, candies, and sodas were all in the fridge
when Carla came home.
What clues help you figure out what
comestibles mean? Can you draw a picture of
how Carla felt?
The cat was so erratic! She would be friendly
and cuddly one time and hissing, scratching
and crying the next. You never could predict
the way she’d act.
What clues help you figure out what erratic
means? Can you role play how the cat
behaved?
The brawl, or fight, on the playground got
both children sent to the principal. What
clues help you figure out what brawl means?
Can you describe how the principal and the
children felt?
46
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Suggestions for Formative Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
Examples adapted from:
https://www.mdek12.org/sites/default/files
/ela-grade-3-lesson-4_20170614.pdf
As learners are reading, encourage them to
search for unknown words, write the sentence
it was found in and how they figured it out in
their notebooks.
Gamifying language learning: (SCO 3.12)
Incorporate online vocabulary-building
resources, such as educational websites, apps,
and interactive games designed to enhance
language skills. E.g., 3rd Grade Language Arts
Games | Turtle Diary
BRAIDING THE STRANDS:
This site may also be useful in ELO 5,6,7
(writing and representing)
A Picture is Worth a Thousand Words (SCO
3.9):
Use a Read Aloud / Think Aloud to share
how images aids like pictures, diagrams, and
illustrations to provide clues to and reinforce
the meaning of vocabulary. Learners may
wish to create their own visual dictionary for
use in reading and writing vocabulary words
47
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Suggestions for Formative Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
with pictures for kids - Search Images
(bing.com)
Read and view to recognise and use
language structures
Fluency aids understanding (SCO: 3.18)
Fluency practice provides opportunities to
discover the structure of words, phrases and
sentences to provide meaning. Display
samples of engaging and relevant poems in
the reading corner. Encourage learners to
choose a poem, practice reading it with
fluency and, when they are ready, read it
aloud to a peer group or the class.
Create a noun life map: (SCO 3.21) Ask
learners to create a community life map of
people in the community, places in the
community and activities in the community.
Schedule time for learners to choose a few
“community life map nouns” and construct
interesting sentences around each noun.
Sentences are shared orally and then written
down. Once written, learners share their
writing with peers. As peers read, they search
for nouns, verbs, adjectives and pronouns in
the sentences.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS
This ILS is an excellent example of how all
48
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Suggestions for Formative Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
three strands of ELO can be braided
together.
Viewing the Grammar of Picture Books
(SCO 3.21)
Schedule regular opportunities for learners to
share wordless picture books. As learners
view the books, ask them to think about the
meaning of each picture and come up with
specific parts of speech (noun, verb, adjective,
etc.) and use each word choice in a
meaningful sentence. Repeat this activity with
books including written text. Check with the
library for wordless picture books such as
https://teachingmadepractical.com/wordless
-picture-books-list/ and check digital video
sources such as the wordless picture book
Chalk by Bill Thomson.
Read and view to interact with and
meaningfully apply Early/Transitional
49
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Suggestions for Formative Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
graphophonic cues to a variety of genres
and text forms
See Additional teacher Content section for
the Grade three expectations for phonics.
Affix Bingo (SCO 3.22, 3.25)
Read and view to interact with and
meaningfully apply Early/Transitional
graphophonic cues to a variety of genres
and text forms.
Supplement lessons using text-based
vocabulary to teach prefixes and suffixes with
Affix Bingo. Create Bingo cards with words
that have prefixes and suffixes. Call out the
definitions of the words, and learners can
mark the corresponding word on their cards.
This activity reinforces their understanding of
word meanings.
Building Words: The Superpower of ONE
letter Engages learners in word-building
games using letter blocks or flashcards.
Provide learners with meaningful clues that
help them think about how a change in letter
can create a new word.
Example:
It tells the time _c ----
Change one letter
The sound a camera makes c----
50
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Suggestions for Formative Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
Change one letter
The sound a chicken makes c----
Change one letter
What other vowel can you use to make a new
word? c----
For lots of examples how changing one letter
makes a BIG impact, visit
https://www.spelfabet.com.au/2021/07/new
-word-building-sequences/
NOTE: choose sequences of 5 or more at a
time.
Hmm, that’s unusual (SCO 3.21, 3.22)
Take on the role of an investigator by
noticing any unusually spelled word in a
sentence you’re reading aloud. Demonstrate
how to figure it out through problem solving.
For example:
The weight of the teacher’s desk was 143
pounds. It took two of us to lift it.
- Can weight be sounded out letter by
letter? No
- Can weight be sounded out by syllables?
No
- What information does the sentence give
about this word (a teacher’s desk is heavy,
two were needed to lift it)
- What word beginning with w and ending
with t would make sense?
- When I reread the sentence does my
choice look right?
51
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Suggestions for Formative Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
If not, where else can I get information?
(dictionary, thesaurus)
What other words are spelled this way?
(eight, freighter)
As learners are reading, notice if they are
monitoring (self checking) reading for
unknown words and using a combination of
cues (meaning, grammar, and graphophonic)
to solve unknown reading vocabulary with
automaticity
Letters work together to make new sounds
(SCO 3.24, 3.25)
continue to provide opportunities for learners
- to notice and problem solve using
grade - level phonics and word
analysis skills with increasing
automaticity:
- the variant sounds of vowels, vowel
patterns (ou/ow, oi/oy, oo, aw), and
some consonants(c,g)
- the sounds of common digraphs and
diphthongs
- complex letter patterns (such as
weight in the ILS above)
- words with silent letters affixes
- syllabication
- inflectional endings
For examples of activities that can be used and
adapted over time, visit:
https://www.homereadinghelper.org/3rd-
grade-reading-skills-phonics/
52
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Suggestions for Formative Assessment Inclusive Learning Strategies
In Essential Learning Outcome 3 learners will interact with understanding and critical thought to a variety of genres and text forms
using vocabulary, comprehension strategies and graphophonic cues.
Additional Resources and Materials
The following resources will support reading and viewing instruction. These resources provide useful websites, readings, and definitions
for teachers to enhance comprehension skills among learners through the use and understanding of various genres, text features and
comprehension strategies.
1.The following are links to a set of Open Education Resources (OERs) lessons that comprise a unit. Aspects of the language arts are targeted. These
include critical thinking, communication, and writing. It uses games as one of the instructional strategies.
https://oercommons.org/courseware/lesson/64815/overview This link provides a variety of free to use pdf downloadable books.
https://freekidsbooks.org/age-group/stories-age-6-9-year-olds/
The link below provides OERs reading materials from over 25 websites
https://freekidsbooks.org/age-group/stories-age-6-9-year-olds/
https://www.getepic.com/ is also worth exploring.
All the resources listed here could be used to support the teaching of reading through ready made lesson plans, books, and games.
For Readers’ Theatre scripts, visit:
53
Visit http://www.teachingheart.net/readerstheater.htm
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Wondering how to think about different ways to plan reading instruction? Visit https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=onmjCqy1K5g
for information about which instruction is effective and which isn’t.
Reading Comprehension Strategies Overview The poster below provides teachers with a refresher about the types of strategies to include in
lessons focussed on Reading Comprehension.
Kinderprintco.com
Book Buddies: Pair with an upper grade class to form regular book buddy meetings. Visit https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xpsa-IJGbAk
For more information.
54
What are text features? Text features are essential components of written materials that aid readers in understanding and navigating a text. These
elements include headings, subheadings, captions, tables of contents, indexes, glossaries, illustrations, diagrams, and more. They serve as valuable
tools for comprehension and are especially significant for children as they begin to develop strong reading skills. One crucial aspect of text features is
that they act as resources to support learning. These features not only enhance the reading experience but also facilitate the acquisition of various
literacy skills. In addition to their role in aiding comprehension, text features also have an educational dimension. They are resources that support
learning about text features themselves. Teachers and parents can use them as teaching tools to enhance children's understanding of how to
effectively use and interpret these features. Incorporating activities and exercises that focus on text features can help children become more proficient
readers, improve their comprehension, and prepare them for a lifetime of successful learning and communication through reading.
Visit https://curriculum.novascotia.ca/sites/default/files/documents/resource-
files/Phonological%20Awareness%20and%20Phonics%20Instruction%20in%20a%20Balanced%20Literacy%20Program.pdf for a grade by grade
overview of the expectations for phonological awareness and phonics learning in Grade 1-3. A sample page from this 10-page resource is below.
55
The following is a list of key terms. The list provides definitions for genre, comprehension strategies, vocabulary, and other essential terminology.
Mini Glossary of Reading Terminology
Genre - a set of characteristics that define and categorise literature of a certain type, style, form, and content.
Comprehension strategies - these are deliberate plans and or activities students use to make sense of text
Graphophonic cues - the cues or clues that readers use to identify and decode words while reading
Reading fluency - the ability to read text accurately, at an appropriate pace, and with proper expression
Vocabulary - a body of words or terms used and understood by a person, within a particular language or field of study
Decode - being able to read words correctly
56
Self-assessment - the process of evaluating oneself
Peer-assessment - a process in which individuals within a group or community evaluate and provide feedback on each other's work
Etymology - the study of the origin and development of words, including their structure, meaning, and historical usage
The resources below provides a plethora of reading materials and even lesson plans at, below and above grade level.
-The following links to a digital library with books that support emergent readers up to level 5. Read alouds are also supported:
https://digitallibrary.io/topic/library-books/
https://www.getepic.com/ is a fully online digital library that gives teachers, not only access but, the ability to assign books to learners.
-This site offers one free lesson plan per month. Some of the themes are entwined in a Caribbean setting. https://learnbright.org/
-The library is a multifaceted learning opportunity for your students, and you can use library books and resources to create lessons that will grow the
literacy level of your students. -This publication will help you manage your class while allowing your students to engage with the lesson and improve
their reading. TeachersResourceGuide_LibraryTime.pdf (handsacrossthesea.org)
-Library time should not be limited to reading. There are many student-centred learning activities that can be accomplished in the library. This site
provides a list of many of these activities: https://www.teachingexpertise.com/classroom-ideas/library-activities-for-elementary-students/
3. These are some strategies which are useful in the reading classroom-
-The use of the three (3) cuing systems, Meaning, Structure Visual (MSV):
Meaning - Does it make sense? This deals with the semantic of the language
Structure - Does it sound right? This deals with the syntax of the language
Visual - Does it look right? This deals with the relationship between how the letters, syllables, root words, etc. are decoded and used to determine
accurate language, structure and meaning.
57
-Think Aloud is a teacher lead strategy where the teacher models by verbalizing metacognition processes that occur during the reading process. This
strategy can be used during reading. More information on its benefits and how the process can be done is located here:
https://www.readingrockets.org/classroom/classroom-strategies/think-alouds
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
The following website offers content in the form of comprehension passages that cover areas such as Language Arts, HFLE, Social Studies
and Science: https://www.comprehension-worksheets.com/comprehension-worksheets/third-grade-reading-comprehension-worksheets/
The following could be used to integrate the curriculum:
● The use of thematic units
● Project learning
● The use of technology and multimedia resource
● Plan cross curricular discussions and activities
58
ESSENTIAL LEARNING OUTCOME 4 – Reading and Viewing
Introduction to the Strand: Language is the foundation of communication and the primary instrument of thought. The study of Language Arts
provides access to multiple and inter-related oral, aural, written, and visual ways of representing, exploring, problem solving, communicating, and
sharing meaning. Through listening, speaking, writing, representing, reading, and viewing a wide range of text and text form, the student continues to
develop an awareness of culture, personal identity, and the strategies needed to participate, communicate, and reflect critically on thought and action.
Strand Reading and Viewing: The purpose of Reading and Viewing instruction is for pleasure and personal growth and to develop readers who
enjoy and interact meaningfully with a wide range of genres and text forms. Meaningful interaction with texts is developed through learning how to
access and build on background knowledge and use the information provided by various sources of meaning, developing vocabulary, recognising, and
using language structures and meaningful application of graphophonic elements of the text.
Grade Level Expectations for Reading and Viewing:
Read for pleasure and personal growth
select and read a variety of materials with fluency at the early to transitional levels
participate in independent reading with books chosen to provide just the right amount of challenge
explore texts of interest that may be difficult, but still informative
reflect on and identify their strengths as readers, areas for improvement and the strategies they found most helpful before, during and after
reading
Use background knowledge
further develop a connection to a range of favourite authors
use knowledge of author’s craft, topic, or genre as a foundation to predict and confirm purpose and meaning - new readings
Interact meaningfully with a wide range of genres and text forms
read and demonstrate an understanding of a variety of Early to Transitional level literary, graphic, and informational texts using a wide range of
strategies to construct meaning
use different sources to find information e.g., reference texts, encyclopedias, the internet
identify significant elements and meaningful details to construct meaningful responses to what is read with critical thought in a variety of ways
Develop vocabulary
continue to notice and apply new vocabulary gathered while reading a wide range of genres
predict the meaning of unfamiliar words with more strategic use of background knowledge, context, text and word work
Recognise and use language structures
recognize a variety of text forms, text features and stylistic elements and demonstrate understanding of how they help communicate meaning
59
notice the similarities of paper based and digital language and organisational structures
Apply graphophonic elements meaningfully
use existing knowledge of words and meaningful word solving strategies to read with automaticity and fluency
use reading as a resource for building knowledge of writing conventions
Essential Learning Outcome 4: Learners will develop their understanding of how an author’s choice of vocabulary, language, genre, text form,
text features and style influence the meaning of text and define the author’s craft.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
By the end of Grade Three, the learner The use of formative assessment, learner
will: observation journals, and feedback empowers Read and view to develop understanding of
educators to create a student-responsive approach how author’s purpose and style influence
Read and view to develop understanding of that nurtures intellectual growth and fosters a meaning
how author’s purpose and style influence culture of continuous improvement.
meaning Books are written for a reason (SCO 4.1-
CONVERSATIONS 4.4)
4.1 Continue to notice and compare the Discussion-based Analysis: Organize a group Begin the term with an opportunity to explore
purpose and style of a variety of authors and discussion or small-group activity centered around a a wide range of texts. Collect a variety of
illustrators. particular visual or textual source. Provide a set of digital and paper based books, magazines,
open-ended questions or prompts related to the signs, bulletins, etc. advertisements. Invite the
4.2 Develop understanding of the basic content. Ask participants to discuss their learners to peruse the various texts with their
features of the plots of fables, folk tales, fairy interpretations, insights, and reactions to the peers and share their ideas about “why” these
tales, adventure stories etc. material. As an observer, pay attention to the depth texts were written and who would be
of their analysis, their ability to support their interested in the content and why. Learners
4.3 Discuss the purpose of particular images viewpoints with evidence from the content, and choose a few texts to explore further and
or media texts e.g., to inform, entertain, and their engagement in constructive dialogue with share with peers.
persuade. others.
Dear Author, Why did you write this
4.4 Begin to develop an understanding of the Plot analysis: Offer opportunities to interpret plot book? (SCO 4.1- 4.4 )
component of author’s style. during class work, schedule time for learners to Building on the learning strategy above, each
demonstrate their understanding independently, time a new fiction, nonfiction of poetic
using a graphic organiser such as the story map passage is introduced, introduce the idea of
below.
60
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Read and view to develop understanding author’s purpose with a book, story, poem,
and recognise use of genres and text walk etc., followed by questions such as:
features influence meaning - Why do you think the author wrote this
book?
4.5 Recognize a variety of text forms, text - Who do you think this author wrote the
features and stylistic elements and how they book for?
help communicate meaning. - Why do you think the author thought
people would be interested in this book?
4.6 Refer to parts of stories, dramas and After this conversation remind learners about
poems when writing or speaking about text how authors have a reason,
using terms such as chapter, scene, and or purpose, for writing and
stanza, describe how each successive part their style helps to convey
builds on earlier sections. that purpose. As learners
Learners may also be encouraged to search for a read, regularly remind them
4.7 Refine use of a variety of text features digital “Smart Art” organiser that they feel provides to think about the author’s
to locate information (table of contents, the format to share their understanding. Samples purpose by sharing the
glossary, index, charts, titles, and subtitles, include: various purposes an author may have: To
etc.). persuade to inform, or to entertain. (P.I.E.)
Co-create a class chart such as the one
4.8 Generate questions to guide research and: illustrated here.
- locate appropriate information with https://www.upperelementarysnapshots.com/
OBSERVATIONS
assistance (classroom, library, home, 2015/01/authors-purpose-8-steps-easy-as-
community) pie.html
Provide learners with an image (illustration, chart,
- organise information
map, etc.) from a fiction or nonfiction passage and a
-share information Dear Author, you have style! (SCO 4.1-4.4)
5 Notes and Two Questions form. As the learners
Engage learners with a variety of texts, by the
view the image, they write 5 pieces of information the
4.9 Use charts, diagrams, and other graphic same author to create a paper based on digital
image provided.
information in an expository selection as an collection of that author’s books. Provide
aid to understanding the text. time for learners, working in groups, to
Title:
identify the author’s style based on criteria
4.10 Evaluate the contribution of graphic such as
information to an expository selection.
61
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5 NOTES ● Why the covers and the back
4.11 Use information gained from illustrations blurbs interested me
– e.g., maps, photographs, and the words 1. This is happening in a place like where I live. ● What other books this author has
in a text to demonstrate understanding of 2. The weather looks like it’s going to be written
the text. ● How the story and the illustrations
stormy.
work together
3. There are adults and children talking and
Read and view to develop understanding ● How the author uses interesting
looking at the sky.
of how vocabulary and language use words to describe people, places,
4.
influence the meaning and mood of the and things
5.
text ● How the author makes the reader
feel happy, sad, excited, curious,
2 QUESTIONS
4.12 Continue to develop understanding of etc.
1. I wonder what will happen
how:
2.
- illustrations, fonts, vocabulary and
language structures are designed to
BRAIDING THE STRANDS
engage the reader
During writing class, learners write an email
PRODUCTS or paper-based note to a favourite author.
4.13 Continue to provide examples of author’s
Search online for the publisher’s contact
use of interesting words, phrases, and
Visual Interpretation and Synthesis: information for favourite authors.
sentences to evoke emotions, describe, create
a. Select a visual artifact, such as a painting,
humour, etc.
photograph, or graphic novel page. Read and view to develop understanding
b. Instruct learners to view the visual product and recognise use of genres and text
4.14 Explain how specific aspects of a text’s
and create a written narrative or analysis of features influence meaning
illustrations contribute to what is being
what they see and what it means to them.
conveyed by words in the text, e.g., create
c. Encourage learners to consider elements like What’s a genre?. (SCO 4.5 - 4.7)
mood and emphasize setting.
composition, color, symbolism, and mood, Drama is a very engaging way to build on the
and relate these aspects to broader themes or meaning of the term genre (fiction,
4.15 Compare and contrast the effectiveness,
ideas. nonfiction, and poetry) the learners have been
cultural relevance and possible hidden
d. Review the learner’s work with the learner exposed to in previous grades. Display a page
messages of advertisements, social media
and provide feedback from a play and engage learners in a
posts, etc. used to:
discussion about what they notice about the
Comparing Reading and Viewing: page: For example, this script lists the
62
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
- influence the reader -provide unwritten characters at the top and what each character
information Share a video of a story from a source such as says within the script. Learners may wish to
Storylineonline.net. After viewing provide learners share with the class to get a sense of how the
4.16 Continue to search for and compare the with an Exit Slip such as: drama works. After the shared reading,
purpose and style of a variety of authors and
illustrators. I liked watching this video story because:
4.17 Develop understanding of how the
author develops the basic features of the plots Next, Read Aloud the same story to the learners and
of fables, folk tales, fairy tales, adventure provide an Exit Slip as:
stories etc.
I liked listening to this story because:
Now, provide learners with an Exit Slip such as the
one below to complete after they have read a
passage:
I liked reading this story because:
Repeat with nonfiction and poetry. Use the learners’
observations to highlight the possibilities of how we
listen to, read and view various formats of texts.
Self Assessment
Story Retelling through Art
a. After reading a story or a section of a book, learners search online for examples of fiction,
instruct learners to select a key scene or event from nonfiction, and poetic drama.
the reading.
b. Have them draw or create a visual representation
of that scene on a piece of paper or a small poster.
63
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Remind the students that stick figures and brief https://www.themeasuredmom.com/product
sketches will suffice. This is about their /readers-theater-scripts-familiar-tales-for-
understanding, not their artistic ability. Some grades-1-3-spec-off/
students may wish to use clay or blocks to create the
visual image. Throughout the year, as different plays are
c. Beneath the artwork, learners write a short introduced, extend the learners’
caption or paragraph explaining what's happening in understanding of drama and add to a co-
the scene. created chart such as:
d. This activity assesses their ability to comprehend
and retell a story visually.
e. This activity assesses their ability to analyze and
compare different media forms while encouraging
critical thinking and reading comprehension.
Peer Assessment:
Book Review Buddies:
a. Pair learners and provide each pair with a
different picture book or short story.
b. Instruct each student to read their assigned
book independently.
c. After reading a section of the book, have them
write a short book review such as (e.g., "I
recommend this book because . . .
b. Then the pairs of learners exchange book
reviews. Repeat this type of learning strategy by
c. Each student reads and responds to their extending the learners’ understanding of
partner's review and asks any further questions genre and each genre’s categories. For
about the book. example:
d. Encourage learners to explain their reasoning, Nonfiction: newspaper or instructions
fostering critical thinking. Poetry: haiku, acrostic, rhyming couplets, etc.
Fiction: science fiction, fables, etc.
64
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Reader's Theater Performances: Text features are like a map (SCO 4.7)
a. Divide the class into small groups and provide Engage learners in regular discussions that
each group with a short script or scene from a review the purpose of the text features they
play or children's book. encounter while reading. Encourage them to
b. Instruct each group to practice and rehearse share their observations on how these
their assigned scene. features contribute to their understanding of
c. After adequate preparation, have each group the fiction and or nonfiction text features as
perform their scene in front of the class. you ask questions such as:
d. Encourage the audience (their peers) to take
notes on the performance, paying attention to - Find the picture on the cover of the
aspects like expression, fluency, and how well book? Why is it there?
the actors conveyed the story. - What do the pictures throughout the
e. After each performance, allow the audience to book tell you?
share their feedback with the performers, - Fine the Table of Contents. What
highlighting both positive aspects and areas for does it tell you?
improvement. - Where would you find a chapter title?
f. Rotate roles so that each student has the - Choose a chapter title. What do you
opportunity to perform and provide feedback. think this chapter will be about?
- Find the glossary (if applicable). What
is the purpose of the glossary?
- Choose an illustration with a caption
under it. What does the caption tell
you about the illustration? etc.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS:
During Writing, provide opportunities for
learners to use text features in their nonfiction
writing.
Read to find the meaning of words (SCO
4.1,3, 4.14)
65
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Display or share a copy of a nonfiction text
such as the example provided below. Share
read the first part of the text and think aloud
the process of finding out the meaning of
new words by clues in the sentence.
https://caffeinequeenteacher.com/wp-
content/uploads/2019/11/primates-reading-
comprehension-finding-text-evidence-
passages-blue-pin-688x1024.jpeg
Discuss how the words used to define the
new words allow us to make a picture in our
heads about what the word means. Learners
then draw the picture and add the word
and/or image to the word wall or personal
dictionary.
When I read this , I feel . . . (SCO 4.13)_
66
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Provide learners with a few sticks and a copy
of emotion emojis such as the following.
https://www.alamy.com/stock-
photo/emojis-
emotions.html?cutout=1&sortBy=relevant
Learners paste one emoji to each stick.
Read Aloud a passage to learners using varied
tone, pitch, and intonation to reflect the
mood and meaning of the text. Provide
learners with “icon mood sticks”; as you read,
pause, and ask the learners how this section
of the passage makes you feel and why.
As learners are reading, conference with
individual students and ask them to share
their mood by using their words or a mood
stick. After they share, ask how the author’s
words or the illustrations made them feel that
way.
During this 1-1 conference, encourage
learners, to reading a short section aloud to
you with expression to convey the intended
emotions.
67
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Reading between the lines of
advertisements (SCO 4.16) Become aware
of the ads your learners are exposed to daily.
Take pictures of the ads. As a class, view this
video and poster and discuss.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hn_i
X9uTuCM
As a regular morning message, share a copy
of an add. Discuss the images on the ad and
then discuss the purpose, style, and messages
(sometimes hidden messages) of the ad. For
example:
68
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
This ad is meant to encourage learners to
contrast the advertisement picture with the
real item:
https://spoonuniversity.com/lifestyle/m
ashed-potatoes-motor-oil-deceptive-food-
advertising
Review the text and images below and share
ideas about how this ad is designed to
convince the viewer to buy the product.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS:
This is an opportunity for braiding the strands
of Language Arts. During a writing lesson on
persuasive writing, encourage learners to
experiment with writing an ad.
Read and view to develop understanding of
how vocabulary and language and
influence the meaning and mood of the
text
69
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Book Club SCO (4.12-4.17): the year,
organize small groups of learners into book
clubs to read books by different authors or
illustrators. Learners can discuss their
observations, share their favourite aspects of
each work, and compare the purpose and
style within their group. For information
about setting up book clubs and activities for
readers, visit
https://thefriendlyteacher.com/2021/04/boo
k-clubs-in-3rd-grade-classroom.html
https://i0.wp.com/writeonwithmissg.com/w
p-
content/uploads/2021/03/5TipsForSettingU
pBookClubsFEATUREDIMAGEBLOG.png
?fit=920%2C520&ssl=1
In Essential Learning Outcome 4 learners will develop their understanding of how an author’s choice of vocabulary, language, genre, text
form, text features and style influence the meaning of text and define the author’s craft.
70
Additional Resources and Materials
My Book Report
Learners can use book reports to show the author's motivations for creating the story and to formulate a critique of the book as a whole.
Book Report: How To Write A Book Report/ Review - Twinkl
Reader Theatre: Reader's theatre for children is a dramatic performance style where a group of young readers, rather than memorizing lines, read a
script aloud to convey a story, play, or other literary work. This form of theatre focuses on interpreting and presenting the text effectively, often with
expressive vocal delivery and minimal props or costumes. Reader's theatre for children encourages reading comprehension, boosts confidence, and
promotes teamwork as young participants work together to bring the story to life through their voices and expressions, making literature an
interactive and engaging experience.
Book Blurbs
A book blurb is a snapshot of what a book is about and how it can be used for a lesson plan. In this publication we offer a wide choice of
book blurbs, suggested by grade level, and aligned with the language arts curriculum, along with suggestions for other subject areas.
TeachersResourceGuide_BookBlurbs.pdf (handsacrossthesea.org)
71
Book Review
A book review is a short writing or discussion about a book where someone tells if they liked it, why they like it and what the book was about.
Book Creator is a digital program that allows students to write and read culturally relevant stories that are multimodal digital books. It is the perfect
tool for increasing student engagement through multimedia design and story development. Students can either create their own content (by writing,
drawing, or uploading their own films, audio files, and photographs) or they can select online multimedia resources from the Internet while making
their own books.
https://read.bookcreator.com/I7V7LB6QQidnFCDjcn9Pf24hT6L2/mseMP3JUSQuj1uosSeg-bQ
My Storybook
myStorybook.com is a free digital resource that is engaging and simple to use for students and teachers. You may begin digital storytelling with this
tool. Start by using the clipart in My Storybook, they can add their own photos, or utilize the drawing tools to make their own creations. These stories
can be used to build fluency and other useful reading skills.
Write to Read books
Titles suited for Grade 3
1. Peanut and the Under the Bed- by A. L. Dawn French
2. A Day at the Lake - by Tizyana McLelland
72
3. The Adventures of Possum - by Ryn-Kyi King
4. Naughty Henna - by Angelique Marquis
5. Let's Make Music - By Pearl Tench
The Village Leader - Global Digital Library - Global Digital Library
Off to an Island Reunion - Global Digital Library - Global Digital Library
The Day the Vegetables Came to School - Global Digital Library - Global Digital Library
The Brave Little Bird - Global Digital Library - Global Digital Library
The Jealous Cloud - Global Digital Library - Global Digital Library
73
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Overview
Exposing young children to different literary genres is crucial as it broadens their horizons, enriches their cognitive and emotional development, and
cultivates a passion for reading. This exposure introduces them to various writing styles, themes, and perspectives, expanding their knowledge and
imagination. Reading diverse genres like fantasy, science fiction, historical fiction, and non-fiction stimulates critical thinking, creativity, and
vocabulary growth. Additionally, it enables children to explore a range of emotions, situations, and cultures, fostering empathy and a deeper global
understanding.
Furthermore, this exposure assists children in identifying their personal reading preferences and encourages a lifelong love for reading. It empowers
them to select books that truly intrigue them, promoting independent reading, which is vital for academic success and personal growth.
1. Realistic Fiction: Realistic fiction for grade 3 is a literary genre that includes stories set in the real world with characters,
settings, and events that could plausibly happen. These narratives often revolve around everyday life, relationships, and
experiences, making them relatable to young readers. Realistic fiction in grade 3 typically features protagonists who
encounter and overcome challenges, allowing young readers to connect with the characters and explore important themes
while expanding their reading skills and comprehension.
2. Historical Fiction: Historical fiction for grade 3 is a literary genre that presents fictional stories set in a specific historical
time period, incorporating real events, settings, and sometimes actual historical figures. These stories offer young readers
an engaging way to learn about the past while featuring fictional characters and plots that bring history to life. Historical
fiction for grade 3 aims to make history accessible and interesting, helping students develop an understanding of different
time periods and cultures through compelling narratives.
74
3. Fantasy: Fantasy for children is a literary genre that features imaginative and magical elements not found in the real world. These stories
often include mythical creatures, enchanted places, and extraordinary adventures, offering young readers an escape
into fantastical realms where creativity knows no bounds. Fantasy literature for children sparks their imaginations,
encourages exploration of new worlds, and teaches valuable lessons through captivating and otherworldly
narratives.
4. Science Fiction: Science for children is a genre of literature that presents scientific concepts, discoveries, and
principles in an engaging and accessible way, specifically tailored to young readers. These books aim to educate
and inspire children about the natural world, various scientific topics, and the wonders of scientific exploration. They often include age-
appropriate explanations, colorful illustrations, and hands-on experiments to foster curiosity and a deeper understanding of science among
young readers.
5. Mystery: A mystery book for children is a literary genre that features a captivating and puzzling storyline where young
protagonists work to solve a mysterious event or crime. These stories often involve suspense, clues, and a
sense of adventure, encouraging young readers to use their critical thinking and problem-solving skills to
unravel the mystery alongside the characters. Mystery books for children aim to engage and entertain,
fostering a love for reading and enhancing cognitive development as readers piece together the clues to
discover the solution to the enigma.
6. Traditional Literature: Traditional literature for children refers to a genre of timeless stories, legends, myths, and folktales passed down
through generations. These narratives often carry cultural, moral, or universal themes and are typically not attributed to specific authors.
Traditional children's literature includes classic tales like fables, fairy tales, and legends that have been cherished for centuries, offering young
readers valuable life lessons, cultural insights, and imaginative adventures while preserving cultural heritage and oral traditions.
7. Biography: A biography for children is a genre of literature that tells the life story of a real person, typically aimed at
young readers. These books provide an informative and engaging account of an individual's life, highlighting their
achievements, challenges, and contributions to society. Biography books for children aim to inspire, educate, and
encourage young readers to learn about the lives of notable figures, fostering a greater understanding of history,
character, and the potential for personal growth and success.
8. Autobiography: An autobiography for children is a genre of literature in which a real person, often the author
themselves, writes about their own life experiences and personal journey. These books are written for young readers and offer an intimate and
relatable glimpse into the author's life, including their challenges, triumphs, and life lessons. Autobiographies for children aim to inspire,
75
educate, and encourage self-reflection, fostering a deeper understanding of individual growth, resilience, and the potential for personal
development and empathy.
9. Informational Text: An informational text for children is a type of literature that provides factual and educational
content, often presented in a clear and engaging manner. These texts cover a wide range of topics, from science and
history to nature and technology, with the primary purpose of imparting knowledge and fostering understanding.
Informational texts for children aim to promote learning, critical thinking, and curiosity by presenting facts, explanations,
and visual aids such as illustrations and photographs to make complex subjects accessible and interesting to young
readers.
St. Vincent and the Grenadines’ National Symbols.
Compiled by: Khaleil Mc Innis and Damian Ballantyne
10. Poetry: Poetry for children is a genre of literature that uses creative and expressive language, often with rhyme and rhythm, to evoke
emotions, tell stories, or convey ideas in a condensed and artistic form. These poems are written with young readers in mind, offering a unique
and engaging way to explore language and imagination. Poetry for children encourages a love of language, sparks creativity, and helps children
develop their reading and comprehension skills while enjoying the beauty of words and sounds.
Overview
Understanding how an author's craft influences the meaning of a text is an essential skill for third-grade students. It's about recognizing that authors
make thoughtful decisions regarding vocabulary, language, genre, text form, text features, and style to convey their message effectively. These choices
are like the paint on an artist's canvas, shaping the story's mood, characters, and overall impact.
Teaching students about the author's craft helps them become more perceptive readers and critical thinkers. It encourages them to analyze texts more
deeply, consider the author's intent, and appreciate the artistry of language. By fostering this awareness, you empower your students to become more
engaged and discerning readers.
1. Author and Illustrator Showcase: In the "Author and Illustrator Showcase" activity, students explore the purpose and style of a variety of
authors and illustrators. The teacher selects a diverse set of books, each representing a different author and illustrator. Students read or view
these books, paying attention to the unique style, themes, and storytelling techniques employed by each creator. Afterward, students present
their findings, discussing the author's intent and the illustrator's artistic choices, fostering an appreciation for the creative diversity in literature
and art (supports ELO 4.1).
2. Expressive Language Analysis: “Expressive Language Analysis” activity, students delve into an author's use of interesting words, phrases,
and sentences to evoke emotions, describe scenes vividly, and create humor. After reading a selected text, students identify and analyze
instances of expressive language that stood out to them. They discuss how these literary devices contribute to the emotional impact, vivid
76
imagery, and humor in the text. This activity enhances students' understanding of how skilled authors use language to engage and entertain
readers (supports ELO 4.13).
3. Plot Exploration Adventure: For the "Plot Exploration Adventure" activity, students embark on a journey to develop a deeper
understanding of the basic features of fables, folk tales, fairy tales, and adventure stories. They are provided with a selection of stories from
each genre and work in small groups to analyze the plot elements, such as the introduction, conflict, climax, and resolution. By comparing and
contrasting the plot structures, students gain insight into the unique characteristics of each literary form, enhancing their comprehension of
these classic storytelling styles (supports ELO 4.2).
4. Media Text Analysis: When students interact with "Media Text Analysis" activity, they critically examine various images and media texts,
such as advertisements, news articles, and entertainment content. They discuss the purpose behind each text, whether it is to inform, entertain,
or persuade the audience. Through group discussions and presentations, students learn to identify the strategies and techniques used by
creators to achieve their intended purpose, fostering media literacy and critical thinking skills (supports 4.3).
5. Text Form Treasure Hunt: For this activity, students become literary detectives as they search for a variety of text forms, features, and
stylistic elements within a given selection of texts. They collaborate in small groups to identify and collect examples of headings, subheadings,
bullet points, images, metaphors, similes, and other elements. Through discussion and reflection, students recognize how these components
are strategically used to enhance communication and convey meaning in different types of text, promoting a deeper understanding of textual
structure and style (supports 4.5).
6. Illustrator's Impact Discussion: in this activity third graders read selected children's books and focus on the illustrator's role in enhancing
the text. Afterward, they engage in a group discussion where each student expresses their opinion on how the illustrator's visual text engages
the reader and complements the author's writing. To support their opinions, students can reference specific illustrations from the book. This
activity encourages critical thinking and helps students understand the collaborative nature of storytelling in picture books (supports ELO
4.14).
Let's Read | Children's Books | Free to Read Download Translate (letsreadasia.org)
Let's Read creates a world in which inquisitive and knowledgeable readers build vibrant societies. Let's Read promotes reading habits
that help kids meet developmental milestones, families share books that celebrate their culture, and communities thrive and become
more diverse.
Level 3 - Global Digital Library - Global Digital Library
The Global Digital Library makes early grade reading materials available online for free in child-friendly languages.
ICDL - International Children's Digital Library (childrenslibrary.org)
77
The International Children’s Library provides access to the best children's books from around the world, which encourages tolerance and
respect for various cultures.
I'm Reading (starfall.com)
Starfall I'm Reading helps both beginning and seasoned readers improve their comprehension and fluency. With the aid of this app, your
child will be able to go from learning to read to reading to learn, and includes plays, myths from China and Greece, and folktales.
Stories for Kids: The Atrocious Fairy tale (freechildrenstories.com)
With access to the internet, Free Children Stories' objective is to offer traditional, meaningful storytelling to every child, parent, or teacher
around the world, for free. They divide the stories in their online books into sections for learners ages 3-4, 5-8, and 8-10.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Integrated Unit
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Science Integration
Incorporating reading and science into the third-grade curriculum can be an engaging strategy to improve children' comprehension abilities while
igniting their curiosity about scientific ideas. Here are some inventive suggestions for fusing these topics:
1. Science Reading Stations Set up reading stations with books, articles, or digital resources related to various science topics. Students can rotate
through these stations, read materials, and answer comprehension questions or engage in discussions.
2. Scientific Vocabulary Journals: Have students maintain journals where they record and define scientific terms they encounter during their
reading. This reinforces vocabulary skills and enhances their understanding of science concepts.
3. Science Graphic Organizers: Use graphic organizers to help students organize information from their science readings. Graphic organizers like
concept maps or Venn diagrams can aid in visualizing connections between scientific ideas.
4. Inquiry-Based Reading Projects: Assign inquiry-based projects where students choose a scientific topic of interest, conduct research through
reading, and present their findings. This encourages independent reading and research skills.
5. Crossword Puzzles and Word Searches: Develop crossword puzzles or word searches based on science readings. This not only helps with
vocabulary reinforcement but also adds an element of fun to the learning process.
Social Studies Integration
Integrating reading and social studies in the curriculum for grade 3 can help students develop a deeper understanding of historical events, cultures,
and societal structures. Here are some creative ideas to blend these subjects effectively:
78
1. Biographies: Read biographies of important historical figures and discuss their contributions to society. Encourage students to analyze the impact
of these individuals on the world.
2. Book Club: Organize book clubs or literature circles where students can choose books related to various historical eras or regions. They can read
and discuss these books in small groups.
3. Compare and Contrast: Ask students to compare and contrast events, cultures, or societies from different time periods or regions. They can read
about these topics and present their findings through written reports or presentations.
4. Research Projects: Assign research projects related to social studies topics. Students can choose a specific aspect of history or a cultural element
to investigate further, read books and articles, and present their findings.
5. Current Events Analysis: Incorporate current events related to social studies topics. Read news articles, discuss the events' historical context, and
analyze their relevance to the present.
Mathematics Integration
Integrating math and reading in the curriculum for grade 3 can be a powerful way to enhance students' learning experiences and promote cross-
disciplinary skills. Here are some strategies and ideas to help you achieve this integration:
1. Word Problems: Incorporate math word problems into your reading lessons. Use stories or scenarios that require students to read and understand
the problem before applying math skills to solve it. This helps students see the practical application of math in real-life situations.
2. Math Literature: Use children's books that incorporate math concepts into the story. For example, "The Greedy Triangle" by Marilyn Burns
introduces geometry concepts, and "One Grain of Rice" by Demi explores increased growth through a mathematical tale.
3. Math Vocabulary: Teach math-related vocabulary words during your reading lessons. You can introduce terms like "sum," "difference,"
"multiply," "divide," and "fraction" while reading math-related texts or stories.
4. Math Storytelling: Encourage students to create their own math stories or problems. This not only reinforces their math skills but also enhances
their reading and writing skills as they craft narratives around math concepts.
6. Cross-Curricular Projects: Plan cross-curricular projects that require both math and reading skills. For example, students could research a
historical figure, calculate their age at different points in history, and then present their findings through a written report or presentation.
79
ESSENTIAL LEARNING OUTCOME 5 – Writing and Representing
Introduction to the Strand: Language is the foundation of communication and the primary instrument of thought. The study of Language Arts
provides access to multiple and interrelated oral, aural, written, and visual ways of representing, exploring, problem solving, communicating, and
sharing meaning. Through listening, speaking, writing, representing, reading, and viewing a wide range of text and text form, the learner continues to
develop an awareness of culture, personal identity, and the strategies needed to participate, communicate, and reflect critically on thought and action.
Strand: Writing and Representing provide learners with the strategies and skills to communicate with their peers and other meaningful audiences
within and beyond their community using paper and digital formats. The process of writing includes planning, organizing, revising, refining, and
sharing feedback. Throughout this process, ongoing problem solving and critical thinking strategies, applicable to subject areas and to life, develop.
Grade Level Expectations: we’ll make sure these are comprehensive enough after we review all ELOs
Write for pleasure and personal growth
choose topics of personal interest to share
use the writing of favourite authors as models for their own writing
reflect on and identify their strengths as writers, areas for improvement and the strategies they found most helpful at different stages in the
writing process
Engage in the writing process
Continue to develop understanding and application of the purpose and structure of the genres:
- Narrative
- Expository
- Descriptive
- Opinion
- Persuasive
state the purpose and write for a variety of purposes including self, to explain, to describe, to report, to write about real or imagined experiences
generate, gather, and organize ideas and information to write for intended purposes and audiences
use editing, proofreading, and publishing skills and strategies and knowledge of language conventions to correct errors, refine expression and
present their work effectively
use print and technological resources for locating information
begin to use a variety of presentation style elements including print, script, fonts, graphics, and layout
Explore language structures
organize writing into paragraphs
apply selected text types previously studied
make decisions about when casual or formal language is required and apply those language structures
80
monitor writing more independently to revise and edit vocabulary, sentence fluency, voice and grammar
Explore word solving
select words for their appropriateness and exactness in conveying intended meanings
write legibly
monitor writing more independently to edit spelling.
Essential Learning Outcome 5: Learners will generate, gather, and organize thoughts to explore, clarify and reflect on thoughts, feelings, and
experiences as they create a written or representative draft, independently and collaboratively, for a range of audiences and purposes.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
By the end of Grade 3, the learner will: Begin the year with an opportunity for learners The focus of ELO 5 is on the prewriting
to create their personal writing portfolios. Use a (brainstorming) and drafting stages of the
Write and represent to generate and file folder to maintain a record of: writing process.
gather thoughts to explore, ideas, - Brainstorms During Writers’ Workshop, begin with a lesson
feelings, and experiences - Drafts describing the topic of the session, follow this
- Revisions lesson with time to practice and time to reflect and
5.1 Maintain a personal record of interests, - Completed work share. During all stages of Writers’ Workshop,
personal or community experiences, music, Ensure each piece of work is dated. This engage the learners with opportunities to ask
books, pictures for use as writing prompts. provides a record of progress over time. questions or contribute ideas. At the beginning of
The portfolio allows teachers to track learners' each term, ask the learners to share their ideas
5.2 Maintain a writing portfolio that includes skills, development, and the effectiveness of about what good writers do. Record their ideas
drafts, revisions, personal dictionary, personal their revisions. Using this information, teachers and then compare it to the list below – discuss the
writing prompts, etc. plan responsive instruction to build on progress similarities and differences in the lists.
and scaffold to the next steps. In addition to Refer to the class list throughout writing lessons as
5.3 Identify the topic, purpose, audience, and this record of progress, teachers use a reminder of expectations.
form for writing. observation, self assessments, rubrics, and
checklists for the learners. Becoming an effective writer
5.4 Participate in group and individual
brainstorming to gather ideas for their CONVERSATIONS
writing, to write for an intended purpose and ● Write frequently
audience. Conferencing with learners ● Engage in the writing
process
Teacher conferencing is a meeting where the
● Choose their own topic for writing
writer and a teacher come together to discuss
81
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5.5 Become familiar with a variety of paper the learner’s progress, offer feedback and ● Receive explicit instruction in writing
based and digital brainstorming techniques: engage in discussions about writing. This ● Explore various forms and genres
− talk about the ideas they plan to write exchange of oral feedback during the ELO 5
● Accept and reflect on constructive
about brainstorming and drafting stage can greatly
feedback
− draw pictures to develop ideas for assist the writer. Refer to the suggested list of
● Explore various ways to be creative in
writing questions below to ask learners during the
writing
− create jot notes for research writing conference. Revise questions to match the
genre and learning throughout the year. During ● Remember they are writing to share
5.6 Gather information from a variety of the conference, write anecdotal notes in your information in meaningful and engaging
paper based and digital resources to support Observation of Learner Learning Journal. ways
and enhance brainstorm.
NAME: DATE:
NOTE: Independent writing
5.7 Reflect on ideas gathered and add, revise,
In addition to focussed lessons, schedule time and
or delete to suit to topic and genre. WRITING PROJECT:
encourage learners to use journaling to write freely
and independently, putting what they have learnt
Write and represent to use organizational
● Tell me about what you have been into practice without worrying about grammar,
strategies to arrange thoughts to explore,
working on today. spelling, or punctuation. These opportunities allow
clarify and reflect on ideas, feelings, and
● How did you choose this topic to learners to practice, notice and consolidate lessons
experiences
write about? learned.
● What is going well?
5.8 Organize ideas and information to write
● What is hard/ difficult? The suggested learning strategies below may
for an intended purpose and audience using:
● (Point to a specific section)What
● paper based or digital graphic organizers be applied to whichever genre is the focus on
were you feeling while writing this
● samples of how published texts are the term.
part?
organized Write and represent to generate and gather
● (Point to specific section) Please read
thoughts to explore, ideas, feelings, and
this section to me and I’ll tell you
5.9 Further develop independence in using, experience
what it makes me think about.
choosing, and creating simple graphic
(Point to a specific section) Listen as
organizers.
I read this section to you. and you My portfolio (5.1, 5.2)
can tell me what it makes you think
5.10 Participate and contribute to shared
about.
writing opportunities that reflect the genre
82
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
studied (e.g., newsletters to parents, thank- Begin each term with an opportunity for each
you letters to classroom guests, lists of learner to create a personal writing portfolio.
classroom procedures, recipes, labels). OBSERVATION Schedule time for the learners to:
- Personalise the cover of file folder with a
hand drawn or printed image collage of
Observing learners while writing and making
5.11 Write a simple nonfiction report on a their interests
anecdotal notes can be a valuable assessment
topic of personal relevance. - Organise the sections of the portfolio to
tool. Anecdotal notes allow teachers to record
include:
specific observations and behaviors of learners
5.12 Explore and begin to use blogs, google o Prewriting (brainstorms)
while they are writing. Document both the
classroom diary, social media to contribute to o Drafts
things that learners are doing well and the areas
various genres of writing. o Revisions
where they may need additional support. Pay
o Completed copies
attention to how focused and engaged the
5.13 Refer to texts and conversations as
learners are. Are they actively brainstorming
anchors for organising a sequence of events, Throughout the term, learners insert each day’s
ideas, organizing their thoughts?
changes in setting, and character writing and information handouts provided by the
development. teacher.
Look for evidence of each learner’s level of
Write and represent to create a written or confidence as they begin the writing process: Purpose and Audience - (SCO5.3)
- Are they able to come up with a topic?
representative draft
- Do they support the topic with a variety Engage learners in discussions on why they are
of ideas? writing on a particular topic (purpose) e.g. to
5.14 Further develop understanding of the
- Are they comfortable creating a inform, entertain, describe, give opinion, or
purpose and organisation of:
brainstorm or web without worry about persuade
- narrative writing
spelling and punctuation?
- expository writing
- Do they use a graphic organiser to put As learners share their topic and the purpose for
- opinion writing
their ideas in order? writing, they identify the different people they
- persuasive writing
- Are they comfortable changing their want to read their writing (audience) e.g. friends,
- report writing
mind and deleting or adding new ideas? teacher, parents.
Discuss the language that needs to be used (formal
5.15 Continue to develop and apply Observing these writing behaviours provides and informal) when writing to different audiences.
understanding of the Writing Traits of Ideas, the teacher with information about each Provide learners with an example of the same
Organisation and Language Use with
learner’s level of comfort and how support is nates written in informal language and then in
increasing independence. best planned. formal language. Learners to share their pieces
83
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
aloud and discuss how and when each form of
5.16 Enhance understanding of how to use PRODUCTS language is most effective.
transition words and phrases to develop a
logical progression of ideas and thoughts Provide learners with an organising strategy to Planning for Writing (SCO 5.3, 5.4,)
(e.g., because, therefore, since, for example) record their brainstorm ideas. This provides a Begin each writing project with a conversation
to connect opinion and reasons. teacher assessment and self assessment of the about how writers often use topics they know
first stages of the writing process. about, their interests or their “wonderings” to get
5.17 Explore possibilities provided in anchor their ideas for writing. Share an example of
texts of various ways to convey ideas, through something you know about, something you’re
- introductory sentences interested in and something you wonder about.
- concluding sentences
- sequencing of ideas Teacher Sample:
- vocabulary choices Date: Sept. X
- simple, compound, and complex What I know:
sentences. -
-
5.18 Apply, with increasing independence, the What I’m interested in:
understanding and application of Ideas, -
Organisation and Language Use in draft -
writing in a range of genres. What I wonder about:
-
-After this demonstration, invite learners to
share what they know about, their interests or
Use your observations to provide timely their “wonderings”. As each learner shares,
feedback to learners. Offer specific praise for create notes on a “Ideas for Writing” chart.
areas of strength and constructive suggestions Ask learners to work in small groups for 15
for areas that need improvement. minutes and make a list of things that they
know a great deal about, are curious about,
As an informal assessment of progress, provide experiences they have had and want to share.
learners with a short sample of an anchor text After the discussions, individual learners write
and ask for one or more of: their own ideas in their personal writing
● a new introduction portfolio.
● a different ending
84
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● a different description of the setting
My Idea Box
Observe how the learner applies lessons
focussed on the topics listed above.
Check in after a lesson for learner’s
independent understanding of how to
determine if details support a main idea. The Idea box SCO 5.3,5.4, 5.6)
suggestion below provides an example. Create a class “idea box” to collect ideas for
writing about the topic
Using the ‘Think-Pair-Share’ strategy, encourage
learners to think about, and then share a topic
based on a given idea.
Create the opportunity for pairs to share period so
learners can know what topics others are writing
about. Remember than an Idea Box can be written
or illustrated in paper based or digital formats.
Narrowing a topic (SCO 5.7, 5.8):
Provide learners with an example of a draft with
TMI! (Too Much Information)
They looked at the school playground and thought it would
be really good football field. My favourite game is football. I
want to go to a pro game. My friend has a football.
Football uniforms are so colourful. In some places, football
https://www.englishworksheetsland.com/topic
is called soccer. A football is made of leather.
s/supportdetails/supportingdetails1.pdf
Explain to learners the importance of narrowing a
Portfolio Assessment: Throughout each term,
topic before beginning the draft. Emphasize that
collect the learners’ portfolio and review their
narrowing a topic helps to focus ideas and make
progress to date using a rubric such as the
writing more precise and coherent. Discuss the
example provided below. Schedule a brief
challenges of writing when a topic is too broad.
85
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
conversation with the learner to review the Allow learners to use graphic organisers to focus
comments and suggestions. on specific ideas based on a topic such as Animals.
(See sample below)
Learners team up in small groups and add 2 details
to each section of the web. During the revising
process (ELO 6) revisit this chart and use it as an
anchor for a lesson about paragraphing.
https://study.com/cimages/multimages/16/st
ructures_port-assess.gif
SELF- ASSESSMENT
Learners can assess their own prewriting and
draft work by reflecting on their strengths and Write and represent to use organizational
areas for improvement by using a checklist. strategies to arrange thoughts to explore,
clarify and reflect on ideas, feelings, and
Checklist for learners’ self assessment experiences
Learners’ checklist yes /no
Is there a topic sentence that
states the main idea or an
86
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
effective opening that will hook
the readers?
Did you stick to the topic?
Did you write and rewrite the first
NWEA.com
draft?
Lots of Ideas! Time to Organise! (SCO5.8)
Did you connect sentences using
Using the revised list of ideas created during
transition words?
brainstorming (prewriting) sessions, use a digital or
Did you write a variety of paper based graphic organiser to demonstrate how
sentences? to organise ideas in a way that matches the genre.
For example, a narrative organiser:
Is there a closing sentence?
PEER-ASSESSMENT
Jamaica Gleaner
Peer assessment learner provides valuable
insights and perspectives that may not be
captured by the teacher's feedback alone. It
gives learners the opportunity to see their work https://s3.amazonaws.com/prod-hmhco-vmg-
from a different point of view. craftcms-public/WF1553650_Inline-3.png
Encourage learners to begin feedback by first
identifying what was done well. Once a
learner's strength has been identified, move on
to what can be improved.
87
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
A nonfiction organiser:
Visit
https://mrswarnerarlington.weebly.com/graphic-
organizers.html for more samples.
Encourage learners who wish to express their ideas
in drawings, storyboards, or flow charts to do so.
This visual aid may help them structure their
teachingessentials.com writing and remember the ideas so they can write
sentences based on the drawings created.
Partner check Write and represent to create a written or
representative draft
Authors teach us to write (5.15- 5.18)
INTEGRATING THE
SUBJECTS AND BRAIDING THE
STRANDS
As each writing project begins, use Teacher Read
Alouds to ensure that learners are reminded of or
88
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
exposed to various examples of the genre that will
I told the writer what I liked _______
be studied during the writing process. For
yes/no
example, for nonfiction writing, read aloud
sections of a community newspaper, a short article
I asked questions ______ yes/no
about a favourite animal / sport / a social issue
(environment, etc.) and point out the purpose and
I suggested a change for …………
elements of the genre.
The change I suggested was ……………
Modeled writing through mini lessons (SCO
5.16, 5.17)
Comments
Introduce each mini lesson with a brief passage
that illustrates the focus of the lesson in the
context of authentic writing. For example, a lesson
Adapted from Scholastic- Traits Based mini on letter writing could be introduced with the
lessons for teaching writing in Grades 2-4 book: I wanna iguana which tells the story
Megan S. ,Sloan 2001. through letter writing.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bcgKZPAU
yGc
Organisation - Throughout the year, model,
discuss and help learners build the skills involved
in the organisation of different forms of writing
89
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
using the practices and procedures described
below and anchor texts such as:
a) Sample paragraph (SCO 5.17)
Provide small groups of learners with a title and 5
sentence strips to place in a sequence they feel
creates an organised paragraph. Within each group,
one learner reads the paragraph aloud and the
members of the group decide if the order is good
and why. Suggestions for reorganisation are also
considered.
b) Writing a topic sentence (SCO 5.18)
Share a variety of topic sentences from a range of
paper based and digital texts representing the
genre being studied. Review the
various formats of topic
sentences. As each sample is
read aloud, co-create an anchor
chart such as the one illustrated.
Note that samples of Topic
sentences may vary among the
various genres.
https://i0.wp.com/elementaryengagement.com/wp-
content/uploads/2021/10/Bold-Beginnings-Narrative-
Anchor-Chart.png?fit=683%2C1024&ssl=1
90
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Following this opportunity, learners select a topic
from their portfolio idea box. Choose one at
random to discuss with learners what they think
might be a good topic sentence for their writing.
Allow learners to share information whilst the
teacher records the suggestions on the board.
Guide learners as they choose their own topics and
practice writing topic sentences based on the
suggestions discovered above. Observe them as
they work and take note of those who may need
extra support. Encourage learners to share and
reflect on the writing process.
d) Concluding sentences (SCO 5.18)
Share with learners any text you have read or
movie you've watched where the ending had an
impact on you and why. Provide time for learners
to search through books or think about movies,
songs, etc. with powerful endings and share.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS:
Continue to draw on texts shared during Teacher
Read Aloud as samples.
Putting it all together (SCO 5.15, - 5.18)
91
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Review the parts of a paragraph
with an anchor chart used in previous grades and
explore how to increase the length of the
paragraph or the sentences within the paragraph.
Use an organiser, such as the one provided below
to co-write a paragraph with the class.
https://www.worksheetplace.com/index.php?func
tion=DisplaySheet&sheet=Paragraph-Writing-
Organizer&links=3&id=1399
92
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
After practicing together, introduce this simple
reminder image.
five finger.com
Sharing (SCO 5.19)
At the end of the first
draft, schedule time for
learners to share their
writing whilst their peers
use this checklist to guide
feedback.
Worldblankblogs.com
INTEGRATING SUBJECTS
Generate topics from different subject areas and
create a bank of topics for writing.
Write on topics related to different subject areas.
for example, Social Science - How to prepare a
traditional dish, Caribbean Festivals
93
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Science - Types of habitats
Arts- draw/ illustrate, captions, signs, design book
covers
Learners create persuasive posters on healthy
eating habits or how to solve a maths problem.
Additional Resources and Materials
In Essential Learning Outcome 5 learners will generate, gather, and organize thoughts to explore, clarify and reflect on thoughts, feelings, and
experiences as they create a written or representative draft, independently and collaboratively, for a range of audiences and purposes.
Writing Friendly Letters
Sample Email Template
To
Subject
Body
Story Starters: Provide learners with an opportunity to develop a set of story starters about their areas of interest within the genre being studied.
Encourage them to use their imagination to continue the story. This helps with creativity and narrative development.
94
Journaling: Encourage daily or weekly journaling. Topics can vary from "What did you do over the weekend?" to "If you could be any animal for a
day, which would you choose and why?" Journaling promotes self-expression and helps develop writing fluency.
Creative Poetry: Introduce different types of poems like acrostic, haiku, or rhyming poems. Give them themes to work with, such as seasons,
animals, or emotions, and let them create their own poems.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
1. Picture Prompts: Show learners a picture or illustration and ask them to write a story or description based on what they see. This activity
sparks creativity and helps with descriptive writing.
2. Collaborative Stories: Start a story as a class and have each student contribute a sentence or paragraph to continue it. This fosters teamwork
and creative storytelling.
3. Storyboards: Have learners create storyboards with drawings and captions to visually tell a story. This exercise combines writing with art and
encourages creativity.
Using Mentor texts
Mentor texts provide examples of well-written pieces of writing in various genres. Learners can analyze these texts to understand different aspects of
writing and to guide their writing
- Select a mentor text that aligns with the writing skills you want to teach and introduce during a read aloud or shared reading activity,
emphasizing key elements
- Engage learners in conversation about the text focusing on the specific strategy such as developing ideas, organizing ideas, enhancing
vocabulary, expanding, or shortening sentences for increased impact, etc.
- Use the guidelines below to engage learners in a specific activity using a mentor text
Read - take a moment to read the text and make some observations.
Discuss - discuss what the writer did to make it exceptionally good.
Identify - identify the writing technique used by the author so that learners can learn and understand it better. (For example, the author's
flow of sentences and use of vivid verbs to bring the writing to life).
Apply - apply this writing technique of drafting sentences to your own writing.
Demonstrate - Before allowing learners to try it on their own, demonstrate how it will be done
Share and Reflect - Allow learners to share and reflect on their experience of implementing the writing technique using the mentor text
Repeat the process with different mentor texts to expose learners to a variety of writing styles and strategies
https://www.teachstarter.com/us/blog/what-is-a-mentor-text/
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
95
Science Integration
Integrating science and writing in the curriculum for third grade can make learning more engaging and meaningful for learners. It helps them develop
scientific literacy and communication skills simultaneously. Here are some strategies and ideas for integrating science and writing:
1. Science Journals:
· Provide learners with science journals where they can record observations, hypotheses, and experiments. Encourage them to write daily or
weekly entries about what they've learned in science class.
2. Scientific Narratives
· Create opportunities for learners to write narratives that involve scientific concepts. They can write stories that revolve around a
scientific discovery, adventure, or mystery.
· This combines creative writing with science learning.
3. Science Vocabulary
· Teach and reinforce science vocabulary through writing exercises. Have learners create glossaries, flashcards, or sentences using new
science terms.
4. Lab Report
· Conduct simple experiments in class and have learners write lab reports to communicate their findings.
5. Science Blog or Website:
· Create a class science blog or website where learners can write and share their scientific discoveries, research, or reports with a wider
audience. This promotes digital literacy and communication skills.
6. Science and Opinion Writing
· Encourage learners to express their opinions about scientific topics, such as environmental issues or ethical questions related to science.
This can lead to persuasive essays or opinion pieces.
7. Cross-Curricular Projects
· Collaborate with Science teachers to design cross-curricular projects that connect science and writing. For example, learners can research
and write about the impact of climate change on ecosystems.
Remember to provide guidance and support as learners transition between scientific concepts and written expression. Encourage them to revise and
edit their writing for clarity and accuracy. By integrating science and writing, you can help learners become more proficient in both areas and foster a
deeper understanding of scientific concepts.
Mathematics Integration
Integrating math and writing in the curriculum for third grade can be a rewarding experience for both learners and teachers. This approach not only
helps learners see the interconnectedness of different subjects but also enhances their critical thinking and problem-solving skills. Here are some ideas
and strategies for integrating math and writing in a third-grade curriculum:
1. Word Problems and Storytelling
96
- Create math word problems that require learners to write out the steps they took to solve the problem. This encourages them to use written
communication to explain their mathematical thinking.
- Have learners create their own math word problems and share them with classmates. This activity involves both math skills and writing
creativity.
2. Math Journals
- Introduce math journals where learners can write about their understanding of mathematical concepts, explain problem-solving strategies,
and reflect on their learning.
- Encourage the use of visual representations such as drawings, charts, and graphs in their math journals to reinforce mathematical concepts.
3. Real-World Applications
- Incorporate real-world scenarios in math problems that require learners to write about how they would apply mathematical concepts in
everyday situations. This connects math to practical life and enhances writing skills.
- For example, ask learners to calculate the cost of items in a grocery store and write a shopping list, or plan a budget for a special event.
4. Mathematical Stories
- Have learners create short stories or narratives that incorporate mathematical concepts. This could involve characters solving math problems
or facing challenges that require mathematical solutions.
- This not only reinforces math skills but also enhances creativity and storytelling abilities.
5. Math Vocabulary
- Teach and reinforce math vocabulary through writing. Have learners create vocabulary lists, write sentences using new terms, or even create
short stories incorporating the math vocabulary.
- Use writing activities to reinforce understanding and application of mathematical terms.
6. Math Reports
- Assign research projects where learners investigate a specific mathematical concept or mathematician. They can write reports that include
the history, applications, and significance of the concept.
- This integrates research, writing, and mathematical understanding.
7. Math Dialogue
- Incorporate dialogue in math activities. Learners can engage in discussions about problem-solving strategies, explaining their thought
processes to peers, and writing out their dialogue.
- This helps develop communication skills alongside mathematical understanding.
8. Cross-Curricular Projects
- Collaborate with language arts teachers to create cross-curricular projects. For instance, a project on designing a city can integrate math
(measurement, geometry) and writing (descriptive writing, explaining the city layout).
Remember to scaffold these activities appropriately based on your learners' abilities and provide ample support as they transition between
mathematical concepts and written expression. Encourage a growth mindset and celebrate the connections between math and writing.
97
Social Studies Integration
Integrating social studies and writing in the curriculum for third grade is a valuable approach to help learners develop a deeper understanding of
historical events, geography, and culture while enhancing their writing skills. Here's a step-by-step guide on how to integrate social studies and writing
effectively:
1. Select Cross-Curricular Topics
- Choose social studies topics that naturally lend themselves to writing activities. Look for areas where learners can explore historical events,
geography, cultures, and civic concepts through writing.
2. Research Projects
- Assign research projects tied to specific social studies topics. learners can select a country, historical event, or culture to investigate more
deeply.
- Teach research skills, including note-taking, outlining, and citing sources, and require learners to compile research notes and present their
findings in well-structured reports.
3. Simple Geography Reports
- Integrate geography by assigning reports on countries, regions, or landmarks. Learners can write about the geography, climate, culture, and
historical significance of their chosen location.
- Promote peer editing and revision skills. Encourage learners to provide constructive feedback to their peers to improve their writing.
4. Celebrate Student Work
- Showcase learners' social studies-writing projects in the classroom, during parent-teacher conferences, or at special events to celebrate their
achievements.
By integrating social studies and writing in a thoughtful and purposeful manner, you can create a holistic learning experience that enables learners to
connect historical knowledge with effective communication and writing skills.
98
ESSENTIAL LEARNING OUTCOME 6 – Writing and Representing
Introduction to the Strand: Language is the foundation of communication and the primary instrument of thought. The study of Language Arts
provides access to multiple and interrelated oral, aural, written, and visual ways of representing, exploring, problem solving, communicating, and
sharing meaning. Through listening, speaking, writing, representing, reading, and viewing a wide range of text and text form, the learner continues to
develop an awareness of culture, personal identity, and the strategies needed to
participate, communicate, and reflect critically on thought and action.
Strand: Writing and Representing strategies and skills provide opportunities for learners to communicate with their peers and other meaningful
audiences within and beyond their community using paper and digital formats. The process of writing includes planning, organizing, revising, refining,
and sharing feedback. Throughout this process, ongoing problem solving and critical thinking strategies, applicable to subject areas and to life,
develop.
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions: Write for pleasure and personal growth`
choose topics of personal interest to share
use the writing of favourite authors as models for their own writing
reflect on and identify their strengths as writers, areas for improvement and the strategies they found most helpful at different stages in the
writing process
Engage in the writing process
state the purpose and write for a variety of purposes including self, to explain, to describe, to report, to write about real or imagined experiences
generate, gather, and organize ideas and information to write for intended purposes and audiences
use editing, proofreading, and publishing skills and strategies and knowledge of language conventions to correct errors, refine expression and
present their work effectively
use print and technological resources for locating information
begin to use a variety of presentation style elements including print, script, fonts, graphics, and layout
Explore language structures
organize writing into paragraphs
apply selected text types previously studied
make decisions about when casual or formal language is required and apply those language structures
monitor writing more independently to revise and edit vocabulary, sentence fluency, voice and grammar
Explore word solving
select words for their appropriateness and exactness in conveying intended meanings
write legibly
monitor writing more independently to edit spelling.
99
Essential Learning Outcome 6: Learners will revise the organization and language use in drafted writing or representation, collaboratively
and independently, for a variety of purposes and audiences
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
By the end of Grade Three, Learners will When providing feedback to a learner, ensure The focus of ELO 6 is revision of the draft
the comments lead to increased independence. developed in ELO 5. The focus of these revisions
Write and represent to revise organization Feedback can be coded: is:
styles of draft writing and representation a) Rather than correcting a spelling error, ● strengthening sentences,
place a dot in the margin of the line ● adding or deleting information
6.1 Continue to develop self assessment where an error occurred. The learner
● rearranging ideas
revision strategies by self monitoring writing finds the error and attempts correction.
● selecting appropriate/interesting words.
for form and organisation using paper based (Note: spelling is the focus of ELO 7)
Learners continue to collect their revisions in their
or digital revision tools such as: *The childern saw the dog in the car.
writing portfolio.
- caret, b) use symbols to suggest changes in
- crossing out vocabulary, grammar, sentence fluency
NOTE: the examples provided below can be
- adding /removing details
adapted to various genres. As you read an example,
- arrows to organise + : Add a word
think about how it could be used in writing
- : Remove a word
projects focussed on narrative, expository, poetry,
6.2 Use feedback given by peers and teachers ? : Writing is unclear
etc. and make adaptations to suit the genre.
as an aid in writing and strengthening the > : Move sentence
organization of the draft
Write and represent to revise organization styles of
focus revisions on creating print, visual and Formative assessment information is gathered
draft writing and representation
digital texts with increasingly engaging through
beginnings,
Time to organise (SCO 6.2)
- begin to experiment with how the CONVERSATIONS, OBSERVATIONS
Display a graphic organiser such as the one
middle, of the draft evolves AND PRODUCTS
provided below and demonstrate how to use a
- explore new endings
brainstorm or prewriting activity to distinguish
CONVERSATIONS
between a main idea and the details. Schedule time
6.3 Experiment with digital and paper-based
for learners to practice organising the ideas from
organisation with various real-world genres:
brainstorms into main idea and details.
(wish list, how to list, grocery list, play lists,
etc.)
sphero.com
100
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Write and represent to develop language Desk-side conference: Schedule 2-3 minute de tail
use when revising written drafts teacher-learner conferences to revise learners’
( vocabulary) w
lea
o
r
r
n
k
e
.
r
I
s
d
h
en
av
ti
e
f y
r e
s
p
o
r
m
es
e
e
e
n
l
t
e
e
m
d
e
w
n
e
ts
ll
o
(s
f
e
w
nt
r
e
it
n
in
c
g
e variety, de tail M id a e i a n
de t ail
6.5 Continue to appreciate and develop the interesting opening and closing sentences, use
purpose and place of Home Language and of transition words etc.). Engage the learner in
de tail
Standard English vocabulary. the process by adapting questions such as the
following to the focus of the observation:
6.6 Continue to develop self monitoring of Once organisers are complete, focus on the details
errors in word use. as you repeat the process of demonstrating and
learner practice to organise the details by sequence.
6.7 Explore synonyms to enhance, clarify and The example below provides an opportunity for
expand information. learners to illustrate the details to better visualise
the sequence. NOTE: Learners may also wish to
6.8 Connect the use of sensory verbs, use paper strips to organise the ideas.
adjectives, and adverbs to enliven language.
6.9 Demonstrate understanding of figurative
language by using simple similes, metaphors,
and personification in their writing.
6.10 Use a paper based or digital dictionary
or thesaurus to clarify the meaning of
keywords.
6.11 Recognize and use words with multiple
meanings with understanding and intent.
Write and represent to develop language
use when revising written drafts
conference questions.com
(grammar and sentence fluency) http://teachtomeducation.com/
101
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
6.12 Acknowledge the importance and Revise, Refine, & Re-create! (SCO 6.1, 6.2, 6.3)
purpose of the grammar of Home Present a familiar story with very few details or
Language(s), standard and informal writing. ideas. Read aloud the story and have learners close
their eyes and make visual images.
6.13 Revise with a focus on monitoring for Engage the learners in sharing what they have
complete and well-formed sentences that are imagined.
clear and understandable. OBSERVATIONS Ask questions such as What do you think about my
story? Is there information missing?
6.14 Continue to engage in individual and Spontaneous observations allow the teacher to Engage learners to work in pairs to discuss details
shared peer revision opportunities to share gather information about learner engagement they think are missing then share with the class.
drafts aloud and provide/ receive feedback and progress in the moment. The ELO 6 focus Share another version of the story with the class’s
on elements of grammar and sentence of observations is organisation, language use, added details and schedule opportunities for
fluency such as: vocabulary, and sentence fluency. learners to tell which version is better and why.
- use of simple verb tenses Present another bare story and engage learners in
- comparative and superlative Continuously observe the revised work to see if group work to revise by adding details. E.g.
adjectives and adverbs, the suggested improvements have been
- form and use possessives. implemented effectively. Monitor how the I went to Dominica to enjoy the Independence
- subject and verb agreement revisions have enhanced the overall quality of celebrations. We went to the music festival.
- meaningful use of simple, compound, the work. The following observation models Although it rained a lot, it was fun.
and complex sentence patterns provides teachers and learners with a guide to
meaningfully writing progress throughout the writing Give guiding questions to learners e.g. Who went
- determining complete and project. with you? What other activities did you participate
incomplete sentences in? What did you do for fun?
Stages of Writing: Provide opportunities for learners to use a variety
6.15 Begin to use a simple digital grammar of other media to enhance their writing (drawing,
checker. computer graphics and drawing programs)
Write and represent to develop language Write and represent to develop language use when
use when revising written drafts (voice) revising written drafts (vocabulary)
102
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
6.16 Begin to notice how favourite authors
use language and why it is engaging.
Note - Throughout the year, provide
6.17 Experiment with a variety of writing
opportunities for learners to enhance their writing
styles to develop a sense of authorship.
by exploring Standard English and Home
Language words and phrases that add depth and
6.18 Experiment with writing from another
clarity to their pieces: e.g., strong verbs, vivid
perspective (an animal, an alien, etc.).
adjectives, adverbs etc. and figurative language:
similes, metaphors, personification, antonyms,
6.19 Experiment with character, dialogue and
synonyms, etc.
descriptions of actions, thoughts, and
feelings to fully develop character.
Choosing the right word! (SCO 6.7, 6.8, 6.9,
6.11)
6.19 Experiment with real or imagined
Present a sentence on the board using an overused
experiences or events using descriptive
word e.g., Mother wore a nice dress to the party.
details and intentional sequences of event.
Encourage learners to write down any words or
ideas that come to mind when they think of the
word ‘nice”.
Observe learners as they pair up and use
dictionaries, thesaurus or online resources to assist
them.
Present a passage with overused words and
encourage learners to supply more effective
alternatives.
Example of a passage:
There was a nice little girl named Lily. She had a
https://www.readingrockets.org/topics/assess
nice, fluffy cat named Whiskers. Lily lived in a nice
ment-and-evaluation/articles/simple-ways-
house with a nice garden. At home, she always
assess-writing-skills-students-learning
enjoyed nice meals with her nice family. Then,
when she went to school, she would meet her nice
Sample observation of paragraph writing
friends with whom she would play nice games
103
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
during recess. Lily was very grateful for all the nice
things in her life.
Revised piece 1:
There was a lovely little girl named Lily. She had a
friendly, fluffy cat named Whiskers. Lily lived in an
attractive house with a beautiful garden. At home,
she always enjoyed delicious meals with her loving
family. Then, when she went to school, she would
meet her kind friends with whom she would play
exciting games during recess. Lily was very grateful
for all the wonderful things in her life.
After this shared activity, learners return to their
writing to search for words that could be changed
to improve the descriptions.
Revised piece 2:
As a class, rewrite the paragraph above using the
vocabulary, phrasing, and expression from a Home
Language.
After this shared activity, learners return to their
writing and change some words and phrases to
Home Language. After this experience, students
discuss the purpose and time to use Standard
English and the time to use Home Language(s)
https://www.readingrockets.org/topics/assess
ment-and-evaluation/articles/simple-ways-
assess-writing-skills-students-learning INTEGRATING THE SUBJECTS:
Provide opportunities for learners to research the
history of words or phrases commonly used in
Home Language.
104
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
SELF-ASSESSMENT What’s on that wall? (SCO 6.7, 6.12)
Use Rubric/Checklists to:
Self Check
I have read my writing to myself
I have made some changes
The changes I made are _____________
Comments __________
Rubric
Display a word wall in the classroom where you
Create a rubric based on the ARMS process
can add new, interesting, words and phrases and
below
colloquial-based words. Encourage learners to
A Didn’t Not Yes
search online or through a digital thesaurus for
Add or need to sure
alternate choices in vocabulary. During writing,
remove
learners refer to the word wall when revising to
R
enhance or correct their vocabulary choices.
Remove
M
Replace overused or misused words with more
Move
colourful words e.g.
S
Synonyms for “brave”: courageous, bold, valiant
Substitute Synonyms for ‘walk: stride, wander, hike, stroll
NOTE: when possible, use an image of the noun,
verb, adjective, or adverb. These visual cues not
only provide differentiation, but they also help to
make new vocabulary come alive.
Illustrated Vocabulary Journals (SCO
6.7,6.7,6.9)
Learners create paper-based or digital vocabulary
journals using words, phrases and illustrations
learners come across while they read that they can
use to enhance their writing.
105
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
readwritethink.com
Provide learners with a set of reflection
questions (see below) to consider after
completing their writing. Examples of
reflection questions could be "What do you
think is the strongest part of your writing?" or
"What areas do you need to focus on for
improvement?" or “What changes have I made
that make the writing better?”
vocabularyjournal.com
Good writers show more than tell! (SCO
6.7,6.8, 6.9)
Present learners with simple narrative sentences
that lack vividness. Show learners how to utilize
figurative expressions, and sensory details and
actions to revise these sentences by writing “show
and not tell” sentences/paragraphs.
Show them that their writing is more interesting
and engaging when they show how the character
feels through their actions than to simply tell what
they do.
Example of “Show, Don’t Tell” sentences:
checklistwriting.com Tell: Mary had been crying.
Share model examples of strong writing with Show: Mary’s eyes were red and puffy. Her nose
learners, along with explanations of why they was slightly swollen, and dried teardrops stained
are effective. This allows learners to compare her cheeks.
their own work to the model examples and Group Activity -Revise these telling sentences
identify areas where they can improve. into showing sentences.
Encourage the use of figurative language (similes,
PEER ASSESSMENT metaphors, personification, and alliteration).
The lady was old.
106
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Peer-Revision partnerships: Pair learners with When the light went out the girls were scared.
peer-revising partners within the class or buddy It was a rainy day.
up with another class (or grade) for peer Learners work independently and then share their
reviews. Peers review each other’s work with sentences with the class for feedback.
the use of specific checklists or rubrics. This
will foster a sense of “supportive author Emoji vocabulary SCO 6.9,6.10,6.11,6.12
communities”. Encourage learners to use Demonstrate how to search for emojis or clipart
compliments, suggestions, and corrections to images. Choose one emoji and ask for words to
help their partner improve their pieces. describe the emotion or action.
Observe how learners incorporate feedback to
improve their writing
PRODUCT
CBC.com
Writing portfolios: At the beginning of each
term, Learners develop portfolios to keep
brainstorms, drafts, revisions, and final copies. https://www.shutterstock.com/image-vector/kids-
Teacher comments or opinions of these pieces chores-clipart-collection-daily-routine-2330567709
would be attached to each draft.
Portfolios help to monitor the development of
the learners’ writing over time and would Write and represent to develop language use when
enable them to make necessary improvements revising written drafts (grammar and sentence
or revisions to their writing. fluency).
107
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Grammar provides a framework to ensure that
each sentence conveys a clear and specific meaning.
Using the grammar of formal and informal
language, writing is not only interesting and
engaging but also accurate and effective.
Subject verb agreement (SCO 6.14). Review the
terms subject and verb and rules of how the
subject and the verb must agree. Throughout the
year, as each verb is discussed, prepare a sample
illustration such as:
grammarmonster.com
Present sentences and allow learners to revise in
groups.
● My friend have spoken to me yesterday.
108
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● The dog are chasing the cat down the
street.
● We was going to the beach and the river
after cleaning.
After this group practice, instruct learners to check
their writing for subject verb agreement. If an error
is observed, ask the learner to read the sentence to
you and discuss the error and how to correct.
Sentence Variety is the spice of life (SCO 6.13,
6.14, 6.15)
Remind learners that their writing
needs to have sentences of
various lengths, patterns and
rhythms that will help their
writing flow and sound better to
the reader. Begin with a simple sentence My cat’s
name is Ginger and use words and phrases to add
information, mood, and imagery.
My_______ cat’s name is Ginger. (ask for
possibilities to fill in the blank)
e.g., My new cat’s name is Ginger.
My new cat’s name is Ginger ____ (choose from
and or but) then complete the sentence.
Repeat the activity above two or three more times,
each time beginning with the sentence My cat’s
name is Ginger.
After this group activity, learners choose a sentence
from their draft to revise.
109
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Repeat this activity regularly, beginning with a new
simple sentence each time.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS:
Post an interesting sentence from the book or
poem being read aloud to the class or a song the
class knows. “The majestic elephant trampled the
grass as he crossed through the meadow to the
sparkling water hole in the distance.” Read the
sentence aloud and ask , “why didn’t the author
just write “The elephant went to the water hole”
After discussions, share ideas about the impact of
various word choices (trampled, through the
meadow, sparkling, etc.)
Guiding Our Writing with Word Choice and
Sentence Fluency (SCO 6.12, 6.13)
Observe learners and provide support as they work
in groups to revise a piece for sentence fluency
using nouns, transitions, and verbs.
e.g., I woke up in the morning. I ate breakfast. I
went to school. I went to lunch. I had a hotdog. I
went home early. I went to dinner.
Initiate discussion by asking questions such as:
How does the writing sound? Why do you say so?
Do the sentences begin in different ways?
Do they flow smoothly from one to another?
Are there sufficient details in the sentences?
Observe and support learners as they revise and
take anecdotal notes to give feedback.
110
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Sample revised piece
In the morning, I woke up and had breakfast
before heading to school. During lunchtime, I
enjoyed a hotdog. After school I was feeling tired,
so I went home early. Later in the evening, I went
to dinner with my family.
Bits and pieces need help. (SCO 6.13) -
Conduct mini lessons on how “bits and pieces” of
sentences don’t provide enough information.
Errors of fragments and run on sentences in
learners' writing.
Teach learners to read sentences aloud and listen to
the flow and rhythm and to identify what
information is missing. e.g.
● on the beach on Saturday
● the big cats
● after the rain stops
Engage learners in conversations about these bits
and pieces and introduce the term “sentence
fragments” Remind learners to search for “bits and
pieces” in their drafts and revise:
-a clear subject
-a clear action
Reflection - encourage learners to read aloud the
revised piece then have them share what they have
learnt as the revised.
Write and represent to develop language use
when revising written drafts (voice)
111
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Writing With My Voice (SCO
6.16, 6.71,6.18)
Voice adds personality in writing.
It brings words to life and
connects the writer and the reader.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS: As
you Read aloud the poem below learners listen and
then share ideas about the tone, expression, and
emotions conveyed through the author's voice.
Question learners - How does the author make you
feel? Why do you say so?
Project the poem so all can see. Read Aloud again.
Using think-pair share, learners identify words that
express the author's feelings based on the tone of
the poem- e.g., happy, joyful, excited, satisfied etc.
112
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
In the Caribbean where sandy beaches meet the
land,
We have lots of fun leaving tracks in the sand
Palm trees sway, oh what a sight,
Underneath the golden sunlight.
Crabs scamper along the shore,
The ocean waves, they crash and roar,
Jump in the water, take a dip,
Feel the coolness upon your fingertips.
Tropical fruits, oh so delicious,
Bananas, mangoes, oh how nutritious,
Sip coconut water from a fresh green nut,
Taste the flavors oh what a glut!
The Caribbean, a paradise to explore
With treasures and wonders to adore
Author unknown
Words can make me smile, frown, laugh, and
wonder (SCO 6.16.6.17,6.18)
Present some ideas and have learners choose an
audience and write a few sentences to show their
feelings and emotions.
Ideas
● You lost your pet
● It is raining and you can't go to school
● You got a present you always wanted
● People are throwing garbage all over the
community
After this practice session, learners review their
draft and adjust and develop their voice as an
author. Did I write about an audience?
Can the reader tell how I feel about my topic?
113
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Does this sound like me?
Writing from different
perspectives
The many faces of a writer!
(SCO 6.17, 6.18,6.19):
Share examples of writing from the
point of view or perspectives of different
characters/viewpoints. For example: display this
image and imagine what’s being said when “One
old shoe speaks to another”.
BritishGQ.com
Describe yourself. What have you been doing? Was
it fun? How would the world look from your new
point of view? What would make the world better
for you? What are your plans for tomorrow? etc.
Example of writing from the perspective of two
shoes
Scarlet, the high heel shoe said to Turner, the beat-
up sneaker. “My life is so busy I have so many
parties to attend. You couldn’t possibly
understand.”
Turner responds, “Just because you are fancy
doesn’t make you better than me. My life has been
114
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
hard. My owner always wears me in the dirt and
mud. I bet no one wears you out in the rain.”
Character sketches (SCO 6.17, 6.1,6.198)
Use Shared Writing time to co-create character
sketches for selected characters from texts/stories/
poems that the learners are familiar with. Then
encourage learners to write vivid descriptions of
imaginary or real characters or of different
characters from stories they have written or
drafted.
Same story; different voice: (SCO 6.17,
6.18,6.19):
INTEGRATING THE STRANDS:
As you read aloud
a passage, review
the basic structure
of the plot.
Cultivating critical readers.com
Explore plots of local stories or poems (Then
through shared writing, create alternate plots from
the perspectives/experiences of characters (e.g.,
Re-write Little Red Riding Hood from the
perspective of the wolf). As learners revise their
writing, provide opportunities to conference with
peers and share ideas about possibilities for
different settings, problems, events, etc. Learners
115
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
then decide if or when to use the suggestions to
strengthen their writing.
Alternate endings (SCO 6.15, 6.17):
Prompt learners to share alternate or possible
endings to given fiction or nonfiction scenarios,
incomplete stories, or current events. Use shared
writing to model a good example of such an
ending. Then instruct learners to write an extended
or alternate ending that explains or continues to
develop events after the main plot has ended. (It
can be a progression in the story’s timeline, a
twisted ending, or a change in perspective). After
this group lesson, advise learners to review their
writing with peers and think about alternate
endings. During this collaboration, learners may
wish to dramatize alternate endings for the writing.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS: The
Revising process facilitates the braiding of Writing
and Representing with both Listening and Speaking
and Reading and Viewing. During the revising
process, through shared writing, use of models,
read alouds, and revision circles, learners can work
collaboratively to improve their writing.
Reading & Viewing as well as Listening & Speaking
can be braided with Writing & Representing
through the use of dramatizations.
116
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
INTEGRATING SUBJECTS:
Presentation Revisions: Encourage students to
revise their scientific presentations or social studies
projects by incorporating effective speaking and
visual aids to enhance their communication of key
concepts or historical themes.
Historical Narratives: In social studies, students can
revise their historical narratives by incorporating
visual representations or multimedia elements, such
as maps, timelines, or images, to enhance the
storytelling and deepen the understanding of
historical events.
Additional Resources and Materials
In Essential Learning Outcome 6 learners will revise the organization and language use in drafted writing or representation, collaboratively
and independently, for a variety of purposes and audiences
Revision
This link provides information about revision as a classroom strategy, why it is necessary to teach revising and how to teach it. A video is also
included. It demonstrates students adding details to their writing.
https://www.readingrockets.org/classroom/classroom-strategies/revision
The link below provides seventeen (17) revision strategies.
https://www.tckpublishing.com/17-powerful-strategies-for-revising-your-writing/
The following is a YouTube video about revising:
https://youtu.be/QPDoYG3296k
Word Usage
Students frequently struggle with limited vocabulary when writing and usually overuse words. Here is a list of synonyms for the word ‘nice’.
https://www.wordhippo.com/what-is/another-word-for/nice.html
117
Vocabulary: http://www.teachhub.com/teaching-strategies-5-ideas-instructing-vocabulary
Trait Based Mini Lesson for Teaching Writing in Grades 2-4 Megan S. Sloan)
Spark learners’ creativity by helping them imagine how to personify objects. For example, would a pen complain about standing on its nose to write?
Would a boot complain about trudging through mud ? Might an envelope hurt when you tear it open? Would water in an ice-cube tray shiver when it
goes in the freezer?
Genre Study (Poetry):
The site below will guide your students into the world of poetry using this easy-to-follow format poem process. Worksheets for a variety of poems
are available.
https://www.commackschools.org/Downloads/Poetry%20workbook.pdf
How to Write a Limerick
To write a limerick, one must follow the rhyme scheme of AABBA. This means that the end of the "A" lines (lines one, two, and five) must rhyme
with each other and the end of the "B" lines (lines three and four) must rhyme with one another. See the website below for more details.
https://poetry4kids.com/lessons/how-to-write-a-limerick/
Examples of Limerick
Limericks are short, humorous verses that are usually nonsensical and silly. They are made up of five lines, rhyming AABBA. Here is an example of a
limerick, followed by two websites that provide more examples.
There was a young woman named Bright,
Whose speed was much faster than light.
She set out one day,
In a relative way,
And returned on the previous night. (From https://parade.com/1249429/marynliles/limericks/)
https://www.rd.com/list/limericks-for-kids/
https://www.weareteachers.com/limericks-for-kids/
118
ESSENTIAL LEARNING OUTCOME 7 – Writing and Representing
Introduction to the Strand: Language is the foundation of communication and the primary instrument of thought. The study of Language Arts
provides access to multiple and interrelated oral, aural, written, and visual ways of representing, exploring, problem solving, communicating, and
sharing meaning. Through listening, speaking, writing, representing, reading, and viewing a wide range of text and text form, the learner continues to
develop an awareness of culture, personal identity, and the strategies needed to participate, communicate, and reflect critically on thought and action.
Strand: Writing and Representing provides learners with the strategies and skills to communicate with their peers and other meaningful audiences
within and beyond their community using paper and digital formats. The process of writing includes planning, organizing, revising, refining, and
sharing feedback. Throughout this process, ongoing problem solving and critical thinking strategies, applicable to subject areas and to life develop.
Grade Level Expectations: Write for pleasure and personal growth
choose topics of personal interest to share
use the writing of favourite authors as models for their own writing
reflect on and identify their strengths as writers, areas for improvement and the strategies they found most helpful at different stages in the
writing process
Engage in the writing process
state the purpose and write for a variety of purposes including self, to explain, to describe, to report, to write about real or imagined experiences
generate, gather, and organize ideas and information to write for intended purposes and audience
use editing, proofreading, and publishing skills and strategies and knowledge of language conventions to correct errors, refine expression and
present their work effectively
use print and technological resources for locating information
begin to use a variety of presentation style elements including print, script, fonts, graphics, and layout
Explore language structures
organize writing into paragraphs
apply selected text types previously studied
make decisions about when casual or formal language is required and apply those language structures
monitor writing more independently to revise and edit vocabulary, sentence fluency, voice and grammar
Explore word solving
select words for their appropriateness and exactness in conveying intended meanings
write legibly
monitor writing more independently to edit spelling.
119
Essential Learning Outcome 7: Learners will use their knowledge of spoken language, written language and writing conventions to refine the
precision and enhance the meaning and clarity of their written work.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Formative assessment of ELO 7 focuses on The focus of ELO 7 is on the conventions of
By the end of Grade 3, learners will: determining what the learner has achieved in writing. Lessons in spelling, capitalisation,
spelling, punctuation, and presentation; this handwriting, and presentation are taught and
Develop and make use of the writing assessment information is the foundation on practiced.
conventions to enhance the meaning which to plan next steps lessons. For
and clarity of their written work with information about the expectations for spelling Develop and make use of the writing
increased attention to develop in Grade 3, visit page 4 of conventions to enhance the meaning and
spelling conventions https://curriculum.novascotia.ca/sites/default/ clarity of their written work with increased
files/documents/resource- attention to develop spelling conventions
7.1 Continue to develop spelling accuracy files/Phonological%20Awareness%20and%20P
and automaticity. honics%20Instruction%20in%20a%20Balanced
%20Literacy%20Program.pdf
7.2 Use temporary (or attempted) spelling
with an increasing knowledge of spelling
patterns of language(s) in common use. NOTE: The OHPC ensures that learners engage in
meaningful use of Language Arts Strategies. Rather
than memorising words for weekly tests, the focus
7.3 Continue to refine the use spelling is on learning about and using the spelling rules in
patterns and generalizations such as: authentic text. For suggestions about which
- phonetic position-based spellings spelling patterns to focus on in Grade 3, visit page 4
(beginning, middle and ending of
sounds)
- rhyming word families https://curriculum.novascotia.ca/sites/default/files/
- syllable patterns documents/resource-
- meaningful use of affixes and root files/Phonological%20Awareness%20and%20Pho
words nics%20Instruction%20in%20a%20Balanced%20
- knowledge of some irregularly Literacy%20Program.pdf
spelled words
Each Inclusive Assessment Strategy below is
designed to increase student independence.
120
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
- use frequently confused words (e.g.,
to/too/two; there/their) with
increased accuracy. CONVERSATIONS
- regular and some irregular ending
rules Check Ins after the Mini Lesson
After each mini lesson at the beginning of the
7.4 Consult reference materials, including writing session, have a conversation with a few
paper based, digital dictionaries and spell learners each day to ensure they are using the
check, to monitor and correct spellings. lesson to inform their writing. Keep notes of
progress in the Observation of Student Learning
7.5 Use technology to produce and publish Journal.
writing (using keyboarding skills) as well as
to interact and collaborate with others.
Apply strategies for editing and presenting One-on-one conferences to build
during the writing process. independent monitoring of spelling
Schedule conferences with individual students
7.6 Engage in the editing process by to discuss their use of spelling conventions. Do
completing a close read of revised draft. not point out spelling errors - ask the learner to
Sample active spelling lessons are available at
review their writing and search for words they
https://www.yourdictionary.com/articles/teac
Write and represent to develop feel are correct, almost correct, and probably
hing-spelling-3rd-grade-fun
punctuation conventions to enhance the incorrect.
meaning and clarity of their written As the learner shares their findings, ask:
Can you see the spelling patterns?
work. How do you know this is correct, almost
(SCO:7.1,7.2,7.3, 7.6, )
correct, or probably incorrect?
Invite the learners to scrutinize a sample piece of
7.7 Demonstrate increased understanding For partially correct or incorrect words, ask:
writing and make note of words that are correct and
of the purpose and meaningful use of Which part of this word is correct?
misspelled. Group words based on patterns and
capitals and punctuation (and variations of Which part is incorrect?
conduct mini lessons focusing on each pattern.
punctuation among English and local How can you fix the incorrect part?
Then, encourage learners to create personal spelling
languages) NOTE: focus on 2-3 incorrect words per
notebooks with sample words that match a pattern
- capitals for sentence beginnings, session.
and those that don’t match a pattern. Spelling notes
names, titles, etc. This process allows you to provide personalized
become a reference as the learning is writing.
feedback and support their editing process.
spellwizards.com
121
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
- punctuation as full stops, Watch that Wall! (SCO 7.1, 7.2, 7.3):
exclamation marks and question Peers may discuss each other's writing using the Create a word of words frequently misspelled.
marks same process. Engage learners to peer edit for spelling of a piece
- punctuation as beginning use of of their writing and use the word wall to correct the
commas and colon to begin a list OBSERVATION words.
Teach the spelling of new words by presenting
Write and represent to develop Use a checklist or rubric to observe learners’ them embedded in a sentence, paragraph, or poem.
presentation formats to enhance the writing to see if it reflects accurate punctuation Demonstrate or share ideas about spelling strategies
meaning and clarity of their written and spelling. If an error is observed, place a dot such as making an analogy, decoding words slowly,
work. in the margin. The learner notices the dot, using a dictionary and online spell check tools
searches the line of the error and attempts a
7.8 Further develop accuracy and neatness correction. Spelling tricks (SCO 7.1,7.2,7.3)
in handwritten work. Use mnemonic devices, such as small words in big
Create a blank template, such as the example words, acronyms, catchy phrases, or letter chants to
7.9 Create presentations of stories and below to review a learner’s conversations help learners remember the spelling of challenging
reports in various paper based or digital (spelling, punctuation, capitalisation, and words.
formats that are engaging to the reader. presentation)
Examples: Teacher shares with learners e.g., to spell
7.10 Demonstrate beginning use of fonts, Convention Accomplishments Not Yet tomorrow - Tom -or- row,
graphics, letter size, spacing etc. to express because – clap the letters in a rhythmic sequence
their thoughts and engage the reader. spelling dessert / desert – a dessert has lots of calories, so it
capitalization needed an extra s; desert is so dry it lost an s
punctuation Schedule opportunities for learners to share their
presentation strategies for learning tricky words with each other -
(think-pair-share) from their knowledge.
The example below provides teachers with a
sample paragraph and suggestions for the type Spell Check (SCO 7.4,7.5 )
of information they will look for to record in Share examples of how to use a dictionary or digital
each cell. spell check. Dictionary hunts include not only the
requested word, but variations of the word. These
variations provide opportunities for learners to
122
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
observe how affixes change the meaning and
sometimes the spelling of the word.
Making words (SCO7.1-7.6)
Provide each learner with a selection of letters
chosen to make a word. Use a series of instructions
that encourage the learner to use their knowledge of
letter pattern to add and take away letters to create
the “mystery word”. For example:
Letters: p e l a p
- -make the word lap
- -rearrange the letters to make pal
- add a letter the make the word pale
- mix up the letters and make the word app
- add the last two letter to make the mystery
word
https://www.readingrockets.org/topics/assess - describe (or draw a picture) what the
ment-and-evaluation/articles/simple-ways- mystery word looks like
assess-writing-skills-students-learning https://www.learningforjustice.org/classroom-
resources/teaching-strategies/word-work/making-
words
Self Assessment
Write and represent to develop punctuation
Provide learners with a COPS Editing checklist conventions to enhance the meaning and clarity
and inform them that during the editing stage, of their written work.
this is the information you will be looking for.
Before work is submitted, learners check their The drama of punctuation: (SCO: 7.7)
own work using a COPS checklist.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS: Share
read a selection of text that combines a variety of
examples of punctuation. Throughout the shared
reading, pay particular attention to the punctuation
123
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
and dramatise with zest! Encourage learners to read
aloud their own writing to note where punctuation
should be.
Visit
http://www.teachingheart.net/readerstheater.htm
for Readers Theatre that includes opportunities to
read punctuated text with expression.
Read the sign (SCO 7.7)
Use an anchor chart showing and explaining the
editing marks. Model editing a piece of writing
whilst learners observe.
printablepdfs.com
Self assessment
Have learners edit their writing using an editing
checklist for presentation:
● Have I included a title?
● Is my handwriting (or fonts) legible?
● Are the illustrations or visuals
easyteacherworksheet.com
appropriately placed?
● Is my name on the paper? Present learners with their pieces of writing with
editing marks and allow them to make the necessary
Peer revising - Encourage learners to exchange corrections using the editing chart.
their writing with a peer and provide
constructive feedback. Teach them how to give
124
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
specific suggestions for improvement and how
to receive feedback gracefully.
The music of punctuation (SCO 7.7 )
1. Peer Editing: Peers can exchange their Visit
writing and provide feedback to each https://www.ellenjmchenry.com/homeschool-
other about what was completed well freedownloads/languagearts-
and perhaps a suggestion to enhance the games/documents/PunctuationTheater.pdf
writing (see sample below). for an intriguing idea to make punctuation come
2. Presentations or Readings: Peers may alive through sound. For example:
wish to read aloud their pieces or display Period: one clap
them on a screen. This allows peers to Comma: one cluck of tongue
share their work with a larger group and Exclamation point: one stamp on floor
receive feedback and encouragement. Question mark: one raising of shoulders with a “huh?”
After practising as a class, learners share their
Partner Revision Checklist writing with a peer and read each punctuation mark
as a sound.
Title
Read it, then fix it! (SCO 7.7):
Self check
Read aloud some sentences and allow learners to
● I have read my writing to myself
listen carefully. (Teacher reads the sentences
● I have made at least one change
without making any stops).
The change I made was _______________
e.g.
Comments _________________________
We went to the park after school there were many people
playing games I played football with the boys
Partner check
● I told the writer what I liked
Afterwards, obtain feedback from learners by
● I asked questions
engaging them in conversations about how easy /
I suggested this change _______________
difficult it was to understand the passage. Display
Comments
the sentence and work together to add punctuation.
___________________________
Encourage learners to make corrections in pairs,
read new sentences aloud, and compare. Then, in
125
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
small groups, edit sample pieces. (Focus on capital
letters, commas, and full stops).
PRODUCT
Sample piece
Three possums escaped from the city zoo Tuesday morning the
possums took a taxi to the grocery store where they bought 12
bunches of ripe bananas then they walked to the park
downtown and spent the rest of the day swinging from tree
branches and entertaining people who passed by the three
creatures headed back to the zoo around dinnertime.
Throughout the writing process of
Proofreading (SCO 7.1 – 7.10)
brainstorming, draft, revising and editing,
Step by step: Demonstrate how to proofread in a
learners have kept copies of completed work in
systematic way. Encourage them to check for
their portfolios. This provides a record of
spelling mistakes, punctuation errors, grammar
progress throughout their writing project.
issues, and clarity of their ideas.
Revisit the portfolio periodically to assess the
writer's growth and development and provide
Encourage learners to work in pairs to proofread
the learner with feedback.
sentences and correct errors.
● Tom got a puppy for his birthday he was
very happy. (run on)
● The dog were jumping on the owner when
he walked into the yard. (subject/ verb
agreement)
● The big brown dog and the cat (fragment)
● I went two the zoo and i saw a large
elephant and a tiger. ( capitalization and
spelling)
Monitor and observe learners as they work and
provide extra support to those who need it
126
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
BRAIDING THE STRANDS
Articulate it - When reading aloud be sure to use
proper punctuation and emphasize their
importance. This will help students develop an ear
for correct punctuation usage. Reading is a great
way for learners to see punctuation being used
correctly in context. Encourage learners to read a
variety of texts and discuss the punctuation they
encounter.
Write and represent to develop presentation
formats to enhance the meaning and clarity of
their written work.
Publishing (SCO 7.11-7.13)
Share a range of published pieces of writing with
the class and point out the variety of:
● Covers
● Titles
● Fonts
● Illustrations
● Text features
● Etc.
Ask learners to work with a partner and to look
closely at the presentation style of at least 5 books,
stories, posters, or charts selected by the teacher.
127
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Use a checklist to guide learners. Engage learners in
a discussion on their observations.
Checklist
● Is there a title?
● Is the writing neat and tidy?
● Was the font choice interesting?
● Has the author used pictures/charts and
diagrams well?
Provide samples of well-edited writing and effective
presentations for learners to emulate.
Sharing
Model effective presentation skills for learners by
displaying and reading a sample of your own writing
to the class and discussing how choices re fonts,
titles, etc. were made.
After these demonstrations, learners review their
choice individually, make changes where necessary
and then share with a peer.
NOTE: regardless of the genre, remember that
writing can be shared in different forms and styles
e.g.
● Paragraphs
● Posters
● Booklets and leaflets
● Newspaper articles
● Class book
● Journals
● E-books
● Cards
Finished writing projects work can be shared via
128
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Bulletin board or display area in the
classroom to observe and discuss writing
● In a school magazine or newspaper
● Class blog or website
● Google classrooms
● Multimedia tool - padlet and flipgrid
● Videos and oral presentation such as read
aloud and readers theatre, coral speech,
monologue
● Through organized writing competitions
● Portfolio
Present your best work (SCO 7.11-7.13)
Encourage learners to consider the visual layout of
text (e.g., margins, headings, graphics, and
photographs) and other areas related to how the
writing is presented on the page. Promote the
utilization of these multimedia tools and apps for
publishing by enabling learners to incorporate
images, illustrations, and diagrams to enrich their
written work. For example:
Scratch
Storyjumper
Edublog
canvas
adobe
clip arts
digital pictures
Online Platforms: Utilize online platforms or blogs
to publish student writing, providing a wider
129
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
audience and the opportunity for feedback from
readers beyond the classroom.
Literary Magazines: Create a literary magazine
featuring student writing and artwork, providing an
opportunity for students to contribute and
showcase their work to a broader audience.
Collaboration with Local Newspapers or Magazines:
Explore opportunities for students to submit
articles, essays, or creative writing pieces to local
newspapers or magazines, giving them a real-world
publishing experience.
INTEGRATING SUBJECTS:
Ensure learners have opportunities throughout the
year to publish booklets of completed projects from
other subject areas such as Science, Social Studies,
Health and Wellness, Physical Education, etc.
In Essential Learning Outcome 7 Learners will use their knowledge of spoken language, written language and writing conventions to refine the
precision and enhance the meaning and clarity of their written work.
Additional Resources and Materials
Editing Tool: Teach only the editing symbols that correspond to the information that has been taught. For example, once a lesson on adjectives has
been taught, the carat can be introduced as an editing tool, “today, when I read your writing, if I notice that an (adjective, adverb, etc.) could be added,
I’ll put this mark ^. When you see a ^, think of a word that would improve the sentence.
130
https://cdnsm5-ss11.sharpschool.com/UserFiles/Servers/Server_7899567/File/Departments/Curriculum%20Instruction/Instruction/grades_3-
5_editing_symbols.pdf
https://owl.excelsior.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/EditingChecklist.pdf
Writing, Presentation and Publishing Apps from Playstore
Journey-Diary, Journal - an application that caters for journal writing and notetaking. It offers a variety of tools for the inclusion of photographs,
videos, and audios. Formatting tools such as paragraph styles, bold and italic text and other features are included.
Wattpad- Read & write stories - this application allows for the writing of original stories anytime and anywhere. Stories can be published to a global
community.
My Story Today - A place for the writing of stories on any device.
131
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.journey.app&pcampaignid=web_share
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=wp.wattpad&pcampaignid=web_share
https://mystory.today/
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Practicing Punctuation (SCO 7.10)
The teaching of punctuation can be a mundane and tedious task. As such, discovering engaging ways of teaching the conventions of punctuation and
providing practice are critical for both teachers and learners. The article below suggests engaging ways of providing punctuation practice to young
learners.
Simple Strategies for Hands-on Punctuation Practice:
1. Use Text…Messaging! - use online SMS generators to create text conversations. Turn the text messages into dialogues using correct
punctuation.
2. Incorporate movement with mixed-up sentences - Learners are given cut-up sentences and required to move around the room to put the
words into correct sequence with the relevant punctuation marks.
3. Use real world examples for editing practice - Learners make corrections to real-world punctuation errors from signs, posters, social media
posts, websites etc.
4. Explore how punctuation impacts meaning - Exploring how the use of punctuation marks or lack thereof impacts on the meaning of texts.
Explore the number of ways this sentence can be punctuated, each time with a different meaning:
“Look out! Bob said a car is coming!”
“Look out,” Bob said, “a car is coming!”
132
5. Create a game to practice punctuation - Using a modified die with punctuation marks on each face, learners roll it and then compose
sentences using the punctuation mark. This activity can be adapted to include individual and group practice.
https://www.differentiatedteaching.com/punctuation-activities/
Teaching and Assessing Spelling
In many classrooms, spelling is assessed but rarely taught. The articles below provide information on how to effectively teach and assess spelling.
https://www.literacyworldwide.org/docs/default-source/where-we-stand/ila-teaching-and-assessing-spelling.pdf
https://www.gov.nl.ca/education/files/k12_curriculum_documents_english_spellinghandbook_assess_eval.pdf
A New Model for the Teaching of High-Frequency Words
The article below describes how to “rethink” the teaching of high-frequency words.
https://www.readingrockets.org/node/30887
Literacy Development
Writing is connected to literacy enhancement- writing is an essential skill that can help children become stronger readers; it can provide the means to
enhance vocabulary, comprehension, and spelling abilities.
https://www.readingrockets.org/helping-all-readers/voices-experts/webcasts/teaching-writing
133
