June 2023
OHCP Grade One Social Studies Curriculum
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Historical and Cultural Thinking
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand that our celebrations help us build pride in our identity
Introduction to the Subject: Identifies the purpose and goals of the subject area with links to the Vision and the Essential Education
Competencies. Addresses the question: How are Elements of the Essential Education Competencies being addressed? Set out general
information on how teachers integrate relevant principles included in the Framework for learning, assessment and inclusion. (Specific
details are included below, relevant to the Specific Curriculum Outcomes
Strand (Topic) - Strand: Historical-Cultural Thinking
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand that our celebrations help us build pride in our identity.
Grade Level Expectations and/or Focus Questions:
1)What are celebrations?
2)What are examples of celebrations in families?
3)Why and when do we have celebrations in families?
4)What is meant by the terms pride and identity?
5) How do these celebrations help to build pride in our identity in our families?
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
K - State different forms of • Conversation: As students respond to • Oral Questioning, Visual Deduction or Visual Art and
celebrations that are practiced oral questions based on videos/ Cultural Inferences -
in families to build pride and pictures/items, are they able to show that
identity. they are aware of celebrations in their • Teachers show students videos/pictures/items that
families and community? highlight aspects of celebrations. E.g., birthdays, weddings,
cake, dance, christening/baptism, wakes, Christmas,
K - Identify aspects of culture Teachers make notes of students’ responses. Easter.
such as food, music, dance
that are relevant to • Product: Can students develop a page • Teachers probe students to share what these images have
celebrations in families. with relevant celebration vocabulary? Are in common, state the word ‘celebrations’ and then deduce
they able to read their page out loud? the meaning of celebration; and then make a list of family
celebrations that build pride and identity.
2 | Page
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
• Conversation: Based on the story, can
students define the term culture?
Story Telling
• Conversation: From viewing these
pictures and items, can students • Remind students that this unit is about looking at family
demonstrate that they know the foods, celebrations that are part of their culture. Help students
music and dance in family celebrations define ‘culture’ by sharing a short story of
that promote pride and identity? celebrations. Then ask the students to tell stories of
examples of their family culture.
• Product: Using pictures/items, can
students categorize cultural and non- • Read story, “My Two
cultural food, music and dance items? Grandads”https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GsTG_iutfEs.
• Product/ Observation: Can students • Students respond to oral questions about these stories
identify which foods, music or dances are (asked by the teacher).
reserved for special family celebrations?
• Picture Inferencing
Teachers take notes of students’ responses.
• Present several pictures/items of foods including those
common to their island (E.g., breadfruit, provisions, rice
and peas, mangoes, fish, stew, wild meat, sorrel); traditional
musical instruments (E.g., drums, steel pan, shak-shaks,
tambourine); traditional dance and song (E.g., maypole,
quadrille, folk songs) and link to the different celebrations
through conversation/discussion.
Question and Response
• Students share their thoughts about how the foods/dance/
music relate to cultural celebrations - as guided by teachers.
3 | Page
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
S - Demonstrate different • Conversation: Are students able to state Role Play
forms of celebration in the one reason why it is important to keep • Students view a video of various forms of celebrations in
family and explain the family traditions? the family.
importance of preserving
l ocal culture. • Product: Are students able to write or • Students discuss the video as guided by the teacher,
depict through drawing various forms of focusing on the celebrations and why they are important in
family celebrations? preserving local culture.
In groups, students role play aspects of these
• Product: Can students perform at least celebrations.
one verse of the folk song learnt. Assess
as a class or small group (Include dance
and music). Pop-up Books
• Create Pop-up Books re: Family Celebrations. The book
should include vocabulary and colourful images about the
foods/ dance / music that are part of family celebrations.
Each student can pick a term/concept and create one
page.
Glue the pages together to create a book for their class
library. The book can be a pop-up.
Read Aloud
• Once the book is compiled, students read the book out
loud to the class. The book is then placed in the classroom
library so students can read.
Modelling
• Students learn at least ONE simple folk song and ONE
traditional song from their country/community/family.
4 | Page
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
• Performance can be published on the school's social media
page/website.
V- Appreciate their cultural • Observation/ Conversation: Are Discussion
h eritage. students able to tell family traditions that • Discuss with the students how these celebrations reflect
are unique to them? their family traditions that are unique to them and reasons
why it is important for families to keep their traditions.
• Observation: During the gallery walk, do
students demonstrate an appreciation of
each other’s family cultural celebrations / Gallery Walk (Culminating Activity)
heritage traditions? • Students write or depict through drawing, reasons why it is
important to keep family traditions. These will be
displayed on the classroom walls and students will walk
through to observe and share.
Journaling (Write/Draw/Speak/ Create Video)
• Students are guided to speak, write or draw their likes and
dislikes about the celebrations.
For example:
I like ….
I do not like ….
I wish …...
Devices can also be used to complete this activity. Students
will respond using emojis.
• Students' responses will be displayed on smart boards, etc.
K - List religious and national • Observation: Four Corners As part of Four Corners
festivals celebrated by the the pre-assessment, the teacher can • Get all students involved by asking them to share their
family. observe the celebration choices that opinions on a statement on national and religious
students take part in, noting their different festivals through the “Four Corners” activity.
preferences.
5 | Page
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
• Conversation: What do students know Four Corners Activity
about the national and religious festivals • Teachers label each corner of the room with specific
and to what extent do they participate in statements relating to religious or national festivals
these? such as Easter, Independence, Christmas, Carnival.
E.g., My family celebrates Easter; My family celebrates
Christmas.
• Conversation: Students will be asked the • Students stand in the corner that best represents the
following: festival their family celebrates most.
1. What questions does this video raise • Students engage in conversation about the national and
in your mind? religious festivals that their families celebrate the most.
2. What do you like most about the
festivals? Video Analysis, Inferencing and Questioning
3. What don’t you like about the • Students watch a video of the local religious and
festivals shown? national festivals celebrated by families – E.g.,
4. Where could you find other Christmas, Easter, Carnival, La Rose Flower Festival,
information about festivals? Creole Day/Jouen Kweyol, Nine Mornings, National
Heroes’ Day.
• Product - Based on the video, can • Get students to fold a piece of paper in three parts.
students draw and label one to three
important expressions of traditions they • Based on the video, students will draw and label one to
observed? (E.g., music, colours, costumes three pictures of three important visuals they observed
etc.) in the video in which families express their traditions
through celebrations.
• Inferencing - In a whole group discussion, students
are asked to infer their likes and dislikes about festivals
celebrated by their families in the video and give
reasons to justify their responses using the
conversation questions.
6 | Page
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
S - Investigate and report • Conversation: Through the discussion, is Research and Report & Think-Pair-Share
how the family, school and it evident that students respect that other • Students are guided to state that families celebrate
nation celebrate various families may choose to celebrate different religious and national festivals; thus, it is
religious and national differently from their own? important to respect different views.
festivals.
• Observation: As teachers observe
students play the game, are they able to • Teacher creates an interview prompt to guide students
match the correct celebration with the to talk to /interview a family member or old person in
time of year it is celebrated? the community about a cultural practice /activity that
was done in their time and continues to happen today.
• Product: Do students’ posters reflect They share orally using Think-Pair-Share.
elements of celebrations that their families
celebrate?
• Students will be reminded of the importance of
• Product: Using matching items or similar respecting each other’s views.
assessment, are students able to
summarize how their family, school and
nation celebrate various religious and Games
national festivals? 1. Pass the Ball
• Teacher explains while modelling how the game is played.
• Students pass around a ball while music is playing. When
the music stops, whoever is holding the ball says one
thing about how his/her family celebrates a specific
religious or national festival.
2. Matching Game –
• Play a game that matches aspects of culture with the
season or time of year, E.g., Calypso – Carnival; Folk
song – Independence; Green Pigeon Peas - Christmas.
• A smart board, devices or pictures may be used.
7 | Page
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Poster Design & Presentation
• Students design and present a poster on a specific
religious or national event celebrated by their families.
Teacher evaluates using rubric.
V - Respect that families • Product: Do students’ reflections show Journaling
celebrate religious and respect for individual differences in family • Students state in writing/ orally one way they can show
national festivals in different celebrations? respect to people who celebrate religious and national
ways, and that the families festivals differently than they do.
may choose not to celebrate • Students can create video journals.
some or all of these
occasions.
K - Identify the national • Matching Game: (Pre & Post Definition of Terms
s ymbols of their country. Assessments): Can students match • Students look at a display of familiar signs and
names to the national symbols? symbols, E.g. - stop sign, traffic lights, emojis, ringing
of the bell, gestures; and state what they
represent. Students give other examples and what they
• Conversation: Can all students define the represent.
meaning of a symbol and share examples? • Students are guided to state that a symbol is something
that stands for or represents something else.
Are students able to identify at least 5 • Students view a display of national symbols - items/
national symbols - pictures /images, and/or videos.
1. bird • Students place name cards next to the correct
2. anthem symbols.
3. pledge • Students are guided by the teacher to construct the
4. flag definition of the term ‘national symbols. They learn
5. dish that the national symbols are unique to their country.
6. drink
S - Describe the national • Product: Wall Montage: Are students Paper Fold and Reveal (to establish national colours)
symbols through drawing, able to create models that use the national • Fold paper and reveal in parts to display national
colours? colours. (See Figure … for examples)
8 | Page
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
painting and /or other Students are guided to state that these are the national
expressions. • Conversation: Given simple scenarios, colours of the country.
are students able to distinguish between
respectful behaviours and disrespectful
behaviours to national symbols? Show and Tell
• Teacher models to the students how show and tell is
For example: The Independence ceremony conducted by displaying different national symbols and
has finished. Tom throws his flag on the talking about it (pictures/videos/items).
ground and stomps on it. Is he being
respectful? Why? What do you think he • Students are encouraged to bring symbols of their own
should have done? and talk briefly about it.
• Create Poster /Collage /Picture Book of national
symbols (Group activity)
Model Building & Display Corners /Wall Montage
• Students create models of national symbols using play
dough or other appropriate materials.
• Create Display Corners of national symbols and
facilitate students’ oral expressions through discussions
about the symbols.
Draw/Colour
• Students work in small groups to draw or colour the
national flag and other symbols.
Hand printed shirt
• In small groups, students create a hand stamped T-
shirt using colours of the national flag.
9 | Page
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
• National Colours Day / Rep Yo’ Colours Day-
• Students showcase national colours using clothing or
other items.
• Students are encouraged to showcase national colours
using clothing. (May use T-shirts and everyday wear)
V- Appreciate that their • Observation: Are students Modelling
national symbols are unique demonstrating respect for national • Students observe teachers as they model how to show
and special to their country symbols? respect for the national symbols, E.g., standing
and should be respected. correctly when the national anthem is being sung
(played), when repeating the pledge and caring for the
flag etc.
Demonstrate Respect for National Symbols
• Students practice showing respect for national
symbols.
• They are guided by teachers.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: (Links to professional sources that connect back to the Curriculum
and Assessment Principles of Learning and Principles of Assessment)
Printed materials
1. Pictures
2. Textbooks
3. Newspapers
Internet resources -
Folk Songs
1. http://tourism.gov.vc/tourism/index.php/svg-festivals/folk-songs - Provides lyrics and music to Vincention folk songs.
2. https://music.apple.com/us/album/traditional-st-lucia-folk-music-vol-3/1024228633 - Provides lyrics and music to St. Lucian
Folk Music
10 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
3. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9w1atvkVQnE - Provide lyrics and music to Dominican Folk song
4. https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL2kGl4P_Kr9kXQu2wB13jkiaZQDT78159 - Provide lyrics and music to Grenada Folk
song
National Anthems
1. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j-fV1oaP-yU - St. Vincent and the Grenadines
2. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JFtM4xZYa78 St. Lucia
3. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GmylDJ9Ad8U - Commonwealth of Dominica
4. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rcsktFQs-Qw - Grenada
National Symbols
1. Live worksheet
https://www.liveworksheets.com/worksheets/en/Social_Studies/National_Symbols/St._Lucia_National_Symbols_on1566653px
St. Lucia
2. National Symbols of St. Lucia by Miss Melisamcjh
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iqUCVOp0IM0&list=PL1H0vRnM-9lhJmNdmtB23cNFT0kGHsCyM St. Lucia
3. National Symbols - Government of the Commonwealth of Dominica Commonwealth of Dominica national symbols
4. http://foreign.gov.vc/foreign/index.php/the-national-flag - St. Vincent and the Grenadines national symbol
Celebrations and Festivals
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
• https://www.gov.vc/index.php/visitors/culture-festivals
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists (texts, family & community knowledge and resources, contextually
relevant professional web resources).
11 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
1. I am Special because! | Read with Akili and Me | Educational Cartoons for Preschoolers -
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dAmABKdj51w
2. Nursery Rhymes I am Special Songs with lyrics https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jc0m7bxZ0QA
3. How to make Kids Hand Printed T-Shirt Design https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oKZPGnngU3c
4. https://www.liveworksheets.com
5. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GsTG_iutfEs
6. How I became a Ducana by Mrs. Avelyn Gittens Theobalds (2020).
7. St. Vincent and the Grenadines National Symbols by Khaleil McInnis and Damian Ballantyne (2020).
8. Faces of St. Vincent and the Grenadines by Anna Warrican, Pearlina Carrington and Gaylene Wickham (2020).
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects
in the curriculum)
1. Language Arts -
• Reading
• Research - finding and collecting information.
• Presenting information in different form - oral and written expression,
• Listening and viewing
• Reporting
• Sequencing of information
2. Creative Arts -
• Drawing and colouring of symbols,
• Making models,
• T-Shirt painting,
• Performing folk song and other aspects of festivals/celebrations,
• Singing national anthem,
• Playing musical instruments,
• Dancing of traditional dance.
• Exhibiting students’ work,
12 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
• Dramatization/role playing.
3. Mathematics -
• ordering of colours on flags, dance steps
• Shapes on the national flag
• Shape of flag
4. Science -
• weather - cultural festivals, eg. rain dance; shapes; colours,
• sound of musical instruments (loud and soft)
• type of materials
Elements from Local Culture: (References that learners might know from their local environment)
1. Library/Museum/
2. Places of historical, cultural interest eg. Botanical Gardens, Petroglyph sites, buildings
3. National Archives
4. Vegetable market
5. Religious institutions
Local resource person (historian, cultural ambassador, elders of the community)
Resources for a learner who is struggling: (Links to earlier learning activities for similar knowledge, links to resources for special
education needs)
1. Multisensory instruction [i.e. drawing, painting, use of playdough] https://www.structural-learning.com/post/multisensory-
learning-in-the-classroom-a-teachers-guide
2. Multimedia instruction - videos
3. Mapping out ideas using pictures
13 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Civic Participation
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand that we have roles and responsibilities in our families, school, and community
Section 1: What are our roles and responsibilities in our Family?
Introduction to the Subject: to frame inquiry about roles and responsibilities in our families, school and community. Introduce children
to the broad notion of civic participation and how their actions at home and school are helpful forms of responsibility.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4mrE5zgEvt4&t=29
Focusing Questions:
What are our roles and responsibilities in our family, school and community?
What can we do to keep our class clean?
Why should we keep our environment clean and tidy?
Where should we put our garbage?
How do you feel when your environment is untidy?
Grade Level Expectations:
K - Understand the importance of keeping their home, school, and community tidy and clean.
S - Practice putting garbage and litter in trash cans at school and home.
V - Observe and appreciate places in their environment that are kept clean and tidy.
14 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
K-Understand the importance Observation: Are students able to identify • Students are shown two pictures - one of a clean
of keeping their home, which environment they would prefer and classroom, and one of an untidy and dirty classroom.
school, and community tidy give reasons why? They are asked to indicate which one they will prefer
and clean. to be in and why.
Conversation: Are students able to identify
S- Practice putting garbage and list things that can be done to make the • Invite students to discuss what they can do to make
and litter in trash cans at classroom and other places clean and tidy? the dirty classroom clean. (song “bits of paper”) Then
school and home. students are placed in groups and each group is given a
Conversation: Are students able to identify picture of a dirty house, playing field, beach (or other
V-Observe and appreciate reasons why we need to keep these places places in their environment). Ask students to
places in their environment clean and tidy? brainstorm ideas to clean that area, as well as how to
that are kept clean and tidy. keep that area clean.
Observation: Are students able to determine
which individuals are contributing to keeping • After group discussion students observe and discuss
the environment clean and tidy? following videos
Product: Do students’ sentence frames Cleanliness At Home | Now You Know Book C | Periwinkle
identify how they feel when their Cleanliness At School | Now You Know Book C | Periwinkle
environment is clean and when it is dirty? CLEANLINESS IN SCHOOL | KIDS KNOWLEDGE |
ENGLISH
Product: Do students’ posters correctly • Students and teacher hold whole class discussions
identify location of bins and sufficiently
about why it is important to keep their environment
encourage others to use them? clean and tidy.
Observation: Do students show a willingness
• Provide students with scenarios involving actions of
to participate in the clean-up campaigns and
individuals so that they can determine whether or not
monitor systems for their environment?
the individual is contributing to keeping the
environment clean and tidy or not. Students use
‘thumbs up’ or ‘thumbs down’ to indicate. (6-8)
Example of scenarios:
1. Johnny just sharpened his pencil and left the
shavings on his tabletop.
15 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
2. While flying kite John threw his snow ice bag
in the nearby bushes.
• Students complete sentence frames detailing how they
feel when their environment is clean and when it is
dirty.
(When my home is dirty, I feel_________)
When my classroom is clean, I feel _________)
• In groups students create and display posters
identifying locations of bins and encouraging others to
use bins correctly.
• Students and teachers host a clean-up campaign in an
area of the school.
• Students and teachers implement a “Cleanliness
Monitors” system where different students are
assigned to various areas of the school during break
and lunchtime to encourage others to keep the
environment clean and tidy.
16 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Civic Participation
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand that we have roles and responsibilities in our families, school, and community
Section 2: What are our roles and responsibilities in our extended Family?
Introduction to the Subject: Use focusing question What are our roles and responsibilities in our family and school? to frame inquiry
about roles and responsibilities in our families, school and community. Introduces children to the broad notion of civic participation and
how sharing by themselves and other members of their family are important and helpful forms of responsibility.
Strand (Topic): Civic Participation
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand that we have roles and responsibilities in our families, school, and community.
Focusing Question: What are our roles and responsibilities in our family and school?
Grade Level Expectations: K-Recognize that when everyone in our family shares and helps one another we all benefit.
S - List the ways that our siblings, parents, grandparents, and other relatives help us and vice versa.
V - Appreciate that helping other family members is important for our collective wellbeing.
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
K - Recognize that when Observation: Are students able to see how • Review the learning from the previous SCO in which
everyone in our family shares keeping their classroom and home tidy and they identified ways they help around their home and
and helps one another we all clean is a form of sharing and helping classroom to keep things tidy and clean. Introduce the
benefit. others? idea that they are now going to explore the importance
S - List the ways that our of sharing with others.
siblings, parents, Observation: Can the students identify
grandparents, and other examples of sharing that they do at home • Ask students to brainstorm some examples of sharing
relatives help us and vice and at school? that they do at school and at home. List these
versa. examples of the board and discuss them.
V - Appreciate that helping Product: Do students show how they share
other family members is with others? • Invite students to draw a picture that shows how they
important for our collective Observation: Can students write and read the share something with others in their home. Place these
wellbeing. words in their sentence frames and those of pictures on a bulletin board and help students
others? complete the following sentence frame about each of
their pictures. “At home I share __________”. Label
each child’s picture with their own sentence frames.
17 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
• Use this same approach to explore how other
members of their family such as parents, brothers and
sisters, cousins, uncles and aunts or grandparents share
with them and how this helps them. Have students
draw pictures of how these family members help them.
Place these pictures on a bulletin board and help
students complete the following sentence frame about
each of their pictures. “My __________ helps me to
________”. Label each child’s picture with their own
sentence frames. The teacher can also return to these
sentence frames for follow up at several times to help
Observation: Are students engaged in children reinforce vocabulary and concepts.
listening to the story?
Storyline Online - The Rainbow Fish
Conversation: Are students able to identify
why the sharing that the rainbow fish did is log on to the storylineonline site and share the Rainbow Fish
important for the well-being of self and with your students. Engage students in a discussion about how
other fish? the sharing by the rainbow fish helped the well-being of other
fish. The teacher can also discuss how the sharing affected the
Conversation: Are students able to identify
feelings of the Rainbow Fish.
that there are situations when sharing with
others is not appropriate?
Students could also be taught that sharing isn't just about
sharing your toys and belongings. Sharing is also about sharing
your thoughts, feelings and ideas with others. The teacher can
model examples of sharing of feelings, and how this can be
helpful for getting along. Eg. When students are feeling sad,
tired, hungry. A share chair can be a designated spot for
students to share their writing, or art with their classmates.
Students can also be taught that sharing is not always good.
Sometimes, sharing too much can be harmful. Examples
might be, sharing too much of their lunch and going hungry,
18 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
sharing too much information with strangers. Teachers can
help create a list of pros and cons about sharing with their
class to help students decide if it is best to share or not.
Song for Teaching children the importance of Sharing
https://youtu.be/gKv9KniC4uk
Civic Participation
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand that we have roles and responsibilities in our families, school, and community
Section 3: What are our roles and responsibilities in our Family and School?
Introduction to the Subject: Use focusing question What are our roles and responsibilities in our family and school? to frame inquiry
about roles and responsibilities in our families, school and community. Introduce children to the broad notion of civic participation and
how sharing by themselves and other members of their family are important and helpful forms of responsibility.
Strand (Topic): Civic Participation
Essential Learning Outcomes: To understand that we have roles and responsibilities in our families, school, and community.
Focusing Questions:
Who are the people (families? School and community) you can turn to when you need help?
Where can you find the people when you need help?
How do you know when you feel unsafe?
What can you do when you feel unsafe?
Grade Level Expectations:
K - Identify persons to turn to when they need help.
S - Communicate ways to express when they feel unsafe.
V - Appreciate feeling safe in their environment.
19 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
K - Identify persons to turn Conversation: Are students able to indicate • Introduce the lesson by asking Students to pair-share
to when they need help that they are feeling unsafe in a particular to answer the question, “What are some examples of
S -Communicate ways to situation? problems we might get help for?” Circulate among
express when they feel students during the pair-share and take note of
unsafe Observation: Are students able to identify students’ understandings of some of the situations
V -Appreciate feeling safe in the different individuals they can go to for they may feel unsafe. Ask students to share what they
their environment help? discussed with their partner and record their ideas on
the board.
Product: Are students able to identify a place
where they feel safe? • “Whom do you go to when you have a problem?” Ask
students to share their ideas. Expect examples such as
Conversation: Can students identify some of friends, family members, pastors, priests, police,
the situations where they may be unsafe or nurses, teachers, or siblings.
some situations where they may need help?
Observation: Are students able to work
cooperatively to complete role plays? • Students draw a picture depicting a place where they
feel safe or a place they can go to for help.
Conversation: Are students able to identify
and discuss ways to protect themselves?
• Discuss with students some ways to tell others that
they are feeling unsafe. Use the following sorts of
examples:
1. They are walking home, and other children
begin to tease or bully them.
2. They are playing with friends at school, and
someone touches them in an inappropriate
place.
3. There is a heavy downpour of rain, and they
are outside and do not have an umbrella or
raincoat.
20 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
4. They are walking along a busy road and need
to cross to the other side.
• Students are placed in groups to role play different
scenarios to depict how they can communicate that
they are unsafe or need help.
Protect Yourself Rules - Bullying Students look at video and
discuss ways to protect themselves.
Civic Participation
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand that we have roles and responsibilities in our families, school, and community
Section 4: Who are leaders and what is their role?
Introduction to the Subject:
Use focusing question What are our roles and responsibilities in our family and school? to frame inquiries about roles and responsibilities
in our families, school and community. Introduce children to the broad notion of civic participation and how their knowledge of leaders at
home, school and the community are helpful forms of responsibility.
Strand (Topic): Civic Participation
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand that we have roles and responsibilities in our families, school, and community.
Focusing Questions: What are our roles and responsibilities in our family and school?
1. Who is a leader?
2. Where can we find leaders?
3. What do leaders do?
4. What if we did not have leaders?
5. Why do we need leaders?
6. What qualities or character traits should a leader have?
7. In what ways can you be a leader?
Grade Level Expectations:
K - Understand what a leader is.
S - Identify leaders in their home, school, church, community, and nation.
21 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
V - Appreciate that leaders are an important part of our well-being.
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
K -Understand what a leader Observation: Introduce the lesson by asking, “Whom do you go to when
is. Are students able to identify who they can go you have a problem?”
S - Identify leaders in their to when they are faced with a challenge or
home, school, church, problem? Ask students to share their ideas. Expect examples such as
community, and nation friends, family members, pastors, priests, teachers, or siblings.
V- Appreciate that leaders are Conversation: Do students know when to
an important part of our well-ask for help? Explain to students that problems can arise in a family or
being. neighbourhood community just like they can in school. People
Observation: Are students able to choose the can ask others for help when they have a problem.
best person to help fix a problem?
People go to leaders for help fixing their problems.
Define the word leader. A leader is a person who is
responsible for guiding or directing a group.
Add the word leader to the social studies word wall.
Observation: Are students able to identify Students pair-share to answer the question, “What are some
pictures of leaders in the home, school, examples of problems we might get help for from leaders?”
community and the nation?
Circulate among students during the pair-share and take note
Conversation: Can students provide a of students’ understandings of some of the problems leaders
definition of who a leader is? might help them with, and how they too can play a part to
help resolve the issue with the leader.
Conversation: Are students able to suggest
other ways a leader can fix a problem?
Ask students to share what they discussed with their partner
and record their ideas on the board.
22 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Product: Are students able to recognize that Display images of leaders from their home, school, church,
they too play a part with the leader to help community, and nation or arrange online jigsaw puzzles of
fix a problem? well-known leaders (prime minister, principal…)
https://im-a-puzzle.com/make-puzzle
Product:
Do students’ drawings and sentences of Ask the students: – Do they look familiar? – Who are they?
leaders demonstrate their understanding of How do they know who they are?
who a leader is?
Explain that we are going to explore leadership traits of
community members. Remind them of the definition that: A
Conversation: Are students able to discuss leader is a person who a group of people follow or look up to.
the qualities or characteristics of a good
leader? Ask students why these people might be leaders.
Pose the question, “Why is it important to have good
community and government leaders?”
Conversation:
Are students able to demonstrate examples Asking them what makes these people helpful using examples
of problems that may arise at home, school such as honesty, caring, hard-working, wise, smart, or
and the community and how these problems generous.
can be addressed through the intervention of
a leader through role play? Discuss the idea that leaders can help solve problems and
support our well-being and safety.
Characteristics of a Good Leader
Read aloud of the story the “Little Red Hen.”
Have students identify the leader in the story, provide reasons
for their selection,
state whether the character was a good/bad leader and
provide reasons for stating good or bad, list the character traits
of the leader (graphic organization). State whether the
problem was handled appropriately or not. Give reasons.
23 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Draw a picture of a leader
What qualities does your leader have?
What important problems does this leader solve? (Accompany
drawing with a sentence stating the quality of the chosen
leader and the problem he/she solves. Example __________
is a ___________ leader. He/She helps
to________________ at home/school/community.
Show and tell - have students bring a picture of a leader and
tell the class about that leader.
Arrange students in groups to role play problems that may
arise in school, home and the community and the appropriate
leader is asked to help.
Civic Participation
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand that we have roles and responsibilities in our families, school, and community
Section 5: What are our roles and responsibilities in of adults?
Introduction to the Subject: Use focusing question What are our roles and responsibilities in our family and school? to frame inquiry
about roles and responsibilities in our families, school and community. Introduce children to the broad notion of civic participation and
how their knowledge of leaders at home, school and the community are helpful forms of responsibility.
Strand (Topic): Civic participation
24 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcomes: To understand that we have roles and responsibilities in our families, school and community.
Focusing Questions: What are our roles and responsibilities in our family and school?
1. Who are persons in authority?
2. How are manners important when interacting with adults?
3. What are some of the ways in which you respect persons in authority?
Grade Level Expectations:
K - Recognize the appropriate manners and behaviours towards adults in positions of authority.
S - Practice using proper manners when interacting with adults.
V - Respect persons in authority.
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
K-Recognize the appropriate Observation: • Ask students how they should react when the principal
manners and behaviours How do students react to the principal enters the classroom and why. Introduce the concept
towards adults in positions of entering the classroom? of authority to students.
authority.
S - Practice using proper Observation: Are children able to identify • Ask children who are the persons in authority in the
manners when interacting persons in authority in their home, school home, school and community.
with adults and community?
V - Respect persons in • Song: Who are the people in authority in your
authority Observation: Do student’s responses show neighbourhood.
that they understand persons in authority
and how they should react to them?
Observation: Do student’s responses show • Students brainstorm how they show manners and
an understanding of having manners for respect for persons in the home school and
persons at school? community.
25 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Product: Do the students' mobiles creatively • Students brainstorm some ways disrespect is shown-
display words used to show manners and crossing arms, rolling eyes, hair flip, slamming doors,
respect? sucking teeth, disobey.
Product: Do the students’ response on the
checklist show understanding of appropriate • Students role-play how they would respond to the
manners and respect? principal, class teacher, other teachers and staff
members, education officer, security officers, and their
peers.
The Manners Song
tune of Twinkle Twinkle Little Star
We say, "Thank you.” We say, "Please."
We don't interrupt or tease.
We don't argue. We don't fuss --
Listen when folks talk to us.
Share our toys and take our turn.
Manners are easy to learn.
• Students create mobiles with manners words from the
song: such as Please, Thank You, Listen, Share
•
Students respond to the good manners checklist.
DIRECTIONS: Put a checkmark next to each behavior that is
a way to show respect.
1. When asking for something say “please”
2. Not listening to others
26 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
3. When receiving something say “thank you”
4. Saying “Sir” or “Ma’am”
5. Do not interrupt grown-ups who are speaking to each
other unless it is an emergency.
6. If you need to get somebody’s attention right way, the
phrase “excuse me” is the politest way to do so.
7. Littering
8. When you have any doubt if you are allowed to do
something, ask permission of an adult.
9. Calling people names
10. When an adult asks you how you are, tell them, then
ask them how they are.
1. Not pitching in to help around the house.
2. When you have spent time at a friend’s house
remember to thank their parents for having you over
3. Not saying “please” and “thank you.”
4. Knock on closed doors and want to hear a response
before entering.
5. Not following rules
6. As you walk through a door, look to see if you can
hold it open for someone else.
7. Interrupting others when they are speaking.
8. Always offer to help others when there is something
to be done.
9. When an adult asks you for a favour, do it without
grumbling and with a smile.
10. When someone helps you say “thank you”
27 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Showing Respect: Respect means treating others with honor
and dignity. Treating people with respect is an important part
of maintaining relationships.
Read each scenario below. Then respond to the scenario by
showing respect.
1. Your mom asks you to take on a few chores around the
house.
________________________________________________
____________________________
2. You notice an elderly adult walking home from the store
with groceries.
________________________________________________
____________________________
3. An adult greets you at church and asks you how you are.
________________________________________________
____________________________
https://youtu.be/GOzrAK4gOSo
28 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Spatial Thinking
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand how we shape the local environment and the local environment shapes who we
are and how we live.
Section 1: What is a Neighbourhood?
Introduction to the Subject: Identifies purpose and goals of the subject area with links to the Vision and the Essential Education
Competencies. Addresses the question:
How are Elements of the Essential Education Competencies being addressed?
Set out general information about how teachers integrate relevant principles included in the Framework for learning, assessment and
inclusion. (Specific details are included below relevant to the Specific Curriculum Outcomes)
Strand (Topic): Identify as a Strand which may have a sub-component that will be reflected in the Specific Curriculum Outcomes
Spatial Thinking: My Home/Neighbourhood
Essential Learning Outcomes: To understand how we shape the local environment and the local environment shapes who we are and
how we live.
Focusing Questions:
What does it mean to live in a neighbourhood?
How would you describe where you live?
Grade Level Expectations:
K - Identify where your family lives.
S - Locate your home in relation to your closest neighbours.
V - Appreciate that your family lives in a neighbourhood.
29 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
K - Identify where your Conversation: Are students able to • Introduce the topic with this read aloud. (Stop at time stamp
family lives state where they live? Are students 2:54)
able to state their full address? https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cNYQUl3vxv0
• Engage students in a discussion about where they and their
Can students describe their home? families live.
Observation: What do you observe • Have students say where they live: their address, (in standard
in students’ drawings and ask them English, creole, informal language).
questions to identify what is missing
and what is included. • Have them describe where they live: type of home, do they
have a yard etc.
Conversation: Do students know • Have students draw a picture of their house.
S - Locate your home in who their neighbours are?
relation to your closest • Engage students in a discussion about who lives next to them.
neighbours. Observation: Are they able to Who lives to their left, their right, in font, behind or across
differentiate their homes from their from them.
neighbours’?
• Have students draw a picture of their closest neighbours’
homes.
V -Appreciate that your
family is part of a • Have students talk about and draw pictures of important
neighbourhood. places in their neighbourhood e.g., bridges, hills, rivers, stores,
Conversation: Can students identify trees, churches, and schools etc.
important places in their
neighbourhood? • Have students cut out the pictures and glue them together to
create a neighbourhood map. Connect the buildings and
Are students able to state why these places by drawing the roads and pathways they walk or ride in
places are important? their neighbourhood. Discuss with students what would be an
appropriate title for the map and have them write the title.
• Label the places they have drawn.
30 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Observation: Are students drawing
important buildings/places? • Ask students what places in the neighbourhood they like and
those they believe to be scary and explain why.
Observation: Are students labelling Have students make an oral presentation about their favourite
their drawings correctly? places in their neighbourhood and/or one or two scary places.
Conversation: Are students able to • Learn to sing the song, “Who are the people in your
identify an appropriate title? neighbourhood?”
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jwDq32MtOQU) Have
Product: Were students able to students name the people who live in their neighbourhood.
create a neighbourhood map?
Have students labelled the places in
their neighbourhood correctly?
Conversation: Are students able
to confidently talk about their
favourite place or a scary place in the
neighbourhood.
Observation: Are students able to
identify people in their
neighbourhood?
31 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Spatial Thinking
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand how we shape the local environment and the local environment shapes who we
are and how we live.
Section 2: How does where we live impact us?
Introduction to the Subject: Students will be introduced to experiences that help them begin to understand basic aspects of location
and other elements of their local environment and how they interact in and describe this environment. Students will engage in inquiry, to
question and find answers to how they shape the local environment and how the local environment shapes who they are and how they
live?
Strand (Topic): Spatial Thinking - Relative Location: Near and Far
Essential Learning Outcomes: To understand how we shape the local environment and the local environment shapes who we are and
how we live.
Focusing Question:
How can we give directions to a place if we do not have the exact/absolute location?
How does where we live impact the activities that our families engage in?
Grade Level Expectations:
K - Understand basic terms for relative location in your local environment such as near and far, next to, opposite, in front, and
behind.
S - Distinguish between and show near and far in your immediate environment.
V - Recognize the importance of being able to describe relative location for finding things and knowing your way around your
immediate environment.
V - Appreciate that relative location can influence activities that families engage in.
32 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
K - Identify basic terms to Assessment Near and far
describe relative location in Have students explain how they would give directions to
your local environment such Conversation: Do students use vocabulary the bathroom (or any other location in the school) to a
as near and far. related to relative location? Do students new student in the class. Take note of the various terms
understand what is meant by the term that are used. Introduce students to the term relative
S - Distinguish between and relative location? location.
show near and far in your
immediate environment. Conversation: Can students correctly Have students view the following video on relative
identify objects/people/places that are location.
near or far in relation to each other.
S - Use relative location to https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RcPP15JaW1w8
describe places in their Conversation: Can students name places Have each student give the location of their home in
neighbourhood. on their neighbourhood map that are near relation to the school.
and far from their home and other
V - Recognize the important places? Read Aloud Activity: Read a picture book and have
importance of being able to students identify whether objects/people/places in the
describe relative location for Observation: Are students able to identify story are near or far in relation to each other.
finding places and knowing places near and far in relation to other
your way around your places in their environment? Have students use the map previously drawn to identify
immediate environment places in their neighbourhood that are near and far from
Product: Are students able to draw and their home including their favourite and scary places and
label or make models of places near and important landmarks.
V - Appreciate that relative far from the school.
location can influence Take students on a tour in the environment and as they
activities that families engage Product: Can students correctly colour walk through have them identify places that are near the
in. code places on a map to show near and school as well as in relation to other buildings or things in
far? their environment.
Have students draw a map or make models of the school
Observation: Are students able to correctly environment, made from sand, play dough or blocks and
play the game by identifying objects that include places that are near and far from the school.
are near and far?
33 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Discuss signs that need to be used on the map as well as
symbols to represent significant landmarks in the school
Observation: Are students able to move and on the playground. Have students label the places on
about their room to demonstrate they their map.
understand the concept of relative
location? Note: Use maps whenever you can to identify where
important areas of the school and playground are
Observation: Do students role play located. Introduce the terms near and far as you show
activities that are related to places and locations of features on maps.
landmarks in their neighbourhood?
Observation - Are students able to relate
the activities that they participate into their Give students a map of a neighbourhood. Have students
immediate environment? colour the places on the map based on a code. Example,
colour the building near the school in blue. Colour a place
Conversation: Are students able to connect far from your home in red.
their lack of paricipation in certain
activities to their location? Have students play the game “I Spy with my little
eyes”. During each round, have students spy with their
Conversation- Do students demonstrate little eyes something that is near and in the other round,
understanding that distance limits the something that is far. For example, I spy with my little
activities their families can engage in? eyes something that is near which is round and green.
Teachers can play direction games with children during
transition times. For example, when it is five minutes
before lunch and clean up is complete, fill the time by
asking them to follow a series of quick directions like stand
behind your chair, stand near your friend, sit farther from
your friend, etc. As they become proficient at this game,
they will volunteer to call the directions. This is a good
game for physical education and during outdoor time too.
34 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Have students role play activities that their families are able
to engage in, in their immediate location. Activities can
include river limes, hiking, clean-up campaigns, picnics,
swimming, attending church, shopping etc.
Have students talk about activities their families are unable
to engage in because they live too far.
Spatial Thinking
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand how we shape the local environment and the local environment shapes who we
are and how we live.
Section 3: What is cardinal direction and how is it useful to me?
Introduction to the Subject: Students will be introduced to experiences that help them begin to understand basic aspects of location
and other elements of their local environment and how they interact in and describe this environment. Students will engage in inquiry to
question and find answers to how they shape the local environment and how the local environment shapes who they are and how they
live?
Strand (Topic): Spatial Thinking: Locating My Home: Cardinal Direction
Essential Learning Outcomes: To understand how we shape the local environment and the local environment shapes who we are and
how we live.
Focusing Question: What is cardinal direction?
How is cardinal direction useful in our lives?
Grade Level Expectations:
K - Name and illustrate the four cardinal directions.
35 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
S - Describe the location of your home using cardinal directions in relation to natural and built features in the community.
V - Appreciate the value of directions for finding your way from one location to another.
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
K - Name and illustrate the Observation: Are students able to identify The teacher introduces the idea that we will focus on how
four cardinal directions. the correct cardinal direction outside? we find our way around our school and neighbourhood.
Have students play the Game:
S - Describe the location of Observation: Are students able to
your home using cardinal correctly label the cardinal points on the “North- South-East- West! Choose the one you love the
directions in relation to map. best” The teacher then places the letters N, S, W, E on the
natural and built features in walls of the classroom.
the community. Product: Are students able to construct a
simple compass rose placing the cardinal Take students outside and have them stand in an open
V - Appreciate the value of points in the correct order. space with 4 items strategically positioned (items can be in
directions for finding your the physical environment or the teacher can provide the
way from one location to Observation: Are students able to items) Students describe the location of items in relation to
another. correctly match the words to the letters. themselves. Have students change positions to identify
objects to their North, South, East and West. During this
Conversation: Can students describe activity discuss in your creole culture how you give
location using the four cardinal points? directions in terms of North, South, East and West (e.g.,
North- Nò, East- sòlèy lévan)
Conversation: Are students able to
understand the importance of direction Have students include the cardinal points on the map of
for finding their way? their neighbourhoods drawn in the previous
lesson.
Observation: Are students able to use Cut and paste activity - students are given cut outs of N S
cardinal direction to find their way? W E- Students establish what each letter stands
for. Students use the acronym Never Eat Slimy Worms to
position the letters correctly. Students stick the letters
correctly on a small circular piece of laminating paper to
construct a model of a simple compass rose (Paper used
must be transparent).
36 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Students select the words – north, south, west, and east
from a basket prepared prior to class, match the word to
the correct letter and stick the corresponding pairs (S -
south, N - north, W - west, E - east). Also have students
spell out the words North, South, East, and West.
Have students use the simple compass created above,
place it on their map and describe the location of various
natural and built features from their home using cardinal
directions. Remind students what are natural and built
features.
Read aloud the story of Hansel and Gretel and discuss
how the compass could be useful to the children. Ask
students how things would have been different if Hansel
and Gretel knew cardinal directions.
Have students talk about a time they were lost and how
cardinal directions could have helped them.
Group students in 4s. Hide items in various places on the
school compound. Give each group a direction card and
time them to see how well they follow instructions in
retrieving the items and returning to class. Use realistic
directions on the cards e.g., north of the principal’s office,
south of the school’s canteen etc.
37 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Spatial Thinking
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand how we shape the local environment and the local environment shapes who we
are and how we live.
Section 4: How do we interact with our local environment?
Introduction to the Subject: Students will be introduced to experiences that help them begin to understand basic aspects of location
and other elements of their local environment and how they interact in and describe this environment. Students will engage in inquiry to
question and find answers to how they shape the local environment and how the local environment shapes who they are and how they
live?
Strand (Topic): Spatial Thinking: Spending Time with My Family in My Neighbourhood
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand how we shape the local environment and the local environment shapes who we are and
how we live.
Focusing Question: How do we shape the local environment and how does the local environment shape who we are and how we
live?
Grade Level Expectations:
K - List the activities that you and your family are able engage in because of where you live.
S - Classify these activities as positive or negative for the neighborhood.
V - Recognize that where we live influences how our families live and that the things, we do have an impact on our neighbourhood.
38 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
K - List the activities that Conversation: Are students aware of the Engage students in a discussion where they take turns
you and your family engage activities that take place in their sharing what activities that take place in their
in because of where you neighbourhood? neighbourhood. (Sample Guide questions:
live.
Conversation: Are students able to identify What do adults normally do together in the
S - Classify family activities similarities and differences in the activities neighbourhood?
activities as having a positive that their families engage in their Do they farm, fish, work, sing Christmas Caroling, etc.,
or negative impact on the neighbourhood. together?
neighbourhood. What types of work take place in the neighbourhood?
Conversation: Are students aware that Do they have weekend parties or ‘block-O’s?
different persons in different Do the children in the neighbourhood play together on
V - Recognize that where we neighbourhoods engage in different weekends or afterschool?
live influences how our activities because of where they are Do the people in your family participate?
families live and that the located? What are the things (activities) that you don’t like in your
things we do, have an impact neighbourhood?
on our neighbourhood. Product: Are students able to represent
activities, through the use of drawings or Have students compare and contrast the different activities
pictures, that they or their family engage in that take place in different neighbourhoods.
within their neighbourhood?
Ask students why they are unable to participate in some of
Observation: the activities that their classmates have listed in their own
neighbourhoods?
Are students able to identify activities that
impact their neighbourhood positively or Have students draw scenes to show some activities their
negatively? families do together in their neighbourhood.
Are students demonstrating a willingness Have students create a book display illustrating the ways in
to engage in positive activities after they which their families live and culturally express themselves
have shared their thoughts on how the as a result of the neighbourhood they live in. Have
activities their family engage in impacts students share or read their books to their classmates and
their neighbourhood? talk about similarities and differences.
39 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Have students bring pictures from home that show their
Product: Are students drawing images that families engaging in activities related to where they live
represent positive impact on their (e.g., birthday, wedding, picnic, shopping, playing games).
neighbourhood. They describe the event to their peers. As a class, students
discuss similarities, differences, and diverse ways in which
people live and express themselves because of where they
live.
Whole class Activity: Create a cause-and-effect chart. Use
the pictures the students have drawn or brought in, to
represent different activities that they/their family engage
in within their neighbourhood. Have students match these
pictures to images that represent how this activity impacts
their community. Images can be labeled. Click on this link
for an example: Cause and Effect Illustration Chart.
Have students go back to the scenes they drew in the
earlier activity. Have students classify by ticking ( )
activities that have a positive effect on the neighbourhood
and placing an (X) next to those that may have a negative
effect.
Have students Create a ‘I am a Good Citizen of
My Neighbourhood Oath’ . Have students draw pictures
to show what they intend to do to create a positive impact
on their neighbourhood.
40 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Spatial Thinking
Essential Learning Outcome: To understand how we shape the local environment and the local environment shapes who
we are and how we live.
Section 5: How do we stay safe where we live?
Introduction to the Subject: Students will be introduced to experie nces that help them begin to understand basic aspects of location
and other elements of their local environment and how they interact in and describe this environment. Students will engage in inquiry to
question and find answers to how they shape the local environment and how the local environment shapes who they are and how they
live?
Strand (Topic): Spatial Thinking
Essential Learning Outcomes: To understand how we shape the local environment and the local environment shapes who we are and
how we live.
Focusing Question:
What are the natural hazards or risks to my family because of where I live?
How can my family stay safe in my neighborhood?
Grade Level Expectations:
K - Identify natural hazards such as hurricanes, tsunamis, volcanic eruptions, earthquakes which may pose a threat to your family
because of where you live.
S - Demonstrate how to follow evacuation procedures in your school.
V - Respect the dangers posed by natural disasters.
41 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
K - Identify natural hazards Conversation: Are students able to define Have students watch a video on natural hazards to
such as hurricanes, tsunamis, the term natural hazard? Are they able to introduce the concept. . NATURAL DISASTERS for
volcanic eruptions, demonstrate an understanding of what a kids - EARTHQUAKE 🌋 VOLCÁN 🌊 TSUNAMI
earthquakes which may pose natural hazard is based on their own
🌀 HURRICANE 🌪️ TORNADO 🔥 WILDFIRE
a threat to your family experiences?
Natural Disasters and Our Caribbean Environment
because of where you live.
Have students draw a natural hazard mind map/ concept
S - Demonstrate how to
map about hazards. (Students are to draw, write everything
follow evacuation Observation: Are students able to draw a
they know about natural hazards).
procedures in your school. mind/concept map? Note what is included
V-Respect the dangers posed and missing?
• Have students identify any that may pose a threat
by natural disasters.
to their family in the neighbourhood in which they
live
Conversation: Can students explain their
mind map, to the class, and the reasoning
• Have students talk about how they felt during the
for some of their inclusions?
natural hazard/ disaster they experienced. Were
they scared/excited etc and why?
Conversation: Are students able to identify
natural hazards that pose a threat to their
Sample Guide Questions:
neighborhood and their school? What
were some of the effects of these hazards
Ask what natural hazard is most likely to happen whilst in
on them? What emotions did students
school. Ask what they must do when there is a natural
display as they spoke about the hazard.
disaster emergency (during and after). Ask do they think it
is important to have an emergency plan and why? Ask if it
Product: Were students able to create a
was a natural hazard would an emergency plan be needed?
poster that illustrated the natural hazard
assigned to them.? Did they illustrate the
• Have students bring in pictures and create a
effects the natural hazard may have on
poster/collage of an assigned natural hazard and its
their neighbourhood?
effects on their neighbourhood (in groups).
Students can be reminded that not all natural
Observation: Are students' ideas related to
hazards become natural disasters. Natural Hazards
a natural hazard? Do students’ ideas
vs. Natural Disasters
42 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
demonstrate that they have real • Have students in their assigned groups brainstorm
experiences with natural hazards? ideas on how to simulate the natural hazard
Observation: Are students able to explain assigned in the poster/ collage activity and then
their simulation of the natural hazard? demonstrate to their class.
• Explain the group's simulation of the natural
Product: Were students able to create a disaster.
model or simulate to the class the natural • Use the poster or collage created by the group to
disaster assigned to the group? Did explain the effects of the hazard.
students explain the effects that their demonstrated to the class. Use Creole words such
natural hazard could have on their family as siklonn, afalay, volkan.
and their neighbourhood?
Have students watch videos on emergency preparedness
Conversation: Are students able to indicate and state what you and your family can do to prepare for a
what they and their family could do to natural hazard that poses a threat to you where you live.
prepare for various types of natural Disaster Dodgers: Introduction to Emergency Planning
hazards. Tips to prepare your home and family for natural
disasters
Conversation: Are students aware of
school emergency evacuation routes? Do Conduct a discussion with students on appropriate
students know where safety points are evacuation routes in case of an emergency.
located? • Have students draw an emergency route map for
their school. Label all the important areas along the
Observation: Can the students draw and route and review e.g., of terms near and far in
label the school emergency route relation to the classroom, meeting point etc.
accurately? • Have students practice an emergency/evacuation
drill.
Product: Are the students able to use • Have students discuss what they did correctly and
symbols to represent real life features and what was not done well.
to understand the importance of locating • Ask students whether they believe that the fire drill
them for fire drills. route is used effectively and what would they
change about the route and why?
43 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Observation: Are students able to follow • Have students discuss what to do if there was an
instructions during an earthquake whilst at the school. (Twanblanntè-
emergency/evacuation drill? Creole term for earthquake)
Observation: Are students able to • Simulate an earthquake by shaking a desk and have
demonstrate what to do during and after students role-play what they would do during and
an earthquake? after the earthquake.
Conversation: Are students able to identify • Have students create a storyboard (teachers can
what they did correctly and what was not also provide pictures and have students place in
done well? the correct sequence) showing what emergency/
evacuation procedures students are to follow at
Product: Were students able to create a the school if there is a threat of a natural hazard.
storyboard showing the steps of the (The teacher may wish to use words from local
school’s emergency plan during and after a dialect such as siklonn, afalay, volkan.
natural hazard?
44 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Economic Decision Making
Essential Learning Outcome: To be aware that we all have things we need and things we want
Section 1: What are needs, wants, goods and services?
Introduction to the Subject: Needs are essential to our lives as human beings. Students must have the ability to distinguish between
what they need and what they want. This helps in making informed decisions. Posing the following focus questions to the students at
various times throughout the unit can help the teacher set the stage for the students to learn that we all have things we need and things we
want:
• What are needs and wants?
• Does everyone have the same needs?
• What are goods and services?
• Who provides us with goods and services?
Strand (Topic): Economic Decision Making
Essential Learning Outcomes: To be aware that we all have things we need and things we want
Focus Questions:
1. What are needs and wants?
2. Does everyone have the same needs?
3. What are goods and services?
4. Who provides us with goods and services?
Grade Level Expectations:
K - Identify basic human needs.
S - Distinguish between our basic needs and our wants.
V - Appreciate the difference between needs and wants.
45 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
K - Identify basic human Observation: Are the children able to Create a community circle. The teacher will display a wide
needs. identify basic human needs from the variety of manipulatives such as food, toys, candy, etc. pictures
materials displayed? can be used also. Each student will select one item on display.
S - Distinguish between our The students will then share about the item they selected.
basic needs and our wants.
1. Why did they choose the item?
V - Appreciate the difference
between needs and wants. 2. Is this item needed for your survival? why?
Conversation: As the children share their Class discussion. Do you think we will need all the food items
ideas are they able to explain why they may here? Do we need all the toys we see? How do we tell what
not need all the foods and toys? our needs are?
46 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Observation: Are the children engaged in the Read A-Loud: Lily Learns about Wants and Needs Read
story and do they understand the differences Aloud Introductory activity/ Read the story.
between the needs and wants in the story?
Product: Do children’s lists show that they • After reading the story, have students make a list of all
can appreciate that some items are needed the things they want. Once they have made their list,
more than others? help them to prioritize their items by placing a star
next to the items that they need. This will help them to
Product: Use this to assess their poster see that some of the things they want are actually
needs.
I can Yes No
• Search through a store catalog or online for wants and
Correctly define what is a needs categorise needs and wants on a poster. Use a
sheet of paper and divide it into four squares. Write
need. needs in three and wants in the last square. Look
through magazines and catalogues and cut out three
needs and one want.
Correctly identify my
basic needs • Students are shown diagrams of needs and wants and
categorize accordingly.
Needs and wants interactive worksheet (liveworksheets.com)
Needs vs Wants Interactive Worksheet
Product: Do students correctly categorize the
examples of needs and wants?
47 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Observation: Teacher observes interaction • Role Play Activities: A class shop is organized, and
and students’ shopping behaviour and students fill it with various items that are needed and
identifies if students can distinguish between wanted by human beings. Students take turns
needs and wants during role play. shopping and selling to identify needs and wants.
Observation: With the use of a checklist, the
teacher observes that children naturally know • Students bring a doll/ teddy bear to school and role
the needs of a baby. play taking care of the doll. Teachers can question
why a child does certain things in the role play
activity.
Picture talk: Picture talk:
Are students able to conclude that people Provide students with a picture of a child in a wheelchair or a
may have specific needs that are different child with hearing aids. Ask students what the needs of this
from the needs of others? child would be.
Compare and contrast: Compare and contrast:
Are the students able to differentiate and Guide students to compare and contrast the needs of the able-
find similarities of the needs for both bodied child and a disabled child.
children?
Product:
(I am working on a worksheet)
48 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects
in the curriculum)
Math link:
• Teacher can add price tags to items in the class shop.
• Teacher can purposely make needs cheaper than wants.
(Extension: Students can help determine the prices)
All prices should be digits or multiples of ten.
• Prior Learning: Teacher introduces students to our XCD coins and how money is written and read. Shows real life samples of price
tags.
• Students will take turns determining who is the cashier. The cashier as well as the shoppers/consumers are to add up the cost of
the goods. Consumers pay the cashier.
Discovery learning: Let children determine what happens if the consumer does not have the exact money.
OR
Cashier receives more money than the cost of the items. Teacher can weigh in on the solution which the children decide.
Math 2: Problem Solving
Eg. Scenario: You only have 75c to go shopping. How many items can you buy? / Which items will you buy?
Provide students with the amount of money and have them determine the items they can purchase.
Needed:
Large price tags
coins (real or fake)
49 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Teachers may supply the shop with the out of circulation 1 cent and 2 cent coins as well as 5 cents, ten cents, 25 cents and $1 coins. On
the other hand, each child can bring a predetermined amount of coins for use in the shop. For example, each set should add up to a dollar.
(Ten 10c; twenty 5c, four quarters)
Comprehension Link:
1.Sequencing:
Students number 5 sentences in the correct order to tell a story that is related to the topic.
Speaking/reading: Buddy Share: Students will read their sequenced story to a designated buddy.
If students are sequences in a different order, they should be encouraged to discuss and make necessary changes.
2. QAR
Teacher asks comprehension questions to determine understanding of the book being read eg. “Lily Learns…” or the video used in the
social studies lesson.
3. Comprehension
Skill: Attention to Detail: (
Lily Learns About Needs and Wants…)
1. What is the cost of…the skates/ the raincoat?
2. What does dad’s expression say?
3. Was it cheaper to go to the park or the bowling alley?
4. How many flowers are shown in the picture?
5. What is on dad’s shopping list? (Teacher can ask strong reader to read the list)
6. Can you tell what is wrong with the patient with the yellow hair?
7. I spy… (teacher leads)
e.g., I see two birds. If students have a hard copy of the text, they are to put their finger on the birds or they may counter with the true
number of birds in the picture. Students then get a chance to play the I Spy. game.
This can be done on any page that has enough details. This will force students to picture-read and pay attention to details.
Composition Link:
50 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Activity 1: Make a Shopping list. Students can write as many items as they choose. Teacher assists with vocabulary and spelling by putting
up a labelled picture chart of the items in the shop.
Students who need the challenge can be encouraged to copy the names of the labels.
Activity 2:
Topic: Things I need
Students write a predetermined number of sentences based on the things they want. Number of sentences students write will vary based
on ability.
Public Speaking:
Topic: I want…
Students speak on the topic.
Teacher can trigger the generation of information by providing students with pictures of items. They choose an item they would want and
say why they want it; how they can get it and can they do without it.
Life lesson:
It is okay to want something. But our needs must be met first.
Teacher provides the class with two items: For example, juice and water/ water and sparkling water.
Students choose one item.
Those who choose the need get to keep/eat/drink both items. Those who choose the want, lose both.
(Be sure to prep class first to soften disappointments. Eg. tell class: If you choose well, you will be rewarded; if you don’t you won’t be
rewarded.)
51 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Elements from Local Culture: (References that learners might know from their local environment)
1. The health centres are our primary care providers.
Some people visit the private doctors, but it is more common to visit the health center in one's district.
1. All our food needs can be supplied through subsistence farming/local farmers and fishermen.
1. Fresh produce market
2. Farms and backyard garden
3. Fisheries/ Fishmongers stations
Supermarkets: All our food wants to come from the supermarket.
Elements of culture: we could include the country's local markets. Discuss the common goods of each country; Dominica- provision, St
Lucia -pepper pot etc.
Resources for a learner who is struggling: (Links to earlier learning activities for similar knowledge, links to resources for special
education needs)
• Vocabulary picture chart.
• Text to speech online books/Audio for written words
• Teach through direct instruction.
A field trip can be added which will allow them to visit a factory, salon, shop etc. where a product is provided. This way they can get an
appreciation for a job which may be suited for their skills without feeling like it is all academics.
Resources for a learner who needs challenge: (Links to learning activities and resources in later grades)
• related story at reading level
• comprehension worksheets where he/she records the answers.
• Make him/her the cashier and make change.
• problem solving worksheets.
52 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Economic Decision Making
Essential Learning Outcome: To be aware that we all have things we need and things we want
Section 2: What are examples of goods and services and how do we obtain them?
Introduction to the Subject: Needs are essential to our lives as human beings. Students must have the ability to distinguish between
what they need and what they want. This helps in making informed decisions. Posing the following focus questions to the students at
various times throughout the unit can help the teacher set the stage for the students to learn that we all have things we need and things we
want:
• What are goods?
• What are examples of goods?
• What are services?
• What are examples of services?
• What is tangible?
• What is intangible?
• What is barter?
Strand (Topic): Economic Decision Making
Essential Learning Outcomes: To be aware that we all have things we need and things we want
Focus Question/ Content:
1. What are goods?
2. What are examples of goods?
3. What are services?
4. What are examples of services?
5. What is tangible?
6. What is intangible?
7. What is barter?
Grade Level Expectations & Specific Curriculum Outcomes
K - Understand that we meet most of our needs and wants through goods and services.
S - Categorise our needs and wants as goods or services.
V - Appreciate that goods and services are necessary to meet our needs and wants.
53 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
K - Understand that we meet Observation: Are the students able to Introduce this series of teaching activities by sharing the
most of our needs and wants distinguish between goods and services as following information:
through goods and services. you share examples? • Goods are things that you buy and can hold (Goods
S - Categorise our needs and are produced or purchased). Goods are things that you
wants as goods or services. can keep, eat, or use. If you go to the store and buy an
V - Appreciate that goods apple, you get to keep the apple and take it home with
and services are necessary to you, so it is a ‘good’.
meet our needs and wants. • A service is something that you do to help another. A
service is something that someone does for you. When
you buy a service, you hire people to perform work.
You are not buying something you can touch or hold.
If your car is broken, you might hire someone to fix it.
You are paying for a service.
• Share some examples of each.
Product: Are students able to draw chores
they do at home, and can they name these as • Draw and write about a job that you do at home
services to their family? (chore). This will help students understand that they
are providing a service to their household.
• Draw a picture of a good related to food/school.
• Have the children post their drawings on a bulletin
board categorized under goods and services.
54 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Critical Thinking: Differentiating Between Critical Thinking: Differentiating Between Goods and Services
Goods and Services
Product: Are students able to identify goods? YouTube: Goods and Services for Kids
Are students able to differentiate between Pay attention to 2:52-2:54 for critical thinking. Discuss the act
the act of making a product, e.g., baking and of baking the cake and buying the finished product
selling the product - the bread.
Are students able to articulate that the baker
bakes bread (the good) whilst the breadshop
does the service of selling parents the
finished product? Shops and supermarkets
provide a service by giving us goods!
Observation: Are the students able to Draw and color, or cut from magazines and newspapers,
categorize their needs and wants as goods pictures that show “goods” and some that provide a “service”
and services? and create a mini scrapbook.
55 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Product: Are the students able to categorize Students can create a mural or brochure to identify a need or
their needs and wants as goods and services? want and determine ways in which it could be satisfied
through goods and services.
Conversation: Are the students able to Scenarios to help students differentiate between goods and
categorize their needs and wants as goods services & whether these are supplying wants/needs.
and services?
• You are sick or hurt and need help; where do
Product: Are the students able to categorize you go? Explain what happens there? Is a
their needs and wants as goods and services? want/need being met.
• You need to cut your hair. Where do you go?
Explain what happens there?
Observation: Are the students learning • You want to learn how to do math. Where do
to appreciate that goods and services that you go? Explain what happens there?
these individuals provide are necessary to • Your mum needs her nails done. Where does
meet their needs and wants? she go? Explain what happens there?
• Your family needs to eat. Where can you go?
Conversation: Are the students learning What happens there? What are the goods?
to appreciate that goods and services that What is the service provided?
their families acquire are necessary to meet • The car has run out of gas. Where can mum
their needs and wants? or dad go? What goes on there? What is the
good provided? Will there be a service
provided?
• identifying.pdf (mathworksheets4kids.com)
(Identifying Goods and Services worksheet)
56 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Conversation: Using this checklist can • Invite speakers from the community to come in as
students self-assess as follows: resource persons to speak on the services/goods they
offer with as much manipulatives as they can bring
1. I know/can explain what goods are. (butcher, farmer, fireman, nurse, doctor, veterinarian,
teacher, pastor, priest), to help students differentiate
2. I know/can explain what a service is. between the goods and services they provide (a field
trip is another option).
3. I know/can tell the difference between a
• Ask students to interview their parents on how they
good and a service.
are able to attain goods and services they need and
want. Allow for class discussion the next day. This will
4. I can explain ways that people exchange
allow students to understand how people earn money
goods and services.
to attain goods and services and solidify in their minds
that goods and services help use meet our needs (pay
5. I understand how people earn money by
the rent/ mortgage, purchase food & clothing) and
working at a job.
satisfy our needs and wants.
6. I can explain the idea of exchanging
Make a chart on the board that includes the following and ask
money to purchase goods and services.
the students to use this to fill in their favorite goods:
Favorite Goods Picture
Have students share their pictures and discuss which goods
are needs and which are wants.
57 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Brainstorm a list of services that their families receive. Have
students draw pictures of these services and help them write
words to show how these services help their families.
Picture of Services my How it helps my
family receives family
Share their pictures and discuss whether these services are
needs or wants.
Students can sort their goods and services and paste them in
their notebooks and note if they are needs or wants.
58 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Critical thinking Critical thinking
Are students able to determine at least one Teacher poses questions to elicit discussion and critical
profession which they would like to work in? thinking.
Example:
Are students able to give an ORIGINAL What would you like to be when you grow up? Why?
choice & reason? (Teacher accepts student reasoning since at this age children
are not yet sure what they want to be.
Are students regurgitating the thoughts of Teacher only corrects gross misconceptions.
other students?
Would you like to be a garbage collector?
Are students aware of the importance of Based on student answers teacher guides students to
people who perform services that are appreciate the importance of all jobs especially those that are
considered menial or dirty? dirty and smelly.
Were students able to change their thinking OR
on those who perform such tasks? Teacher can put up three large posters of three service
providers:
Have student appreciation for all jobs
improved. A garbage collector
A cleaner
A pilot
Teacher asks:
-What does each do?
-Do you know one?
-Have you seen one?
-Whose job do you think is the most important? Why? (Every
answer is correct)
Teacher guides students into appreciating the equal
importance of the job done by each service provider.
59 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Show and Tell/ Public Speaking Career Show and Tell/ Public Speaking Career Choices:
Choices:
Product: Are students able to tell what their Prior engagement:
chosen profession entails? Students and parents were provided with a rubric.
Does student speech show a clear Students dress up as the professional they would like to be
understanding of the difference between when they grow up. Guided by teacher’s questions they will
goods and services? say what the job entails and if they provide a good or a
s ervice.
Score student presentation on the given
rubric.
How does the student presentation rate on
the given rubric?
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: (Links to professional sources that connect back to the Curriculum
and Assessment Principles of Learning and Principles of Assessment)
Goods: are things we can see that we use to survive.
(Tangible - something that can be touched)
Services: are somethings someone does for you.
(Intangible - you hire someone to perform a job (work) You are not buying something you can touch or hold.
Teacher can use body learning to teach the difference between tangible (touching self) and intangible (closing eyes and groping at the air)
Barter: the exchange of goods for other goods, and services for other services.
Common Professions/jobs: health care professionals inclusive of sanitation workers; farmers, teachers, fisherman, maids, and builders.
60 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Service providers:
Those people who make life easy for us by performing tasks we may not be able to do or are too busy to do for ourselves.
Examples of service providers:
Garbage collectors, Digicel mobile service providers, electricity providers like Domlec, Lucelec and Grenlec doctor, therapist
Inclusive Resources and Materials from Regional Specialists
Additional Resources and Materials
Internet Resources
YouTube Videos
Let's Go to Work - Garbageman
61 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects
in the curriculum)
Language Arts Action words (verbs)
Garbage Collectors (Abdo Kids) | Reading Books for Kids
Hooray For Garbage Collector by: Tessa Kenan
Read Aloud | Garbage Collectors
Be Careful with this one. She doesn't encourage thinking as she gives the answers to questions. So, determine the best areas to pause the
video and ask students before she gives the answer.
Science:
“Sam The Garbage Man” Music Video | Songs for Kids | TheBeatBuds
Good for a lesson on recycling & caring for the environment we live in.
Resources for a learner who is struggling: (Links to earlier learning activities for similar knowledge, links to resources for special
education needs)
Multisensory Approach:
Kinesthetic activities Eg. colouring, cut and paste/drag and drop, visual and verbal cues, e.g., Jingles.
Economic Decision Making
Essential Learning Outcome: To be aware that we all have things we need and things we want
Section 3: What are resources and how do we obtain and manage them?
Introduction to the Subject: Human beings survive through interaction with their environment. In this topic, the students are presented
with the early concept of Environmental Philosophy. This means that as human beings, we interact not only with our fellow human
62 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
beings, but also with other living and non-living elements in our environment. Students in first grade are beginning to explore the world
around them and how they fit into that world. There should be the understanding that the environment can be used to provide our needs
and wants.
Strand (Topic): Economic Decision Making
Essential Learning Outcomes: To be aware that we all have things we need and things we want
Focus Questions:
1. What are resources?
2. What is the environment?
3. What are natural resources?
4. What are man-made resources?
5. Which natural features/resources do the resources we use come from?
6. How does the use of resources meet our needs and wants?
7. Does the use of natural resources affect the earth?
8. How can we use resources wisely?
9. How does deforestation impact the ability to provide for our basic needs and wants?
Grade Level Expectations:
K - Identify things in the environment that we use.
S - Discuss how we use things in the environment.
V - Appreciate that the environment can be used to provide our needs and wants.
63 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
K - Identify things in the Discussion: Discussion:
environment that we use. Engage students by asking questions about the everyday things
S - Discuss how we use Product: they use.
things in the environment. For example, what do you:
V - Appreciate that the Are students able to identify the resources write with?
environment can be used to they use in the classroom? At home? drink from?
provide our needs and wants. go to school in/on?
wear?
Categorising: Process bathe in?
play on the beach in? ect.
Example:
Small group work: Provide groups with a Explicit instruction: tell students that all the things we use
variety of pictures of natural and man-made are important; they are resources. The difference between
resources. Allow students to categorise the man-made and natural resources.
pictures under two groups. Things made by
God (Natural resources) and Things made by Use visuals, stories and information texts to introduce
Man (Man-made Resources). students to a variety of relationships between people and their
natural environments. These could show differences in work,
They can categorise using bins/ table or play, homes, food, clothing, and recreation.
floor space. Concepts of conservation can be introduced.
After all groups have sorted, students will go Environment Short Story for Children: Drip-Drop-Drip
around the class to view and discuss how the Environment Cleanliness Kids | Short Story | Rooney’s
other groups have sorted their items. Adventures: The Friendly Octopus | Story #4
Teacher corrects misconceptions.
Teacher provides students with a worksheet. Extra practice
They are to write N under the pictures that https://www.liveworksheets.com/worksheets/en/Science/N
are natural resources and MM for those that atural_Resources/Natural_and_Manmade_Resources_Drag_a
are man-made. They can colour the pictures nd_Drop_mv1853879jo
after.
64 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Product: Are students able to correctly
discuss and determine which picture belongs
to which category?
Observation: Are children able to recognise
if a group has a picture in the wrong
category?
Observation: Do children make the
necessary corrections based on discussion/
observation of other groups' stations?
Product: Are students able to independently
categorise pictures into natural and manmade
resources?
Observation: Are students able to give Pair work with Peer Work
examples of resources in the video?
Enable students to make the correlation, that the things we
use, and the things man makes, come from natural resources.
Viewing & Speaking
Play the song. Have students dance and sing along.The
Natural Resources SONG | Science for Kids | Grades K-2
Ask questions related to the video.
For example: I saw a train in the video, it is a man-made
resource. People use it to travel so it is a need, because they
may have to travel far distances on foot.
Do the same for a natural resource. I see a _______
We use it for _______
It is a natural resource.
65 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Product: Are students able to correctly Process: Matching Game
match 90% of the items to the natural
resources? Example:
Provide students with picture cards. Everyday items and
natural resources. Student pairs are to match common items
with the natural resources they originate from.
For example:
Observation: Can students identify the Wood—-- pencil/ desk
Natural resource in our everyday activities? cotton plant— clothing
gold– earrings
fruit— juice
Whole class sharing of matches. Teacher corrects any
misconceptions.
Introduction to Natural Resources:
The natural resources that are used every day in some way in
our society. Some examples could include petroleum, coal,
iron ore, water, wood, or fertile soil.
1st Grade Natural Resources
.
66 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Observation: Role Play - Using resources wisely
Checklist of things to observe:
Small group work - Implicit teaching
1. Did students plan how they will use Example: Teacher gives students a bucket of water as well as
the resource? three tasks they are to accomplish with it.
Task: wash hands/plastic fruits
Task: water a plant/plants
2. Did they determine the best way to Task: wipe the desks
get the most use out of their water?
Teacher explains the task without giving the students the
solution.
1. Everyone gets the same amount of water.
3. Do students' actions show they 2. There are no refills.
recognise the need to conserve their 3. Use your resources wisely.
water? 4. There are extra containers if you need it.
4. Were they knowledgeable enough to After the activity, the teacher brings the class together and
split the water to maximise the use discusses the outcome. How were groups able to accomplish
and reuse of the water. the task set? Teacher will introduce words like conserving,
scarcity and expand on vocabulary that will be used, for
5. Did they use original means to solve example, wastage.
the problem?
6. Did they blindly copy another
group's actions?
7. Did they observe and borrow and
modify another group's process to
solve the problem?
67 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Conversation:
Are students able to recognise that there can
be a shortage of natural resources and
appreciate the need to use resources wisely?
Product: Are students able to answer Natural Resources
questions on the quiz that show they can
distinguish various types of natural resources Google Docs
and recognize and appreciate their https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1fqFD_EflrRYLo7I44Ur_
importance for the survival of living things. KdjeviE3A0HI-wImc33W978/edit
Be sure to make a copy of this assessment and add it to your
drive. Change the settings where applicable.
OR
Printed Worksheet PDF
https://www.generationgenius.com/wp-
content/uploads/2019/06/Natural-Resources-Worksheet-
GG.pdf
68 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Conversation: Can the students identify the Introductory
things in the environment we need and those Teacher plays a silent video of images of the Environment.
we want? After the video teacher constructs a KWL chart as the
springboard for further activities.
Product:
“The fairy Tale moment”
Can students identify things in the The teacher will ask students to tell their own fairy tales about
environment that can be used to provide our • A world without trees, rivers, animals, and Sunlight.
needs and wants? • Their perfect world
Teacher Introduces the lessons with a video on the
environment.
What is Environment and How to Keep It Clean? |
Environmental Studies for Kids | Vid #1
Build your Environment.
Observation: The teacher will allow students to utilize materials found in the
Can the student identify the physical parts of playground to build their own place, village or town.
the environment?
Teacher can do a guided approach as seen in video - eco
environment model 3d making using cardboard | DIY |
howtofunda | still model
69 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Observation: or utilize self discovery, allowing students to make their own.
Are students able to draw and explain the Nature walks
things on their walk that are provided by
nature such as food, materials and water. From a nature walk along a beach area students will draw/
create sketches of a natural environment in their journals and
be asked to draw examples of things that they see that can be
eaten of drank. Students could collect shells and create shell
Conversation: Are students able to explain bracelets (a want), and students will see how again the
how their family uses specific resources on a environment can meet our wants.
regular basis and are they able to discuss
what would happen if the resource ceased to When back in the classroom the teacher can use explicit
instruction to bring across to students that we use things in
exist?
the environment. Students will discuss how we use trees,
Observation: Are students able to identify rivers, oceans, forest, etc.
ways they can conserve the use of water at
home or in school? • Teacher can utilize pictures.
• Video Resources can be utilized Types of
environment/Grade 1/Environmental video for
kids/types of environments
Product: Are students able to create
illustrations of how people care for and do
Teachers allow students to choose environments such as bush,
not care for the environment?
ocean, beaches and hills, and discuss with students how
Conversation: Are students able to describe natural features may vary between different natural
examples of conservation? environments.
Students can interview their parents to find out: how does the
family use the identified resource on a regular basis? what do
they think would happen if the resource ceased to exist? Then,
the next day, each group member would share their responses
with their group and the group would share with the whole
class.
70 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Teachers can, using water as one example of a natural
resource, display a bottle of clean water and invite discussion
about what they see. Ask questions as to where this water
came from, etc. Have children work in groups to show ways
that they use water on a daily basis. Share their work with the
whole group and brainstorm ways they can conserve the use
of water at home or in school. Some examples could include
turning off the water when brushing their teeth and not
wasting water at the fountain. Relate to the global level by
discussing the fact that some children in the world do not
have clean water for drinking.
Draw a cartoon or comic strip of how humans can care for
the environment.
Draw a cartoon or create a comic strip of how humans destroy
the environment.
Introduce the term “conservation” at this point.
• explain how this will help preserve the environment
since they will now understand the importance of the
environment in providing our needs and wants.
71 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome: (Links to professional sources that connect back to the Curriculum
and Assessment Principles of Learning and Principles of Assessment)
The Environment
The Environment is where we live. It is where we play, go to school. It is where we do things.
Different living things live in different environments. For example, our environment is our house and community. A bird's environment is
a tree, your garden, the forest. A fish’s environment is the river or the sea.
A resource is anything that we use. Things that are useful to man.
Manmade resources are those things that are made by man. Man uses natural resources to make manmade resources.
Examples of man-made resources: car, house, clothing, tv, chalk.
Natural resources- Anything from nature that living things can use.
Natural resources are air, water, plants, animals, sun, crude oil and minerals like gold and silver.
Plants and animals also need natural resources.
All resources are important. But water, wood and soil are essential to providing humans and animals with basic needs.
Water is an important natural resource. Every living thing needs water to survive.
We need water to drink, to prepare food and to grow food. Animals and plants need water too.
Water can be found in oceans, rivers, lakes, underground and frozen in glaciers. Only a small amount of water on Earth is freshwater.
Wood is an important natural resource. Wood comes from trees. Animals and humans need to make our shelter. We also use wood to
make tools and furniture and to burn to cook food.
Soil is an important natural resource. Animals and humans need soil to make our shelter. We need good soil to grow food.
Fossil fuels are important natural resources. Coal, crude oil and natural gas are all fossil fuels. They form deep in the earth from dead
plants and animals. It takes millions of years for them to form. Some Caribbean countries like Trinidad and Tobago and Barbados have
natural gas.
Some natural resources like crude oil can be used up. When they are finished there will be no more!
Some natural resources like water and plants make more of themselves. But sometimes humans can prevent that from happening. Then
these resources become scarce. We will have very little of it. Because of that, it will be difficult to supply our needs. We must use
resources wisely for our resources to last and our needs and wants to be met.
Conservation- The careful use of resources so that they will last as long as possible
72 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
YouTube Read ALoud-
The Lorax Dr. Seuss Audiobook for kids Read Aloud app @ Book in Bed
For the student who is online:
1st Grade Natural Resources
Other YouTube Resources: Linked to Sample Lesson plan.
Learn Grade 2 - EVS - Natural Resources
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (How the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects
in the curriculum)
Science: The Three R’s Reduce, Reuse, Recycle
Composition: Write a poem or descriptive paragraph to describe a scene in the environment (show them pictures - could even be a
polluted beach). They must describe it and list ways they can help to conserve the area.
Comprehension: teachers can find a passage on resources or create one which would be used to question students.
Elements from Local Culture: (References that learners might know from their local environment)
• Back yard gardens and gardeners
• Fishing; net pulling
• Potted Plant
Choose a resource in the country and visit: ex _ geothermal plant Dominica.
Grenada cocoa factory
73 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Resources for a learner who is struggling: (Links to earlier learning activities for similar knowledge, links to resources for special
education needs)
Audio: Teachers can add audio to google forms.
Peer work: Match students based on ability. Strong reader with weak reader ect.
Picture vocabulary word wall
Resources for a learner who needs challenge: (Links to learning activities and resources in later grades)
Attempt worksheets similar to the sample.
74 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Language Arts - Read and listen to poems, rhymes, stories, songs about the family, animals and
plants and numbers.
Science: Science-classifying living + non- living classifying vertebrates, Animals – living Things: Vertebrates- Classifying Animals
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
• Local items used to make Art, Architecture, ect.
River Stone - Art and Housing
Wood/Tree - Construction, engineering and decorative purposes
Making Coal
Show local food preparations methods - cooking tools made locally.
Dominica: Mortar and pestle
Coal Pot
Leyley Stick
Gwage
Kalinago Cassava Documentary
Matapi
Hebichet
Platin
• Man made local material.
Kalinago Art, Baskets
textile
75 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Economic Decision Making
Essential Learning Outcome: To be aware that we all have things we need and things we want
Section 4: How do we travel safely?
Introduction to the Subject: Needs are essential to our lives as human beings. Students must have the ability to distinguish between
what they need and what they want. This helps in making informed decisions. Posing the following focus questions to the students at
various times throughout the unit can help the teacher set the stage for the students to learn that we all have things we need and things we
want:
How do we get from place to place?
Why is it important to be careful when traveling about?
Strand (Topic): Economic Decision Making
Essential Learning Outcomes: To be aware that we all have things we need and things we want
Grade Level Expectations:
K - Understand the various forms of transportation in your local environment.
S - Distinguish different forms of transportation and their benefits and limitations.
V - Appreciate the importance of exercising safety around transportation.
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
K - Understand the various Observation: Using a rubric, teacher Transportation is moving people or things from one place to
forms of transportation in observes students throughout the discussion another place.
your local environment. and records the student’s ability to share how
S - Distinguish different they get from home to school, and do they • Teacher invites students to share how they get from
forms of transportation and understand that this is a form of place to place?
their benefits and limitations. transportation? • The teacher asks students:
V - Appreciate the • “How do you get from home to school?
importance of exercising • Does your friend use the same means to get to
safety around transportation. Conversation: Are the students able to come school?”
up with examples of what they observed or
heard about transportation. Read aloud suggestion:
76 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Product: Are students able to present their https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=slf9zs_VPXI
forms of transportation in the form of a
drawing, or to describe it orally? • Read Aloud: A read aloud, or video can be used to
introduce other forms of transportation.
Conversation: Are students able to elaborate
on their forms of transportation to illustrate • We want students to be able to compare the modes of
their understanding of the concept of transportation they see in the read aloud or video.
transportation and that this is how people
move from place to place? • Ask students to draw their own forms of
transportation in groups and to come up with
interesting forms of transportation. They can draw,
describe orally and label their forms of transportation.
• Invite the students to share their drawings and/or
descriptions of transportation with the rest of the
class.
https://kids.kiddle.co/Transport#Kinds_of_transportation
use this site to look at images of transportation for children.
77 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Ask students to place their drawings on a bulletin board called
“Things that go.”
Students will discuss orally what is similar and different about
the modes of transportation depicted on the bulletin board.
This discussion can allow students to categorize the vehicles as
land, air and water transportation.
Take a walk around the community. After the walk, ask the
students:
• Where did we walk?
• Did you notice any signs or markings on or near the
road?
• How did the vehicles move on the road?
• What did we do before we crossed the road?
• Who helps people and vehicles keep safe on the road?
• What are people who walk near the road called?
• What could happen if we are not safe when on or near
the road?
78 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
• Do you think only people walking on or near the road
should stay safe?
• How do people inside the vehicles on the road stay
safe?
To enrich this discussion a resource person (example: a traffic
officer) could briefly address the students on road safety rules.
Students are invited to share their thoughts on safety in other
forms of transportation such as in boats. Make sure we
reinforce the fact that there is always an element of safety
when they are travelling. Sharing examples of these here.
Students can be asked to design pictures of transportation and
to include examples of safety features. Students could work in
groups on this.
Culminating Activity:
Students are invited to choose a travel route and choose the
most appropriate form of transportation for this route.
Links can be made to math for shapes.
Vocabulary:
water, air, land, boats, cars, automobiles, ships, sailing,
walking, movement, bicycle, sled, canoe, airplane, truck,
school bus, skateboard, skates, airport, vehicles, driver, pilot,
captain, traffic light, horn, windshield wipers, safety belts,
steering wheel, trains, fuel, gas, tires, dump truck, pick-up
truck, station-wagon, sports car, garage, tractors.
Discussion/Field Trips:
Discuss different modes of transportation on land, sea and in
the air. Talk about how people get to where they are going
(school bus, ferry boat, car etc.) Incorporate field trips
wherever possible. Take a trip on a school bus, walk around
79 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
the school parking lot to look at cars, visit the airport, bus
station or train station. Watch videos that show different
forms of transportation. Look at travel magazines. Ask if
anyone has been on a plane … a train … a horse … etc. Ask
how students get to school everyday. How do kids in other
countries travel? Leave lots of time for discussion. Make sure
to review safety rules (seat belts in cars, obeying traffic signals,
walk and don’t walk signs). Don’t forget to discuss how
products are delivered … couriers with trucks, airplanes etc.
How does the mail travel?
Activities:
BULLETIN BOARD ACTIVITY: Students can collect
images of different types of transportation and add them to a
bulletin board that has been divided into Land, Sea and Air.
TRANSPORTATION MURAL: Students can work
together to create a transportation mural (one for land, one for
sea and one for air).
SOUND PICTURES: What sounds do the various modes of
transportation make? (Train whistle, truck horn, police car
siren) How would these sounds appear if we were to draw
them? Provide crayons and paper for students to experiment
with the colors and shapes of transportation sounds.
TOY CAR PRINTMAKING: Using old toy cars and
tempera paint, allow students to dip the cars into paint and
“drive” them across paper to see what kinds of marks the tires
make.
LICENSE PLATE RUBBINGS: Using old license plates
(or plate on cars in the parking lot) allow students to do
rubbings of the plates. Provide paper and crayons for the
rubbings.
80 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
SHAPE VEHICLES: See how many types of transportation
vehicles can be created using the basic geometric shapes
(triangles, squares, circles, rectangles). Have students cut their
shapes out of construction paper and arrange them to create
vehicles.
PAPER BOATS: Make paper boats using the directions
found HERE. Decorate them with bright crayon colors.
PAPER AIRPLANES: Make paper airplanes. Decorate them
with bright crayon colors.
TRANSPORTATION MOBILE:
What You Need:
String or yarn; coat hangers; thick paper; paint; brushes;
scissors; hole punch; markers or crayons
What You Do:
After discussing how people and products get from place to
place, students can create drawings and paintings of various
modes of transportation on thick paper. The pictures can be
painted or decorated with markers or crayons. Once complete,
the pictures can be cut out and put together in a mobile … by
punching holes in the pictures and hanging them from a coat
hanger that has been wrapped with yarn or raffia. **Have your
students write facts on the back of each of their modes of
transportation. (i.e., trucks deliver newspapers; people travel
on airplanes etc.)
81 | Pa ge
Grade 1 Social Studies Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
We also brought transportation to our lives by charting how
we get home! zcxhttps://www.structural-
learning.com/post/multisensory-learning-in-the-classroom-a-
teachers-guidezcxhttps://www.structural-
learning.com/post/multisensory-learning-in-the-classroom-a-
teachers-guide.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
82 | Pa ge
