June 2024
OHCP Grade Four Language Arts
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
INTRODUCTION TO THE OECS HARMONISED PRIMARY LANGUAGE ARTS CURRICULUM
The design and content of the OHPC Language Arts curriculum provide teachers with opportunities to not only reflect on the best of existing practices,
but also opportunities to learn about and implement evidence-based shifts in pedagogy that ensure all learners have the best possible chance to succeed.
As with any new curriculum there will be questions. Frequently asked “up front” concerns are addressed below as part of the Introduction which
provides an overview of implementation of the Language Arts OHPC.
I. Frequently Asked Questions
1. If I were to peek inside a Primary School classroom using the curriculum, what would I see?
The chart below provides an overview of the wide range of daily learning opportunities included in the Language Arts OHPC.
Examples of Daily Opportunities to Engage in Language Arts Learning
Listening and Speaking Reading and Viewing Writing and Representing
Learners have daily opportunities to: L e a r n e r s h a v e d a i l y o p p o r t unities to: Learners have daily opportunities to:
- discuss topics of Learner interest - browse through a wide range of paper- - explore formal and informal writing in
- listen, reflect on and contribute to based books, magazines, digital texts, etc. various genres throughout the day
stories, poems, nonfiction, music, on topics of interest - co-construct or independently write
conversations, etc. - engage in reading throughout the day on topics of interest using various
- participate in lessons that build - interact with engaging texts, lessons and genres
strategies in listening and speaking that build reading skills and strategies - apply writing lessons in various genres
- view listening and speaking as a tool to demonstrate understanding of
- share reading with small groups of peers
to communicate with peers, the organisation, ideas style, form, and
community and the world conventions
- share writing with peers and the
community
Throughout the day, Learners receive regular feedback from the teacher about progress made and the next steps of learning.
2
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
2. Will this curriculum improve the literacy rates for all Learners in OHPC?
This curriculum reflects the principles and practices of international research about equitable and effective instructional practices that
increase learners’ levels of engagement and learning success.
3. Does instruction designed from this curriculum provide an equitable learning experience for all Learners?
Yes. Suggestions to differentiate instruction for Learners who excel, Learner who make average progress and Learners who struggle
are provided.
4. Does this curriculum recognise and celebrate on the culture and context of OECS?
Yes. Teachers will find local images, stories, songs, poetry to use as anchors or prompts throughout the curriculum. Home and
community languages and knowledge are valued as foundational building blocks to learning and ensure the culture and context of
OHPC are visible, valued and preserved.
5. How do the strands of Language Arts connect?
While Speaking and Listening, Reading and Viewing, Writing and Representing are presented as different strands, teachers know that
learning about one strand supports learning about other strands. Strands may be taught independently or integrated with other strands
in Language Arts AND among the other strands.
Throughout the OHPC Language Arts Curriculum, the braiding icon indicates some of the opportunities to braid the strands
of Language Arts.
6. Does the curriculum provide opportunities to integrate Language Arts with other subject areas?
Yes. The use of local, national, and international images, nonfiction, poetic, visual and lyrical texts provide anchors to connect
Language arts learning with the content of all other subject areas. For example:
a)The leaf of a flamboyant tree can be used as an anchor to teach descriptive language (Language Arts), plant study (Science),
symmetry (Mathematics and Art) and food study (Health &Wellbeing).
b)A science experiment focussed on the states of matter can be used as an anchor for interpreting cyclical diagrams (Mathematics),
descriptive language in Language Arts and representing the states of matter in artistic formats (the Arts).
3
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Throughout the OHPC Language Arts Curriculum the puzzle pieces icon indicates some of the opportunities to integrate
other subject areas with Language Arts.
II. Creating Welcoming, Learner Responsive and Engaging Classroom Spaces for Language Arts Learning
Responsive classrooms provide opportunities and learning spaces for learners to work in small groups or individually, etc. Every classroom
should be a space that invites learning. This includes:
⮚ a classroom library with books, magazines, pamphlets, etc. of all genres
⮚ walls with Learner and teacher generated poems, stories, schedules, and reference information (Word Wall, What We’ve Learned,
Classroom Rules, etc.) written in large font for ease of viewing throughout the room
⮚ a space for multi-subject exploration (realia table, writing table, science space, math manipulatives, etc.)
⮚ learning centers that invite Learners to explore writing, reading, listening and technology.
⮚ Opportunities to use the school outdoor space and community as learning spaces
II. Using Formative Assessment as an Opportunity to Observe Learner Learning
There are many opportunities to observe learners learning, to assign tasks for Learners to demonstrate learning, and to provide feedback to
Learners. The OHPC provide teachers with a wide range of formative assessment strategies to inform these observations, such as grade
level rubrics and checklists, graphic organizers, opportunities for visual, oral, and written displays of learning and quizzes. Suggestions for
self-assessments encourage learners to monitor their work and use fix up strategies as needed. Suggestions for peer assessments provide
opportunities for peer collaboration about the focus of learning and not on judging a peer’s learning.
An important part of teacher observations of learning is feedback: sharing information about what has been accomplished and how these
accomplishments provide the foundation for the next steps of their learning.
4
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
ESSENTIAL LEARNING OUTCOME 1: Listening and Speaking
Introduction to the Subject: Language is the foundation of communication and the primary instrument of thought. The study of Language Arts
provides access to multiple and interrelated oral, aural, written, and visual ways of representing, exploring, problem-solving, communicating and
sharing meaning. Through listening, speaking, writing, representing, reading, and viewing a wide range of text and text form, the student continues to
develop an awareness of culture, personal identity, and the strategies needed to
participate, communicate, and reflect critically on thought and action.
Strand: Listening and Speaking are foundational for all learning. The strategies and skills of listening and speaking allow learners to contribute
meaningfully to social environments. As learners receive, reflect on, and communicate ideas, they develop increasing proficiency in cognitive
organization, critical thinking, and problem-solving. Listening and speaking strategies and skills are foundational for the development of reading,
viewing, writing, and representing.
Essential Learning Outcome 1: The learner will explore, use, and critically apply oral language for pleasure, and personal growth, to foster
relationships and to develop an appreciation and celebration of culture and of oral languages.
Grade Four Expectations for Listening and Speaking
For pleasure and personal growth
● continue to listen to and appreciate messages of increasingly diverse genres of diverse music, stories, information
● continue to demonstrate interest, curiosity, and responsive engagement in sharing the experiences of others and with oral stories and information
sharing.
● further, develop an awareness of how purposeful oral language provides a receptive or expressive venue for sharing emotions
● reflect on and identify personal strengths as listeners and speakers, areas for improvement and the strategies they found most helpful in oral communication
To form and foster relationships
● demonstrate how conversing with peers with empathy, clarity, intonation, intentionality, animation, and expression builds positive relationships.
● listen carefully and follow up on others’ ideas as they respectfully voice their ideas or opinion
● use speaking skills and strategies appropriately to communicate for a variety of purposes with different audiences
● continue to develop an understanding of the purpose, impact and use of Home Language(s) or Standard English for a variety of oral language
purposes and activities
To develop and serve as cognitive tools for engaging in and sharing learning
● observe, practice, modify and critically examine how tone, fluency and intonation impact meaning and mood
● apply individual and clusters of listening comprehension strategies independent of purpose and intuition.
● develop increasingly complex vocabulary in meaningful and sometimes insightful ways.
● tell real and imagined stories with focused attention to topic, sequence, language use and the conventions of the genre
● demonstrate how to connect phoneme manipulation with meaningful use of affixes to build on existing roots
● recognize and use oral strategies to create a presentation by developing and elaborating on an idea and make increasingly sophisticated decisions
about word choice, sentence fluency and voice.
5
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
At the end of Grade 4, the learners are Formative assessments provide opportunities to The focus of ELO 1 is to allow learners to engage in listening and
expected to: determine prior learning before instruction, observe speaking activities to find joy, personal development, fostering
Listen and speak for pleasure and learner progress during and after learning and provide relationships, and developing an appreciation for both culture and
information needed to inform the next steps of oral expressions.
personal growth
instruction. Using the Observation of Student Learning
Journal, listen, observe, and record anecdotal notes as Listen and speak for pleasure and personal growth
1.1 Demonstrate enthusiasm for
learners are engaged prior to learning, during learning
participating in class discussions,
and after learning. Genre Stations (SCO 1.2)
storytelling, oral poetry, and singing.
Organise the classroom into 5 Listening Stations (Fiction, Non-
The Observation of Student Learning Journal may be fiction, Poetry, and Visual Text Interview Station), each containing a
1.2 Continue to explore a variety of hard or soft copy with brief dated comments about specific genre of recorded books and templates with activities related
genres and styles in spoken language on learner progress as well as next steps for instruction. to the genre. Allow the learners a specific time to move through
topics of interest and personal growth Create one page per learner and keep a record of each station, engage with materials and select one for sharing with
(conversations, debates, poetry, observations throughout the term or year. Add pages as the class at the Interview Station. The teacher or learners can
storytelling, interviews, etc.) necessary conduct the interview.
Name: https://www.myprimaryparadise.com/2018/03/05/listening-centers/
Speaking and Reading and Writing and See Additional Resources section for sites that provide texts for
1.14 Express preferences in written,
Listening Viewing Representing Listening Centers or invite parents and community members to
visual, and oral communication genres
record short stories, newspaper articles, poems, etc.
Date: Date: Date:
and styles and explain the reasons
Focus: Focus: Focus:
behind their choices. Accomplishments Accomplishments Accomplishments
Next steps: Next steps: Next steps:
Debate Extravaganza (SCO 1.14, 1.17, 1.23, 1.25, 1.30)
1.15 use technology to enhance their Teach learners the structure of a debate and how to formulate their
Date:
listening and speaking skills, such as arguments effectively. Arrange a class debate and group the learners
Focus:
recording and listening to their own Accomplishments to discuss and defend their preferences on certain topics. Allow team
speech Next steps: members to choose how they wish to contribute to the team - by
writing, presenting, researching online, and so on.
Date: Recognize and accommodate the different learning styles by
1.16 Use multimedia resources for
Focus:
encouraging the learners to incorporate visual aids, hands-on
research and oral presentations. Accomplishments
activities, and auditory elements. Use multimedia resources to
Next steps:
enhance engagement, such as videos, audio recordings, Podcasts,
1.17 continue to engage with and
Formative assessments include pre-assessments, and interactive presentations.
share various genres of music, oral
assessments during learning and summative assessments
6
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
poetry, artwork, and oral stories for upon completion of learning. Formats for all types of
pleasure formative assessments include the following:
COP:
Conversations INTEGRATING SUBJECTS: Tech Talk integrates well
1.18 Respond to oral/aural language
Observations with content from other subject areas.
through improvisational drama and/or
Products
artwork
Tech Talk (SCO 1.15, 1.16, 1.23) Demonstrate and monitor
CONVERSATIONS learners as they work collaboratively to use technology to video a
1.19 Listen attentively and critically to
debate, conversation interview, a piece of artwork viewed, a book
fiction and nonfiction texts and music
Anecdotal Records read or a specific topic that was researched. Learners can post their
to demonstrate understanding of the videos to a closed/private YouTube page that can only be accessed
mood, main idea, supporting details, One-on-One Discussions by the class. They can view each other’s videos and create video
theme, moral etc. Engage learners in individual conversations to gauge responses as well as give feedback.
their understanding, opinions, and thoughts on particular https://www.commonsense.org/education/search?keywords=podcasts%20for%20elementary
%20students&sort_by=search_api_relevance
1.20 Develop competence in analyzing topics such as current events, and controversial topics.
subtle messages in a conversation, Required Excellent (3) Good (2) Fair (1) Story Elements Analysis: (SCO 1.19, 1.35)
music, advertisements, speeches, and Elements Choose a short online story or passage for learners to listen to or
media. read aloud to the class. Before listening or reading, introduce the
Contributi Contributed Contributed Contribut
concepts of mood, main idea, supporting details, theme, and moral,
ons several few ed 1-2
1.21 give clear “how to” instructions. during reading, pause periodically to discuss these elements with the
meaningful meaningful ideas to
learners. Afterward, facilitate a class discussion where learners
comments to comments the
identify and analyze these elements together.
1.22 discuss issues and/or solutions to the discussion to the discussion
local, regional and world problems by based on discussion .
evidence from based on Advertisement Analysis: (SCO 1.20, 1.23)
extending use of questioning to
the text, evidence Show learners a variety of advertisements from different mediums
consider: why? how? when? what if?
events etc. from the such as print, television, or online platforms. Learners work in small
what else?
text, events groups to analyze the subtle messages conveyed in each
etc. advertisement, including the use of imagery, language, and
Listen and speak to form and foster persuasion techniques. Encourage learners to discuss the intended
Depth of All of the Some of the Questions
relationships audience and the potential impact of these messages.
Thought questions and questions and
Examples:
comments and comments
1.23 engage in back-and-forth
showed deep comments did not
conversations with peers during understanding showed show very
7
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
collaborative activities by adding
and original, deep deep,
relevant comments and questions to
profound understandi original
advance the dialogue. thought. ng and thinking.
original,
profound
1.24 express their ideas and opinions
thought.
with increasing respect and confidence.
Discussio Discussion Discussion Limited
1.25 practice active listening strategies n Skills skills such as skills such discussion https://www.facebook.com/watch/?v=326134925374046
including eye contact with affirming communicatio as skills.
n and communicat
words/gestures to show
reflective ion and Listen and speak to form and foster relationships.
whole-hearted engagement during peer
listening are reflective
discussions.
clearly listening are Listening Buddies: (SCO 1.25)
evident. evident but
Assign each learner a listening buddy for a designated period, such as
1.26 experiment with nonverbal not clear.
a week or a month. Encourage learners to actively listen to their
communication (signing, mime, facial buddy during class discussions and activities, making eye contact and
expressions, etc.) Peer Interviews using affirming words or gestures to show engagement. At the end
Pair learners interview each other on topics of interests of the period, learners reflect on their experience as listening buddies
1.27 continue to develop understanding or on genres of music, oral poetry, artwork, and oral and share how it helped them become better listeners. Examples of
of point of view without expressing stories. Learners can interview their peers on local, topic are: My Dream Adventure; Invent a New Animal; Magic
judgment regional and world problems and on culturally relevant Powers; Favourite Book Character. (This strategy can be employed
song, calypso, soca, drama, and poetry. with learners from different grade levels. Weekly, learners engage in
10-15 minutes interaction, listening and discussing music, poetry,
1.28 give constructive oral feedback
Assess the communication skills and understanding newscast etc.
using prompts such as “I notice...I
demonstrated by both the interviewer and the
wonder...” when responding to
interviewee during their peer interview. Charades! (SCO 1.24, 1.26, 1.35)
classmates' presentations or ideas.
Provide learners with cards that show images or words describing
Use a rubric/rating scale to assess each learners' different emotions. Learners take turns acting out their words while
1.29 continue to explore ideas and performance individually on a scale of 1-3 with 1 being others guess what emotion is portrayed. Observers may wish to use
feelings by asking respectful questions 'Needs Improvement', being 'Meets Expectations', and 3 from a set of emoticon card to display the emotion.
and listening with minimal interruption being 'Exceeds Expectations'.
8
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.30 Participate in the early stages of Record specific comments in the Observation of Student
debate, considering the multiple Learning Journal. Cross-Curricular Projects: Multimedia Presentations
viewpoints and finding common (SCO 1.31, 1.15, 1.16)
Interviewer
grounds
1. Asks clear and understandable questions Assign learners a cross-curricular project that integrates multiple
2. Listens actively and attentively subject areas, such as creating a multimedia presentation on a social
1.31 Integrate listening and speaking
3. Encourages elaboration and details issue or celebration in your country. Guide learners in researching,
skills across various subject areas, such
4. Maintains a respectful and positive tone organizing information, and preparing oral presentations
as mathematics, social studies, and
Interviewee incorporating visual aids, such as slideshows or videos. Provide
science. 1. Articulates responses clearly and concisely opportunities for learners to present their projects to the class, listen
2. Provides relevant and informative responses to feedback from their peers, and reflect on their learning across
Listen and speak to develop 3. Elaborates on answers when prompted different subjects.
appreciation and celebration of 4. Uses a respectful and positive tone
culture and oral languages. STEM Challenges: (SCO 1.21, 1.23, 1.31)
OBSERVATIONS
Listening Skills: Observation Checklist Introduce a STEM (science, technology, engineering, and
As learners engage in discussions and back and forth mathematics) challenge that requires following step-by-step
1.32 Explore and discuss ideas,
conversations with peers during collaborative activities, instructions, such as building a structure out of toothpicks
opinions, and feelings on topics of
observe and make note of active listening skills that they and marshmallows or creating a simple circuit. Provide
personal and social interest using both
individually possess. learners with oral instructions for completing the challenge and
Standard English and Home
The learner: encourage them to work collaboratively in small groups to follow the
Language(s).
- Focuses on the purpose of listening instructions and achieve the desired outcome.
- Looks at the speaker
1.33 demonstrate awareness of the kind - Controls personal activity level Listen and speak to develop appreciation and celebration of
of language appropriate for different - Demonstrates responsive reaction (e.g., nods, smiles) culture and oral languages.
situations and audiences - Shows appreciation for speaker's ideas
- Makes notes on main points
1.34 Deepen understanding of the - Draws reasonable conclusions from materials heard Language Immersion Days: (SCO 1.32, 1.27, 1.33)
importance of word choice, tone of - Uses respectful language in any feedback/questions Dedicate regular days or portion of days to language immersion
voice, volume, projection, facial - Asks for clarification or examples when appropriate activities where learners communicate exclusively in their Home
Language(s) or a language other than Standard English. Facilitate
expression, and gesture appropriate to
discussions, games, or role-playing activities related to personal and
the speaking occasion
social interests, providing opportunities for learners to practice
9
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.35 Listen to identify the tone, mood Role Play speaking and listening in different languages in a supportive and
and the emotion conveyed by a speaker Learners work in small groups and develop role plays inclusive environment.
in an oral communication. where they adjust language, tone, and delivery according https://englishwithnab.com/what-is-the-secret-to-language-
immersion/#:~:text=Listening%20to%20podcasts%2C%20music%20or,often%20after%20o
to listener, context, and situation:
nly%20one%20time.
1.36 Further develop oral
- Observe and assess learners during role-playing
activities or simulations, noting their ability to The Interpreter (SCO 1.32, 1.33, 1.38)
comprehension strategies (e.g., making
apply knowledge and skills in practical scenarios. Provide opportunities for learners to practice interpreting or
predictions, making inferences,
Use guided checklists and oral questions to translating the vernacular language into Standard English by having
visualization, drawing conclusions) to
assess. an assigned Standard English Day weekly. Facilitate a discussion on
determine word meanings
the kind of language appropriate for different situations and
audiences.
1.37 identify, share, and analyze
culturally relevant songs, calypso, soca, Speak Like a Pro Workshop (SCO 1.34)
drama, and poetry with fluency, rhythm, Organise a workshop for learners to deepen their understanding of
and pace for literal and subtle purpose effective verbal and nonverbal communication skills for various
and meaning speaking occasions. Begin by discussing the importance of effective
communication skills in different situations, such as in school, with
1.38 further develop meaningful oral friends, and in future careers. Introduce the concept of word choice,
https://www.coursehero.com/file/78637574/roleplay-
tone of voice, volume, projection, facial expression, and gesture,
language use and conventions of oral
checklistpdf/
explaining how each element contributes to effective communication
language(s) as appropriate to the
(10 minutes). In groups, provide a different speaking occasion
context and purpose:
scenario along with instructions for learners to practice specific
- word order
communication skills (15 minutes). Invite groups to perform their
- increasingly varied vocabulary choices PRODUCTS
role-plays for the class and encourage classmates to provide
for nouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs Group Oral Presentations:
feedback on their use of word choice, tone of voice, volume,
Place learners in groups to research topics of interest or
- use of descriptive language (similes, projection, facial expression, and gesture (10 minutes). Lead a class
issues and/or solutions to local, regional, and world
metaphors, beginning use of discussion where learners reflect on what they learned during the
problems. Learners should showcase their knowledge
personification) workshop. Encourage them to share strategies they can use to
through verbal and oral presentations using creative and
- use of affixes improve their communication skills on different speaking occasions
diverse mediums.
-subject and verb agreement correctly in in the future (5 minutes).
delivering spoken messages and in Use the following rubric to assess learners' use of oral
Power of Tunes (SCO 1.34, 1.35, 1.37)
planned oral presentations. language and ability to follow conventions during
Play a variety of age-appropriate, culturally relevant songs
presentations.
for learners to listen to and have learners identify the tone,
10
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
mood, and emotions indicated by the music and lyrics. Follow the
Gradual Release of Responsibility Model (I do, We do, You do) by
providing an example and engaging in whole group discussions in
brainstorming words that describe tone and mood. Learners can use
card emojis to indicate their choice while listening.
Examples:
1. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cYkqMT6HKD0&list=PLG7kLLCuJuiUJUBf
He-1rmaWStt2LiYtl&index=2
https://www.twinkl.com.au/resource/us2-e-94-presentation- 2. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-
rubric-progress-sheet YOa0TbeDwo&list=PLG7kLLCuJuiUJUBfHe-1rmaWStt2LiYtl&index=308
Reflective Listening
Summarize and reflect on what you've understood from
the speaker's tone, mood, and emotional cues. This not
only confirms your understanding but also encourages Cultural Explosion (SCO 1.36, 1.37)
the speaker to delve deeper into their feelings. Learners discuss the title of a song, poem, etc. listen to the lyrics,
make inferences, and draw conclusions based on content. Learners
Learners Checklist for Reflective Listening will also analyse the Calypso, Soca, etc., for its purpose meaning,
rhythm, etc.
● Listen more than you talk.
● Respond to what is said.
● Restate and clarify what the speaker has said,
don't ask questions or say what you feel, believe,
or want.
● Try to understand the feelings, mood, etc.
reflected in what the speaker is saying, not just
the facts or ideas being presented.
● Work to develop the best possible sense of what
is said.
● Respond with acceptance and empathy, not
indifference, cold objectivity, or false concern
(respond to the emotional cues).
11
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Teacher Checklist for Reflective Listening
The Learner:
● Completely states his/her thoughts or opinions
without interrupting.
● Remembers the important facts or points made
by others.
● Jot down any details or points raised by others.
● Repeats the gist of, or summarises, the points of
view, mood, feeling etc. expressed.
● Keeps an open mind, even if he/she finds the
points made by others displeasing.
● Avoids being unfriendly towards views that are
different from your own.
● Expresses genuine interest in the conversation
of others.
Learner Self-Assessment
Am I a Good Listener?
Provide opportunities for learners to practice and assess
their listening skills. Give learners sticker emojis to
represent responses such as 'always', 'sometimes' or 'I
need help' or they may draw the emoji on a sheet of
paper. Instruct learners to honestly rate themselves.
Always Sometimes
I Have Questions
12
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Making Predictions: Before I hear something, I think
about what might happen next based on what I already
know.
Making Inferences: I think 'between the lines' to
understand what isn't directly said but is implied.
Visualisation: I imagine what I hear in my mind, like
creating a movie in my head.
Drawing Conclusions: I put together clues and
information to figure out the main idea or answer
questions.
Using Word Meaning Clues: I pay attention to how
words are used in sentences to understand their meaning.
Extension: Based on learners' responses, ask learners to
choose the strategy they could practice more and come
up with ways in which they can do so. Further, ask the
learners, 'Is there anything that makes it hard for you to
listen and understand?. Hold discussions with learners to
help them improve.
Speaking with Confidence Self-Assessment Toolkit
Peer Assessment Checklist for Speaking
Assessment Questions Yes No
Did the speaker demonstrate a clear
understanding of the topic?
Was the speaker's voice clear, audible,
and engaging?
13
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Did the speaker use different vocal
tones, inflections, and emphasis to keep
the audience engaged?
Did the speaker successfully achieve
their intended goals?
Did the speaker provide clear and
informative answers to questions?
Peer Assessment Checklist for Listening
Assessment Questions Yes No
Did the listener face the speaker and
avoid distractions?
Did the listener show interest in the
topic being discussed?
Did the listener demonstrate respect for
the speaker by listening without
judgment?
Did the listener nod or provide other
non-verbal cues to show they were
listening?
Was the feedback given in a respectful
and supportive manner?
14
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Additional Resources and Materials
The focus of ELO 1 is oral language. Students will explore oral language for pleasure and personal growth, to foster relationships and to develop
an appreciation and celebration of culture and oral languages. The following resources and materials would assist the teacher in the effective
implementation of the ELO.
1) Text Genres
Texts are classified into genres on the basis of the intent of the writer. These two videos provide the teacher with useful information that may be shared and
discussed with learners one section ate a time.
The Structures of Informational Text
Five types of Text Structure
2) Creole stories
Creole is mostly the learners’ first language. Using creole to enhance language and gain a better understanding of language which would develop thinking
skills. For example, visit:
Gwo Bouden, Pat Fin, èk Gwo Djòl
3) Recording Devices
Recording provides an opportunity for learners to listen to themselves and engage in self assessment. They will be able to assess their fluency, intonation,
and accuracy of words and phrasing. Choose from topics of interest to the learners and schedule time for small group discussions to be recorded and shared.
15
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Additional Use Content Knowledge for the Teacher
1) Tone, Fluency, and Intonation
This video provides useful information about what the tone, fluency, and intonation in speaking sounds like.
a. A brief explanation of the 6 characteristics of fluency.
The 6 Characteristics of Fluency
2) Listening Strategies
There are a variety of listening strategies poems and stories to listen attentively and for understanding.
eSpark Learning's Blog - eSpark
3) Non Verbal Communication
Learners can learn and understand different types of non-verbal communication throughout their lives. They also need to learn the time and place for each.
Nonverbal Communication Activities for Students in Grades K-8 - Centervention®
4) Speaking Skills
Learners can use their speaking skills through prompted activities and questions from the teacher.
16
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
https://www.trinitycollege.com/resource/?id=4336
This site offers excellent mini lessons for speaking.
5) Types of Languages Used
Once learners understand the types of language used and needed in speaking, then it would become easier for them to apply what they have learnt when it
comes to writing. The video suggested below provides a lot of information; choose short sections to share with the learners and provide opportunities to
discuss the topic and apply to speaking activities.
English 4 Lesson 4 Identify the Structure, Purpose, and Language Features of Different Text
17
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
ESSENTIAL LEARNING OUTCOME 2: Reading and Viewing
Introduction to the Subject: Language is the foundation of communication and the primary instrument of thought. The study of
Language Arts provides access to multiple and interrelated oral, aural, written, and visual ways of representing, exploring, problem
solving, communicating, and sharing meaning. Through listening, speaking, writing, representing, reading, and viewing a wide range of
text and text form, the student continues to develop an awareness of culture, personal identity, and the strategies needed to
participate, communicate, and reflect critically on thought and action.
Strand: The purpose of Reading and Viewing instruction is for pleasure and personal growth and to develop readers who enjoy and
interact meaningfully with a wide range of genres and text forms. Meaningful interaction with texts is developed through learning how
to access and build on background knowledge and use the information provided by various sources of meaning, developing vocabulary,
recognising, and using language structures and meaningful application of graphophonic elements of the text.
Essential Learning Outcome 2: Students will demonstrate a variety of ways to use background knowledge and interests to select
and engage critically with a range of culturally diverse paper based, visual, and digital texts for pleasure and personal growth.
Grade Level Expectations for Reading and Viewing:
Read for pleasure and personal growth
● reflect on and identify their strengths as readers, areas for improvement and the strategies they found most helpful before, during and after reading.
Use background knowledge
● become more aware of how to integrate reading with skills in listening, speaking, writing, viewing, and representing to help them
make sense of what they read
Interact meaningfully with a wide range of genres and text forms
● read within the range of the Transitional to Proficient Stages
● demonstrate an understanding of a variety of literary, graphic, and informational texts, using a range of strategies to construct
meaning
● engage in character, setting, plot study and critical reflection
● use problem solving strategies such as monitoring, self-correcting and checking independently
Develop vocabulary
● choose nonfiction reading materials for specific purposes and to gather, analyse and use known and new vocabulary in a variety of
contexts
Recognise and use language structures
● recognise a variety of text forms, text features and stylistic elements and demonstrate understanding of how they help communicate meaning.
Apply graphophonic elements meaningfully
● continue to develop and apply their understanding of meaningful word study and form
18
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
By the end of Grade Four, the At the beginning of each term, and during ELO 2 emphasizes the importance of daily
learner will be expected to the term when necessary, use an oral Independent Reading. During independent reading,
practice and apply strategies reading record to determine each learner’s learners should select materials that interest them, align
progress in reading. Provide guided reading with their progress, and provide just the right amount of
described in the outcomes
sessions to build on the learner’s progress. challenge to improve their reading.
below:
Use formative assessment (Conversation, Read and view to use background knowledge and
read and view to use
Observation, and Product) during interests to select book
background knowledge and
independent reading to assess learners’
interests to select books
reading proficiency.
2.1 select engaging paper
based and digital visual texts
Note: Remember that in addition to written
for Independent Reading
assessments, opportunities to talk, sing,
based on: illustrate or dramatise provide the teacher
- interests with useful information about student
https://www.freepik.com/premium-vector/boy-girl-reading-
- appropriate level of difficulty learners. All learners should be exposed to book_6725652.htm
- various genres a wide range of assessment formats.
Independent reading time ( SCO 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4)
- diverse cultures
Provide opportunities for daily sustained Independent
CONVERSATION
Reading. Ensure there’s a class library stocked with a
2.2 justify reading preferences
diverse range of reading materials for all learners to
Conference with learners about books they
choose from. Enable learners to choose texts that suit
2.3 utilize background have read independently. Inquire about their individual reading levels and start reading
knowledge to better their interest, ask questions, and take note independently. While learners read on their own, the
comprehend a topic, of responses. teacher should engage in one-on-one discussions with
picture, or title before, others, listening to them read, and conduct small group
during and after reading Reading Conference Record Sheet guided reading sessions. See the IAS column for
suggestions about how to observe and confer with
Name ___________ Date ______
learners.
Title ___________ Author _________
19
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
2.4 read, view, and respond to Attitude and interest
a variety of literature from the During independent reading, offer learners the chance to
Why did you choose this book?
Caribbean and other cultures select materials that captivate, appropriate and are
How difficult was this book for you?
enjoyable to them. Involve them in exercises that boost
their reading confidence. Keep track of their progress
h a r d e a s y j u s t r i g h t?
to assess their growth and adjust the reading level
read and view to engage
What connection did you make with the acbcooorkd?i n gly.
critically with a range of
What strategy helped you understand the text?
texts for pleasure
What is your favourite part of the book?
Would you recommend this book? why?
2.5 continue to develop Let’s discuss your strengths and what you need to work
strategies and monitor reading on _______
effectiveness to identify
reading challenges and apply
OBSERVATION
appropriate fix up strategies
Observe students as they engage in
2.6 use pictures and Independent Reading. Look for signs of
illustrations, word structures, active engagement, such as following along
https://eatteachlaughcraft.com/teaching/launching-
and text features to: with the text, using reading strategies, and readers-workshop-guidelines-and-expectations/
- locate information
showing comprehension through facial
Readers’ Workshop (SCO 2.3) – Independent Reading
- obtain or verify
expressions or annotations. Record is one component of Readers’ Workshop. Engage
understanding of information
anecdotal notes of patterns and behaviors learners in a brief 10 minute mini lesson to remind them
- develop questions
for intervention and improvement. of a previous lesson taught during ELO 3 and 4.
-search for answers Encourage them to apply that lesson during Independent
Reading to and practice reading strategies and skills
2.7 continue to develop and fluency, and stamina ( see poster above). (see Additional
demonstrate critical Resources section for before, during and after reading
questioning strategies to gather activities) . Create opportunities for discussion, artistic
information from favourite
20
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
visual, musical, and written representation, illustrative, and written reflections on
text re: reading.
- point of view
Enhancing cultural experience through
- purpose
independent reading (SCO 2.4)
- bias
- subtle messages
https://clipart-library.com/clipart/126603.htm
2.8 follow and correct when
necessary, multi-step written Reading Logs: Reading Logs provide
instructions e.g., how to teachers with a detailed view of learners'
record of the books read and amount of
assemble a product or play a
time spent reading. Use reading logs to https://bookofcinz.com/readcaribbean/
board game.
track learners progress, monitor books they
To improve learners ' understanding and enjoyment of
have read, reflect on their reading habits
literature, encourage them to explore a variety of books
and to set reading goals for them.
from local and international cultures. Create a special
read and view to select and
NOTE: Quality over quantity! It’s
area in the classroom with diverse reading materials for
engage critically with a
important to allow for individual
various skill levels. Stress the importance of interacting
range of texts for personal differences in the time and quantity of
with (curated) locally produced digital and paper based
growth books read.
content such as books, poems, newspapers, lyrics,
posters, magazines, and brochures etc. Encourage
2.9 use Independent Reading Independent reading log
learners to contribute to this collection by bringing
Time to develop items from home or conducting research. Note: Be sure
-reading fluency (accuracy, to review texts brought from home before displaying.
phrasing, and intonation) 1. Title: ______________________
-recognise quotation marks Author: ____________________ Encourage learners to use the classroom space for
independent reading. Allow them to choose materials
and marker words (said, Genre: ____________________
they like, reflect on, and discuss their thoughts while
shouted, whispered, etc.) to Date Started: _____
reading, and then creatively connect the content to their
determine the mood of the
Date Ended: ____
own cultural heritage.
speaker in the text
21
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
-connect punctuation in text to
meaningful interpretation of
sentences and paragraphs
-change the rate of reading 2. Title: ______________________
depending on the mood of Author: ____________________
the text Genre: ____________________ https://clipart-library.com/to-respond-cliparts.html#google_vignette
-practice meaningful word Date Started: _____
How do we respond (SCO 2.4)
solving strategy (root Date Ended: ____
Create the opportunity for learners to respond to text
word, chunking, affixes,
read or viewed, for example:
context clues
Fluency: Provide students with a short - conduct reading conferences where learners can
2.10 use text-based passage of 100-150 words. Allow them to share about the text
information and personal read aloud and use a checklist to check for - participate in literacy circle activities
experiences to anticipate fluency, accuracy, and prosody. Reading - write a response journal
outcomes and solve problems fluency can be monitored regularly during - dramatize the text
reading conferences. - represent a story using a graphic organizer or
2.11 connect funds of mind map
Fluency Checklist
knowledge to analyze and ask
See additional resources for information on literature
questions of author’s message
circles, graphic organizers, journals, and other ways to
in visual and/or text-based
respond to reading.
information through the use
of:
-analysis
-synthesis
-inference
-application
2.12 describe the effect of
illustrations on the mood,
(timrasinski.com)
22
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
setting and plot of written or
visual text. PRODUCT
BRAIDING THE STRANDS - Incorporate
Reading Response Journal
2.13 reflect on the purpose
writing assignments where learners can write
and positive or negative
summaries, reflections, or responses to reading materials.
influences of different types of
popular texts e.g., websites,
advertisements, social media,
etc. INTEGRATING SUBJECTS: Utilize books,
articles, and materials that connect different subjects,
2.14 analyze the techniques allowing learners to see how reading is relevant across
used by various media texts various subject areas.
created to inform, entertain,
persuade Use a response journal as a tool to assess
read and view to engage critically with a range of
learner’s comprehension, critical thinking
skills, and ability to analyze and interpret texts for pleasure
the text. The teacher sets clear guidelines
Monitor and Clarify (SCO 2.5)
for what should be included in each
addition to the response journal. For
Share the Monitor and Clarify video with the class a few
example, questions to answer, reflections to
times each year, pausing to discuss each section.
make, illustrations to include, connections
to other texts or personal experiences, or
analysis of the text. Learners record his or
her reactions to texts read. The teacher
reviews learners’ response journals regularly
and provides feedback on their responses.
This can help track their understanding of
the text and identify areas for https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=yVrn-7h-RaQ
improvement.
https://theappliciousteacher.com/reading-response-journals/
23
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
This strategy enables learners to identify where meaning
Book report breaks down while reading and then apply appropriate
In addition to a variety of other ways to ‘fix up’ strategies to better comprehend.
reflect on texts read, occasionally assign
book reports where learners summarize Discuss with learners the difference between monitoring
different types of text using a template. All and clarifying and utilize the strategies below to monitor
responses to reading should provide their understanding and clarify any confusion. Provide
insights to learners’ comprehension, opportunities for peer or teacher demonstrations
engagement, and critical thinking skills followed by time for learners to practice the strategy
developed through independent reading. during Independent Reading.
For a variety of templates, visit:
https://templatelab.com/book-report-templates/ Think aloud - Encourage learners to verbalize their
thoughts while reading
Sample book report template
Name …. Summarizing: Provide opportunities for learners to
summarize sections of the text in their own words.
Title Author
Peer Discussions: Allow learners to discuss text with peers
Book type
Visual Aids: Use visual aids like pictures, diagrams, or
videos to support comprehension
3 sentences to summarize the book ……..
Questioning: Encourage learners to ask questions before,
5 interesting words from the book …….
during, and after reading. Assist them in writing
clarifying questions on sticky notes as they read e.g. How
to write a book report after every book does that relate to what I already know? Does this make
read. sense? How do I say that word? Why did the author say
or do that?
SELF-ASSESSMENT
Guide learners to use the checklist to assess Work with learners to co-create an anchor chart with
their Independent Reading. Teacher visual prompts to remind learners to monitor their
observes responses and gives feedback. comprehension while reading.
24
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Text features (SCO 2.6)
Review the different text features e.g., bold text, italics,
graphics, headings, charts, graphs, title, subheading,
captions, bullet points, table of content, glossary etc.
Provide learners with time to find specific text features
and share the purpose and meaning of each.. Select
different types of text to compare and contrast the
features. Allow learners to use text features e.g., table of
content, glossary to find information.
https://www.readingrockets.org/classroom/comprehension/teaching-text-features
Read all about it (SCO 2.7)
https://www.google.com/search?sca_esv=95f056e3806c3e9f&sxsrf=ACQVn08-
https://www.google.com
NXLlU0AjTHC1VGkJwSNFCdO
Present local newspapers, magazines, leaflets etc. and
PEER ASSESSMENT
highlight articles and headlines for Independent Reading
and discussion. Provide questions to ponder on as
Create a quiz with different levels of
questions based on a text read and allow learners read e.g. Who wrote this article? Why was it
learners to quiz each other to assess their written? When was it published? Which audience would
comprehension. Focus on questions on it appeal to? Do you agree with the author? Why or why
peers sharing the text and choosing not?
sections to explore. For example:
- Find the part where X is described.
25
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
- Have you ever experienced something like Identify bias and subtle messages in newspaper articles
on page X? and discuss with learners how they may influence the
- Let’s read this paragraph and draw a reader.
picture to illustrate what’s happening.
- Look up the word X in the (digital or
Encourage learners to search for articles that give
paper based) thesaurus. What is an
different messages and allow them to ask their own
antonym? What is a synonym?
questions and share different opinions. Allow learners to
summarize the main message in an article.
Problems/solutions - listening
For suggestions re focus points for lessons on
comprehension
Learners work in small mixed ability newspaper reading visit
groups. Each reader is provided with a text https://mediasmarts.ca/sites/default/files/pdfs/lesson-
plan/Lesson_Looking_at_Newspapers.pdf
on the same topic, but at different reading
levels. To find these texts, search the
topic’s name and an approximate reading
level OR use an AI option and ask it to
alter the text level.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS After reading allow
For example:
learners to give oral or visual book reports.
Sleep is very important. People who do not get
enough sleep have trouble thinking clearly. TFheoyl low the leader (SCO2.8)
also often make mistakes. They may lose theirE ngage learners in reading instructional texts such as
temper easily. How can you solve the problemm?a Gnuoa ls, recipes, textbooks, or any other written
to bed at the same time and wake up at the sammaet erials that offer detailed guidance on completing a
time. Do not drink sugary drinks before goingta tsok or operating a device. Support them in
bed. Relax before bedtime by reading. You cacno malspor ehending and following instructions in a clear and
try counting sheep. sequential manner. Engage learners in completing
activities such as these below.
1. Underline three problems related to nRoet cipe – provide learners with a range of simple recipes
getting enough sleep. to read follow the instruction to create a specific dish
26
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Scavenger hunt – create a scavenger hunt activity with
2. What are three solutions that can help you
clues written in instructions that will lead learners to find
get enough sleep?
hidden words or object
McGraw -Hill Reading Wonders Gr 3-6
Bothell, WA • Chicago, IL • Columbus, OH • New York, NY Games – observe learners as they read the instruction
to play a game
Craft item – provide learners with craft material and
written instructions on how to create a specific craft
Alternate text from Chat GPT:
item. Time learners as they complete the item
Sleep is really important. If you don't sleep
Online challenge – observe learners as they read
enough, you might not think well. You could
instructions to complete a challenge online
make mistakes or get mad easily. How can you
fix this? Try going to bed and waking up at the
same time every day. Don't drink sugary drinks read and view to select and engage critically with a
before bed. Relax before sleep by reading or range of texts for personal growth
counting sheep.
1. Underline three problems related to
not getting enough sleep.
2. What are three solutions that can
help you get enough sleep? Rhythm and Pace in Reading (SCO 2.9)
Model fluent and critical reading for learners by paying
Observe and assess learners’ ability to work attention to the purpose of the text, the tone pauses, and
with peers and their understanding of a variation in voice.
text read to them.
Enhance learners’ fluency in reading, by encouraging
them to practice challenging sentences repeatedly until
they can read them fluently. (See the Fluency rubric in
the IAS column).
27
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Engage learners in these activities to enhance fluency
skills:
Choral reading - Learners read a passage together as a
group, focusing on reading at the same pace and rhythm.
This can help improve fluency as students listen to
others and adjust their own reading accordingly.
Readers’ Theater - Divide the text into parts and
assign roles to learners. Learners will act out or read
aloud with expression, emphasizing the mood and intent
of the text.
Pre-teach vocabulary – Practice identifying difficult
words learners may come across in a reading text first in
isolation using games, crossword puzzles etc.
Problems/Solutions (SCO 2.10, 2.11)
https://www.myprimaryparadise.com/2013/10/14/whats-your-problem-teaching-
problem-and-solution/
Use mentor texts with strong problem solution plots and
demonstrate through ‘read aloud’ and ‘think-aloud’, how
to analyze crucial information in the text. For example,
using a narrative text, focus on the challenges characters
face and potential ways to overcome them. Encourage
learners as they read to pay attention to the characters'
thoughts, actions, emotions, and responses with
supporting evidence. Discuss potential solutions by
posing probing questions that encourage critical thinking
28
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
about the issues supported by evidence from the text.
Encourage learners to draw personal connections to
these challenges and explain how they would address
them.
Allow learners to collaborate independently in small
groups using a T-chart to pinpoint the challenges in a
text and brainstorm possible solutions. Have learners
illustrate challenges and solutions based on their
understanding.
T-Chart
Problems Solutions
Allow learners to reflect on and share their work with
their classmates.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS. Based on
illustrations, allow learners to write descriptions of
problems and possible solutions after reading a text.
Influence me (SCO 2.14)
Provide opportunities for learners to view, read and
evaluate local and familiar products and the messages
conveyed through advertisements.
29
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Create the opportunity for reading and viewing from
different media e.g., food labels, TikTok videos,
magazines etc. (see ad below)
https://jdmwrites.com/examples-of-
services/
Ask learners to focus on the following areas in
discussion:
● The target audience
● The message and how it communicates with
learners
● How it appeals to the audience in terms of
colour, design, image
● The persuasive language used
● General feedback from learners on thought
feeling, emotions effect on them and reactions
towards the advertisement
30
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Encourage learners to share their findings and
summarize the main idea of the advertisement.
What do you anticipate? (SCO 2.11)
Anticipation guides can be used to activate learners’
prior knowledge. Present about 4 to 6 statements that
will stimulate discussion about issues in a text. Provide
the opportunity for learners to participate in discussion
about the statements giving reasons. Note how many
learners agree or disagree with them. During and after
reading, learners look for evidence to support or refute
the statements in order to confirm or modify their
original responses.
https://www.readingrockets.org/classroom/classroom-
strategies/anticipation-guide
INTEGRATING SUBJECTS: Learners create an
item and create an advertisement for it. Integrate technology
and the arts.
Braiding Strands – The use of an Anticipation
Guide is an excellent way to engage learners in all strands
of Language Arts – speaking, listening, reading, viewing,
writing, and representing.
31
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
ELO 2 focuses on the selection and the critical engagement of text for pleasure and personal growth making use of students’ background
knowledge and interest.
Creating a Structure for Independent Reading
Time should be allotted on a daily basis for allowing students to engage in independent reading activities.
This can be accomplished through the use of an established structure such as a reading workshop routine
which begins with a reading-mini-lesson, followed by students’ reading independent of a text of their own
choosing. As students read, they apply/practice the skill/strategy taught in the mini-lesson. During this time,
the teacher may confer with individual students or work with small groups. Students should also be provided
with opportunities to share with others about their reading. This will provide the teacher with information
about how well students were able to apply ideas presented in the mini-lesson. This Strategy Guide provides
ideas on how teachers can support students as they read independently.
Here are a few additional tips to get students excited about reading. How to Recharge Independent Reading
Asking Questions as We Read
Questioning helps students engage with the text as they read. They are able to clarify what they are reading, gain deeper meaning of the
text hence improving their comprehension.. Good readers ask questions before, during and after reading.
Asking Questions Strategy
Questioning the Author
Questions to Ask about Reading
32
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Responding to Reading
Graphic from http://ferrarisgrade3.weebly.com/reading-response.html
A readers’ notebook can be used by students to track the various texts that they read (in the form of a reading log) as well as
allowing them to respond to what they read. Students can draw, write, and share their thinking and ideas or respond to a given
prompt about a text they have read in class or independently during their free time.
Here are some simple ideas and how teachers can implement this idea in their classrooms.
https://www.literacytreasures.com/post/how-to-set-up-readers-notebooks
33
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
from
https://core-docs.s3.amazonaws.com/documents/asset/uploaded_file/638096/Reader_s_Notebook.pdf
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Leveled Books/Texts
Leveled readers help match students to books matching their reading levels. In an attempt to match students with ‘just right’ books,
teachers may use book leveler apps which are available online.
Leveled Reading
Free Book Leveler App
Genres and subgenres of Books
It is useful for the teacher to understand the difference between genres when selecting books for the classroom library as well as for
reading instruction.
Guide to Reading Genres
Determining the Author’s Purpose
The author’s purpose tells us why the author wrote the story or text. Understanding the author’s purpose helps us identify the amin idea
and the most important details.
https://literacyideas.com/authors-purpose/
34
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Readability of Texts
There are a variety of free online tools which can be used to determine the readability of the text - the ease with which students can
understand the written text. This allows the teacher to match reading material to students’ appropriate reading levels so as to increase
their level of comprehension.
Here are a few online resources:
Types of Text and How to Use Them
Teaching Informational Text Structures
Readability Scoring System
Selecting Books based on Students’ Interests
Books available in classroom libraries for student reading should reflect their interests and hobbies and also ensure variety and choice
during independent reading. Additionally, students should be able to see themselves
s in the books that they read.
A variety of free online tools are available to help create student interest surveys in an effort to gather information about students in their
classrooms.
35
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Diversity in Books
Diversify your classroom library, ensure that students are exposed to a wide range
of books from various countries and cultures. This allows students to learn about
the world that we live in - to see themselves and experience the lives of other
people who seem different from us.
Selection of books from Caribbean Reads
Why Diverse Books Matter
The Diverse Bookshelf
Bloom Library
Global Digital Library
Story Online
Determining Students’ Reading Fluency
Assessing students’ oral reading fluency provides useful information on students’ reading progress and competence as well as identifying
areas students need support and intervention. Some ideas for assessing students reading fluency:
● Fluency checklist/rubric: as the student is reading, the teacher listens for the categories of fluent reading (expression/volume,
phrasing, smoothness and pace); use a checklist or rubric to score the oral reading.
● Miscue analysis/running record: to assess students’ reading accuracy. student is given a passage to read orally, teacher follows
on her copy, marking errors, omission of words, etc.
36
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
ESSENTIAL LEARNING OUTCOME 3: Reading and Viewing
Introduction to the Subject: Language is the foundation of communication and the primary instrument of thought. The study of Language Arts
provides access to multiple and interrelated oral, aural, written, and visual ways of representing, exploring, problem solving, communicating, and
sharing meaning. Through listening, speaking, writing, representing, reading, and viewing a wide range of text and text form, the student continues to
develop an awareness of culture, personal identity, and the strategies needed to
participate, communicate, and reflect critically on thought and action.
Strand: The purpose of Reading and Viewing instruction is for pleasure and personal growth and to develop readers who enjoy and interact
meaningfully with a wide range of genres and text forms. Meaningful interaction with texts is developed through learning how to access and build on
background knowledge and use the information provided by various sources of meaning, developing vocabulary, recognising, and using language
structures and meaningful application of graphophonic elements of the text.
Essential Learning Outcome 3: Students will interact with understanding and critical thought to a variety of genres and text forms using
vocabulary, comprehension strategies and graphophonic cues.
Grade Four Level Expectations for Reading and Viewing:
Read for pleasure and personal growth
● reflect on and identify their strengths as readers, areas for improvement and the strategies they found most helpful before, during and after reading.
Use background knowledge
● become more aware of how to integrate reading with skills in listening, speaking, writing, viewing, and representing to help them make sense of
what they read
Interact meaningfully with a wide range of genres and text forms
● read within the range of the Transitional to Proficient Stages
● demonstrate an understanding of a variety of literary, graphic, and informational texts, using a range of strategies to construct meaning
● engage in character, setting, plot study and critical reflection
● use problem solving strategies such as monitoring, self-correcting and checking independently
Develop vocabulary
● choose nonfiction reading materials for specific purposes and to gather, analyse and use known and new vocabulary in a variety of contexts
Recognise and use language structures
● recognise a variety of text forms, text features and stylistic elements and demonstrate understanding of how they help communicate meaning.
Apply graphophonic elements meaningfully
● continue to develop and apply their understanding of meaningful word study and form
37
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
By the end of Grade 4, the learner will be Formative assessment provides opportunities for read and view to interact with
expected to: teachers to provide learners with valuable insights to understanding and critical thought to a
read and view to interact with enhance their learning outcomes through wide range of genres and text forms using
understanding and critical thought to a observation, conversation, and products. comprehension strategies,
wide range of genres and text forms using
comprehension strategies, CONVERSATION
Literature Circles: Organize small group discussions
3.1 Continue to apply knowledge of the where students take on different roles (such as
organizational structure of fiction and discussion director, summarizer, connector, etc.) to
foster collaborative conversations and enhance
nonfiction genres to construct meaning of
meaning about the texts they are reading. The teacher
visual and text based information
takes anecdotal notes to capture important
information about each learner's reading
3.2 apply and integrate comprehension
performance and comprehension level.
strategies listed below to demonstrate https://tremendousleadership.com/blogs/tremendous-tracey/planting-seeds-to-
grow-future-readers
understanding of literary, visual, graphic, and
informational texts: Grow a reader (SCO 3.1, 3.2, 3.3)
- determining main idea Build upon reading comprehension strategies
- making connections that learners have learned in earlier grades
- predicting (see teacher resource for reading strategies).
Begin instruction with materials that match
- visualising
the learners' reading proficiency and
- inferring
progressively introduce more challenging
- analysing
texts. Encourage learners to apply a reading
- synthesising
strategy in small cooperative groups with
suitable reading materials. Monitor learners'
3.3 demonstrate understanding of text
implementation of the strategy. Ensure they
through a variety of oral, written, and visual engage in discussion as they use the strategy.
https://www.readwritethink.org
responses such as: After reading, allow learners to reflect on the
use of the strategy and share
38
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
-artistic representations (visual arts, song, Share like an author with the class.
dance) Learners take turns pretending to be the author of
-discussions texts they have read. Peers ask them questions to test
level of comprehension, trigger critical thought and
-graphic organizers
that will formulate the basis for further discussion.
-oral and written responses to questions
-poetry
Engage them in sharing on different aspects such as:
-letters
• purpose of the text
• the main idea and supporting details
• the language and choice of vocabulary
https://classroomclipart.com/clipart-view/Clipart/Legal/detective-
3.4 respond critically with greater insight to • the author’s point of view doing-his-investigation_jpg.htm
texts by asking and formulating responses to • the author’s bias
Be a detective – What’s the conclusion?
questions such as: • the intended message
(SCO 3.2)
-what if? • questions they would like to ask the author
Making inferences is like detective work
-is it possible that . . .? Take note of responses.
which involves gathering clues, analyzing
-what else?
evidence, and drawing logical conclusions.
OBSERVATION
-what was the author trying to tell us?
Teach the skills of making inferences and
-do I agree / why or why not?
drawing conclusions simultaneously. Use
-how do you know?
pictures, scenarios, short texts as support
-why do you think that? material. Ask questions and draw
conclusions that are logical and can be
3.5 choose from a range of human, paper supported.
based and digital sources to add to existing
information e.g., community experts, online
https://nearpod.com/blog/5-strategies-to-provide-effective-feedback-for-
searches, web, and text based reference teachers/
materials, etc. Observe learners in a small guided reading groups
and take note of the strategy they employ as they
3.6 describe with greater competence how read. Ask one or two questions at each small group
the setting of fiction and nonfiction genres meeting to ascertain if they were able to:
Expository/Nonfiction (SCO 3.2, 3.3)
impacts the plot or the event/s described ● Discuss events, ideas, and information Expository texts are designed to inform and
39
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Connect information to ideas they already explain. Present different expository reading
3.7 deepen application of knowledge of have and facts they already know material in different media and on different
characterization by: ● Ask questions of the text topics at grade level. Focus on the structure
● Make inferences about characters, locations, of expository text and develop reading
-describing the character’s attributes (traits,
plot line, etc. comprehension by exposing learners to skills
motivations, or feelings);
● Adjust their knowledge to include new ideas such as
-using evidence from the text to support
● Identify the most important details in a
generalizations about the character;
passage ● Identifying the main idea, supporting
-comparing and contrasting characters within
Comprehend and explain the underlying meaning in a details and key details
a selection or between/among two or more text. Create anecdotal notes about the learner’s ● Recognizing chronological order in
selections; texts
response and use this information to plan the next
-explaining how the actions of characters ● Identifying cause and effect
steps of instruction.
contribute to the sequence of events relationship
-describing the impact of a character’s Vocabulary Showcase: Learners create a vocabulary ● Summarizing information using
graphic organizers like webs or
response to a problem, the character’s goal, showcase where they present a selection of words
T/L/W (What I think, What I know,
and what the character says or thinks they have learned through reading and viewing. They
What I want to know next)
can display the words on a chart along with
read and view to develop vocabulary definitions, examples of usage, and personal
connections to demonstrate their understanding and
application of the vocabulary. Teacher assesses and
3.8 increase ability to create connections
records on a checklist whether words have been used
between the vocabulary of Home
correctly and effectively.
Language(s) and Standard English
PRODUCT
3.9 extend the development of reading
vocabulary through reading a range of genres, Story Map
authors, and topics https://www.thecurriculumcorner.com/thecurriculumcorner123/gr
aphic-organizers-for-informational-text/
3.10 advance reading vocabulary through the
application of
- antonyms
40
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
- synonyms
- homophones
- homographs
- homonyms
3.11 use, with greater competence, a paper
based or online dictionary and thesaurus to
learn the meaning and other features of https://ldbeehive.wordpress.com/2015/02/27/story-maps-reading-
comprehension/
known and unknown words https://littlelearnersblog.wordpress.com/2013/11/19/elements-of-
a-short-story/
Learners will use a story map to assess the narratives
3.12 build on existing knowledge and skills of they read. This tool helps them visualize the structure Storytime (SCO 3.6 , 3.7)
common prefixes and suffixes to determine and content of the story in a more organized and Engage learners in reading different types of
meaning of new vocabulary. comprehensive manner. After reading a narrative, fiction texts appropriate to grade level e.g.,
they should complete a story map focusing on the folk tales, fantasies, adventure stories, realistic
five W’s: when, where, why, what, and who. They fiction, fairy tales, etc.
Use a known root word as a clue to the should write down the central idea or theme of the
meaning of an unknown word with the same narrative in the center of the mind map. This practice Present clear examples of narratives and
root (e.g., company, companion). will allow teachers to observe learners' ability to allow learners to identify and study the
understand and analyze a narrative piece. elements of a story using a story map. Teach
them to visualize and identify key elements of
a narrative such as the characters, setting,
Informational text assessment plot, and conflict and solution to enhance
3.13 extend vocabulary through the use of
Ensure learners understand how to use the graphic comprehension. Ask learners to describe the
words encountered in cross-curricular
organizer to represent the information they have main characters in the story, including their
lessons.
gathered from the text. Monitor their progress and traits, feelings, and motivations.
provide guidance if needed. Once learners have
3.14 demonstrate continued ability to apply completed the graphic organizer, review their work To ensure understanding and
knowledge of the change in tense (-t,-ed), individually or in groups. Discuss their responses, ask comprehension of a narrative text, guide
number (-s, -es), and degree (-er and –est) clarifying questions, and encourage them to explain learners in summarizing the main events
their answers. Look for evidence of comprehension,
critical thinking skills, and ability to analyze and
41
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
signified by inflected endings to decode synthesize information and give constructive
words feedback.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS- Create
thematic units that incorporate reading
3.15 identify and apply figurative devices to
materials related to the theme. This can help
enhance understanding of text:
learners see connections between different
- similes
subjects and improve their comprehension
- metaphors
skills.
- onomatopoeia
- personification
INTEGRATING SUBJECTS
read and view to recognise and use
Co-create visual aids such as charts, maps,
language structures and diagrams with the learners and Utilize
visual aids alongside reading materials to
https://www.havefunteaching.com/resource/subject/reading/genres/in
3.16 demonstrate with increasing enhance understanding and make
formational-text-graphic-organizer-worksheet/
competence an understanding of how word connections between subjects.
order impacts meaning SELF ASSESSMENT
read and view to develop vocabulary
Summarize reading
3.17 apply knowledge of how reading
fluency impacts understanding
Using a writing frame, learners write a summary of an
informational text read. Provide learners with a rubric
3.18 participate in shared reading to help guide their writing. The teacher provides
opportunities. to: constructive feedback to help learners deepen their
- enhance fluency understanding of the text.
- guide intonation
http://clipart-
- convey the mood and intent of the text library.com/vocabulary-cliparts.html
- expand vocabulary
Throughout the year, the teacher engages
- increase comprehension
learners in the use of a variety of vocabulary
strategies to enhance their comprehension
skills.
42
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.19 further develop awareness of how word Word Power (SCO 3.8, 3.9)
choice and phrasing may be used to describe Shared reading – Use a range of fiction,
persons and events in positive or negative nonfiction, and poetry texts during shared
reading activities. Allow learners to highlight
ways
unfamiliar words and phrases they come
across as they read. Stop and discuss the
words and phrases and determine the
read and view to interact with and
meaning. Involve learners in different word
meaningfully apply Early/ Transitional
learning activities shared below.
graphophonic cues to a variety of genres
Context Clues –Teach learners strategies for
and text forms figuring out the meaning of unfamiliar words
3.20 with increased competence, apply Rubric for a Summary (readwritethink.org) and phrases based on context clues within the
background knowledge and context clues text. -
PEER ASSESSMENT
to read unknown words Reference materials – guide learners in
3.21 deepen application of knowledge of Vocabulary: using paper-based and digital reference
material that gives meaning such as a
roots, affixes, and syllabication to decode
dictionary, glossary, and thesaurus to clarify
unknown words
meaning of words.
3.22 utilize phonics and word analysis skills,
Word bank – Learners continue to use and
when necessary, with increasing
develop their Word Banks by including new
automaticity:
words learned. Allow them to write down
Word of the Day The teacher starts each day
- vowel patterns ( ou/ow, oi/oy, oo, aw)
their meanings / definitions, images, and
introducing a new word to the class. Learners are
- the sounds of common digraphs and
sample sentences in which they use the new
encouraged to use the word throughout the day and
diphthongs words.
to observe how their peers use the word and take
- complex letter pattern
note. At the end of the day, have a class discussion
reflecting on how the word was used and understood. INTEGRATING SUBJECTS
- words with silent letters Integrate vocabulary lessons with content
Compare and contrast fiction and nonfiction text from other subjects such as science, social
read and view to develop studies, or mathematics. This helps learners
Present four different texts in different groups and
understanding and recognise how the see the relevance of vocabulary in different
ask learners to categorize them into fiction, non-
contexts.
fiction, and poetry. Encourage them to recognize
43
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
use of genres and text features specific features commonly found in each type of
influence meaning text. Additionally, prompt them to explain their
3.23 use background knowledge and rationale for classifying the genre of each text as
either fiction or nonfiction and whether the poems BRAIDING THE STRANDS - Assign
information from poetry and expository,
are fiction or nonfiction. One person will sort the writing tasks that require learners to
narrative, and descriptive texts to make and
texts while the other observes. use vocabulary words in sentences,
modify predictions.
paragraphs, or compositions.
3.24 distinguish between main idea and
The observer will provide feedback according to
supporting information in poetry and predefined criteria. Engage learners in discussions, debates, or
expository, narrative, and descriptive texts. presentations where they have to use the
3.25 deepen ability to use prior knowledge of Once texts are classified, invite student to classify the vocabulary words orally. During discussions,
written and visual information to form a texts into subgenres. Observing this activity provides remember to include opportunities to share
judgment about a particular point or issue. the teachers with information about learner through visual images.
knowledge about sub genres and which subgenres to
3.26 continue to refine meaningful and
critical use of text features to locate and use
focus on next. It’s our Tradition (SCO 3.8, 3.13)
Introduce learners
information (titles, subtitles, table of
to a diverse range
contents, glossary, index, etc.)
of Caribbean
3.27 evaluate the purpose of graphic
riddles,
information (illustrations, fonts, charts,
photographs, pictures, maps) in poetry and vocabulary, and
expository, narrative, and descriptive texts as expressions to
an aid to comprehension . improve their
understanding and appreciation of different
read and view to develop understanding cultures. Start by presenting some examples
of how vocabulary and language use to the students and encourage them to
influence the meaning and mood of the explore further on their own by researching
text
additional ones at home.
3.28 recognize and provide examples of how
author’s choice of vocabulary, phrases, and
44
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
sentences evoke emotions, enhance
description, and create humour, Engage learners in group discussions to
analyze the significance of local sayings and
3.29 provide examples of how illustrators
phrases in various contexts e.g.
create mood in visual text..
3.30 discuss the effectiveness and possible
hidden messages of emoticons and social Home Language Standard English
media posts.
‘lime’ hang out/socialize
‘padner’ friend
‘jook/chook’ prick, stab, or poke
‘blood is thicker people tend to be
than water’ loyal to family
‘goat doh make child behaves like
sheep’ his/her parent
Encourage the reading of stories with local
dialect and specific vocabulary, telling of
stories and acting out of scenarios using local
sayings and phrases to create meaning,
enhance communication skills and cultural
sensitivity.
45
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
What’s the effect? ( SCO 3.15)
First teach (or review), then share or present
literary devices used at grade level (similes,
metaphors, onomatopoeia, and
personification). (See teacher resource for
more information on these figurative
devices).
using authentic and engaging text, share
examples of each of these literary devices in
mini lessons. Facilitate class discussions to
deepen learners' understanding of how they
contribute to meaning and impact the
reader's experience. Provides clear definitions
and examples of each literary device.
Think-pair- share – Work with a partner
and identify and highlight the literary device
used in a given text that is read. One person
reads whilst the other listens, highlights the
device and asks questions: e.g. What can you
visualize? What can you hear? What can you
feel? What meaning can you get?
https://content.schoolinsites.com/api/documents/87ab7e9317424d
6d8a72b517109ba76a.pdf
read and view to recognise and use
language structures
Word order (SCO 3.16)
Understanding the correct word order in a
46
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
sentence is crucial for learners to
comprehend its meaning effectively. Provide
learners with pairs of sentences where the
word order is different e.g. "I saw a man
with a binocular" and "With a binocular,
I saw a man." Encourage learners to read
these sentences, discuss their meanings, and
explore how altering the word order can
change the message conveyed.
Offer learners a set of jumbled words and
task them with arranging the words in the
correct order to form coherent sentences.
Emphasize the importance of paying
attention to word order (and, when
appropriate, the use of commas) for
conveying intended meanings. Encourage
learners to collaborate in pairs or small
groups to analyze and determine the proper
word order in sentences provided,
underscoring how word placement influences
message delivery.
https://www.etsy.com/listing/1396919358/punctuation-power-
anchor-chart-hard-good
Punctuation power! (SCO 3.18)
Punctuation is essential for reading
47
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
comprehension as it clarifies meaning.
Display similar sentences with different
punctuation marks and have learners read
and tell the difference in tone and meaning
e.g.
● Jacob likes cooking his family and his dog.
● Jacob likes cooking, his family, and his dog.
Learners read aloud the sentences with the
proper use of the punctuation and discuss
how the use of commas affects their
meaning.
Choose a few sentences from a text used
during a Teacher Read Aloud with varying
end punctuation such as:
Did you watch the music video?
This was the best callaloo I’ve had!
Turn right at the corner and you’ll see the
best view on the island.
Discuss why the author chose to use this end
punctuation and how it affects the meaning
and mood of the passage.
Word Choice- precise word (SCO 3.19)
Present some sentences chosen from the
genre being studied. Engage learners in
discussion about the author’s word choice.
48
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Encourage learners to replace specific words
with more precise word that they feel could
enhance the meaning. Encourage the use of a
digital or paper based thesaurus for this
activity. For example, The team was (elated)
ecstatic when they won the game.
Grandmother was (delighted) pleased to see
the children.
Engage learners in role-playing activities
where they have to use specific vocabulary
related to their characters or scenarios.
Create a class chart of rich vocabulary words
learners encounter as they read that can be
used to replace ‘worn out’ words.
Have learners keep a vocabulary journal
where they write down new words they learn
as they read
read and view to interact with and
meaningfully apply Early/ Transitional
graphophonic cues to a variety of genres
and text forms
Know your Roots SCO 3.21)
Create an understanding that root words and
49
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
affixes can help improve vocabulary and
comprehension during reading. Teach word
activity in and out of context and allow
learners to engage with new words.
Provide learners with a list of words
containing prefixes and suffixes and have
them use their knowledge of them to identify
the root or base words and their meaning.
During a shared reading activity, learners find
words with suffixes and prefixes added and
identify the base word. Discuss the meaning
of the words as used in the text.
Create and play word building games where
learners are given root/base words to add
prefixes or suffixes to create new words.
Common Prefixes and Suffixes - Match upwordwall.net-prefixes-
and-suffixes
https://pngtree.com/so/pattern-clipart
Observing Patterns (SCO 3.22)
Allow opportunities for learners to participate
in these engaging activities as they learn
50
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
complex word patterns suitable for grade
level.
Word hunts, puzzles, and word building – Provide
opportunities for learners to use meaningful
clues to engage on word games. - Rather than
simple word hunts, provide a clue to the
word they are looking for.
- Use Mad Libs focussed on specific parts of
speech or topics.
Visit: https://assets.readbrightly.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/08/Mad-Libs-Workbook-Grade-4.pdf
Note: While options for answers are provided
in this resource, encourage learners to come
with their own choices to meaningfully
complete the passage.
Interactive Online Games: Utilize online
resources like educational websites or apps
that offer interactive games to practice
phonic patterns. These games can be
51
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
engaging and reinforce learning outside the
classroom.
View, Pause, Predict, and Think Aloud -
(VPPT) (SCO 3.27)
Select a YouTube Animated Story. Model
think aloud thoughts and strategies during
viewing. Pause viewing material to model
skills for example predicting, comparing.
Learners make notes or talk to partners
during pauses about the information
presented, author’s technique or purpose, and
questions that they may have.
read and view to develop
understanding and recognise how the
use of genres and text features
influence meaning
https://clipart-
library.com/emotional-mask-cliparts.html
Trigger your feelings (SCO 3.28, 3.29)
Engage learners in reading poems and stories
that evoke emotions and humour. Read aloud
the poem “Saw my Teacher on a Saturday” by
Dave Crawley
52
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Saw my Teacher on Saturday
I can’t believe it’s true!
I saw her buying groceries,
Like normal people do!
She reached for bread and turned around,
And then she caught my eye.
She gave a smile and said, “Hello.”
I thought that I would die! ……..
Read the rest of the poem online using the
link below.
Discuss the emotions and humour in the
poem with evidence e.g. The use of phrases
like "I can't believe it's true!" and "I thought that I
would die!" conveys the speaker's surprise and
embarrassment.
The line "I mumbled like a fool" captures the
speaker's nervousness and awkwardness in
the situation.
Identify other words or phrases used by the
author to evoke humour and emotions and
discuss meanings
https://activeonlineducation.co.za/wp-
content/uploads/2021/09/Poetry-Recitation-Saw-My-Teacher-on-
a-Saturday-.pdf
Emotional expressions (SCO 3.28, 3.29)
Allow learners to view an animated story on
YouTube and give attention to specific words
used by the author to express emotions, such
as adjectives, similes, metaphors, and other
53
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
descriptive elements that help create imagery
and effectively convey the intended
emotional tone in the text.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e1mn72Rk_j0
Encourage learners to work in groups and
analyze whether a section of text it evokes
feelings of happiness, sadness, anger, fear, or
others’ emotions, providing evidence from
the text to support their conclusions.
Provide learners with the opportunity to
create a word cloud using online tools to
visualize the most frequently used words in
the text. Encourage them to compare and
contrast how these words are utilized to
enhance the emotional impact of the story.
Create the opportunity for learners to
participate in similar activities with different
texts to further develop their analytical and
interpretative skills.
How do we interpret?(SCO 3.30)
Using the computer, highlight emoticons that
are familiar to learners and consider the
intended meanings. Analyze different
emoticons used in social media posts and
discuss their effectiveness in conveying
emotions or messages.
54
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Read any media message and interpret and
discuss any hidden message conveyed
through the use of the emoticons. Consider
how the choice of emoticons can influence
the tone of a post and the perception of the
message. Discuss how different individuals
may interpret emoticons differently based on
their cultural background or personal
experiences.
Discuss ethical considerations related to the
use of emoticons in social media, such as
potential misinterpretations, cultural
sensitivity, and unintended consequences of
hidden messages.
Allow learners to create messages using
emoticons and have others read and tell the
possible meaning.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS - Create
social media posts with specific hidden
messages using emoticons.
55
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
ELO 3 focuses on vocabulary, comprehension strategies and grapho-phonic cues while students interact with various genres and text forms. Some
suggestions for additional resources and materials in the classroom are:
1. Text Structure and Text Genres
The organizational structure of fiction and nonfiction genres can be reviewed using a chart or video.
FICTION & NON-FICTION | Definition & Examples
2. Reading Responses
Reading response journals are valuable tools for learners to engage with and reflect on as they read.
Comprehension strategies can be used to respond in a reading response journal.
Reader Response Journal Questions
3. Character Traits
Character Traits play a pivotal role in helping students understand the motivations, actions, and personalities of characters within a story.
Determining Character Traits Worksheet
4. Online Dictionary and Thesaurus
Online dictionaries and thesauruses are essential tools to aid in enhancing vocabulary development and to improve writing skills.
https://www.merriam-webster.com/kids
5. Figurative Devices
By identifying and applying figurative devices, understanding of text is significantly enhanced. It helps readers to unlock the full potential of a text. The link
below provides a lighthearted look at Grade Four Figurative Devices.
Figurative Language Devices
6. Reading Fluency
Oral reading fluency is an essential component of proficient reading. By focusing on developing fluent, expressive oral reading skills, educators can help students
become more confident, competent, and engaged readers.
Fluency Rubrics
Fluency Reading Passages
56
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Additional content knowledge which could be useful for the teacher to achieve the objectives of the ELO are:
1. Comprehension Strategies
Comprehension strategies are techniques and approaches used to help readers understand and retain the information they read.
Components of reading comprehension strategies
7 strategies to teach comprehension strategies
2. Engaging with Complex Text
When students are aware of how to engage with the text that they read, they are better able to respond to it. Comprehension skills are enhanced as well as
critical thinking skills which makes reading an overall enjoyable moment.
Responding to Text
3. Reading Response Journals
Reading response journals are effective tools that can be used to engage readers with texts on a deeper level, fostering critical thinking, reflection, and personal
connection.
Pros and Cons of reading response journals
15 Ways to Emoji-fy Your Teaching
4. Home Language and Standard English
Knowing the difference between Home Language and Standard English can help learners develop stronger connections which leads to improved bilingual
literacy and language proficiency.
What is the difference between Home Language and Standard English?
5. Figurative Devices
By identifying and applying figurative devices, understanding of text is significantly enhanced. It helps readers to unlock the full potential of a text.
Types of Figurative Languages
6. Oral Reading Fluency
Oral reading fluency is an essential component of proficient reading. By focusing on developing fluent, expressive oral reading skills, educators can help students
become more confident, competent, and engaged readers.
What is Oral Reading Fluency
The 6 characteristics of fluency
57
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
7. Vocabulary Development and Word Analysis Skills
Providing students with opportunities to repeatedly practice analyzing unfamiliar vocabulary will help to develop their word analysis and spelling skills.
Word analysis to expand vocabulary
58
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
ESSENTIAL LEARNING OUTCOME 4: Reading and Viewing
Introduction to the Subject: Language is the foundation of communication and the primary instrument of thought. The study of Language Arts provides
access to multiple and interrelated oral, aural, written, and visual ways of representing, exploring, problem solving, communicating, and sharing meaning. Through
listening, speaking, writing, representing, reading, and viewing a wide range of text and text form, the student continues to develop an awareness of culture,
personal identity, and the strategies needed to
participate, communicate, and reflect critically on thought and action.
Strand: The purpose of Reading and Viewing instruction is for pleasure and personal growth and to develop readers who enjoy and interact meaningfully with
a wide range of genres and text forms. Meaningful interaction with texts is developed through learning how to access and build on background knowledge and use
the information of provided by various sources of meaning, developing vocabulary, recognising, and using language structures and meaningful application of
graphophonic elements of the text.
Essential Learning Outcome 4: Students will develop their understanding of how an author’s choice of vocabulary, language, genre, text form, text
features and style influence the meaning of text and define the author’s craft.
Grade Four Level Expectations for Reading and Viewing:
Read for pleasure and personal growth
● reflect on and identify their strengths as readers, areas for improvement and the strategies they found most helpful before, during and after reading.
Use background knowledge
● become more aware of how to integrate reading with skills in listening, speaking, writing, viewing, and representing to help them make sense of what they
read
Interact meaningfully with a wide range of genres and text forms
● read within the range of the Transitional to Proficient Stages
● demonstrate an understanding of a variety of literary, graphic, and informational texts, using a range of strategies to construct meaning
● engage in character, setting, plot study and critical reflection
● use problem solving strategies such as monitoring, self-correcting and checking independently
Develop vocabulary specific purposes and to gather, analyse and use known and new vocabulary in a variety of contexts
Recognise and use language structures
● recognise a variety of text forms, text features and stylistic elements and demonstrate understanding of how they help communicate meaning.
Apply graphophonic elements meaningfully
● continue to develop and apply their understanding of meaningful word study and form
59
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
By the end of Grade Four, the learner Through conversation, observation, and products The focus of ELO 4 is to foster a love of reading and
will be expected to: (COP), formative assessments provide continuous to appreciate authors’ craft through interactions with
read and view to develop opportunities for feedback for both teachers and various authors and genres.
understanding of how author’s learners which enables the real-time modifications of
purpose and style influence meaning lesson delivery and materials.
4.1 with greater competence, compare CONVERSATIONS
and contrast the various formats of
fiction, nonfiction, poetry, and drama
4.2 continue to identify purpose of a
variety of authors of fiction, nonfiction,
https://thewritestuffteaching.com/authors-purpose/
and poetry
- to inform Throughout the year, learners need to encounter
https://edu.rsc.org/ideas/classroom-assessment-skills-6-ways-to-develop-your-
- to entertain assessment-literacy/4013293.article various types of literary content in digital and print
-to persuade formats, including e-books, articles, magazines,
Reflective discussions on author's purpose and
newspapers, books, and more. Understanding the
style
4. 3 with greater competence, continue author's intention is crucial for grasping the main
message, while recognizing their unique style aids in
to identify the purpose of a variety of
Analyze a familiar text critically with learners - whole
comprehending how information is presented. This
illustrators of fiction, nonfiction, and class or small groups. Have a conversation on the
awareness enables learners to answer questions
poetry author's purpose and style and the overall impact of
correctly, make connections within the text, and
- to inform the author’s writing. Allow learners to give reasons
deepen their understanding of the material.
- to entertain for their responses Use these questions below to
-to persuade engage learners and take note of how their responses
read and view to develop understanding of how author’s
reflect:
purpose and style influence meaning.
4.4 develop an understanding of an
- literal understanding of content
author’s style of plot development of
fiction: fables, folk tales, fairy tales, and
- awareness of author’s purpose
adventure stories.
- use of time sequence
60
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
- use of descriptive language - appreciation of how the author uses words and
- use of dialogue phrases
- why this author is “memorable” for content or
read and view to develop
understanding and recognise use of technique
genres and text features influence
meaning - why you would or would not recommend this text
to peers
https://www.kellyharmon.net/blog/2015/01/6/teaching-students-analyze-
4.5 begin to notice the purpose of an authors-craft/
author’s use of structures such as:
- paragraphing in fiction and nonfiction Retelling Analysing a writer's craft (SCO 4.1, 4.2, 4.3)
This process helps assess Teachers may wish to introduce each component of
- stanzas, line breaks, rhyme in poetry
learners' ability to recall key Author’s Craft by sharing small sections of a video
- dialogue markers, scenes, stage
details, sequence events, and such as: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4bXop6iE8aQ
directions in drama
summarize the main ideas.
After viewing the video, provide learners with a short
Retelling also allows teachers to identify any
4.6 demonstrate understanding as a narrative text and have them explore the text to
misunderstandings or gaps in comprehension that
variety of text features are used to
develop their analytical skills and deepen their
may need to be. After reading or listening to a text,
locate information (table of
understanding of how writers use techniques to
contents, glossary, index, charts, allow learners to take turns and retell what they read
engage readers and convey meaning in their texts.
titles, and subtitles, etc.) or heard. Using the chart below and a dice, learners
Support learners as they gain independence while they:
use the table as a guide. Use the rubric in the link to
4.7 continue to develop
● Identify words and phrases that create vivid
independence in the use charts,
images in their minds and discuss how these
diagrams, and other graphic
descriptive words enhance their understanding
information in an expository
of the text
selection as an aid to
● Explore dialogue in the text and analyze how
understanding the text.
the characters' words reveal their thoughts and
feelings. Encourage learners to role play
4.8 begin to develop skills to
dialogue to understand the character better
generate questions based on charts,
assess learners.
diagrams, etc.
https://www.weareteachers.com/third-grade-reading-comprehension/
61
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4.9 participate in discussions that Retelling rubric: Visit ● Choose a character and identify the traits with
compare and contrast how the local https://www.readwritethink.org/sites/default/files/resources/lesson_images/l evidence from the text. Allow learners to create
esson402/rubric.pdf
and international contexts of topic, a portrait of the character.
for a rubric to guide your observations of a learner’s
setting, plot, and characters influence retelling. ● Create a visual representation of the text such
fiction, nonfiction, and poetry as illustrations, graphic organizer etc.
●
OBSERVATION
Compare and Contrast - (SCO 4.1)
read and view to develop
understanding of how vocabulary
and language use influence the
meaning and mood of the text
https://eap-essentials.com/2021/09/29/fobo-fear-of-being-observed/ https://computationalthinkingforeducators.ca/2018/12/06/compare-contrast-
4.10 identify examples of how an frame/
author introduces and develops Close Reading Analysis: This is a detailed Analyzing a book and a movie side by side can offer a
characters through: examination of a specific text. After the strategies of valuable and enlightening experience that necessitates
critical thinking. Give learners opportunities to
- descriptive language close reading have been taught and practiced,
compare and contrast two versions of the same story
- informal and formal language provide learners with a passage from a text and
(familiar story) – the book and the movie.
- Home Language(s) and Standard observe them as they analyze the Author's Craft
English through close and gradual examination of specific
Encourage learners to highlight specific details in the
- dialogue text selections. As the term and school unfold,
book and the YouTube suggested above) and create a
learners will demonstrate their understanding of the
list of questions they want answered.
author's intentions by examining the use of literary
4.11 reflect on the purpose of
devices, point of view, sentence structure, purpose,
messages relayed through social Present questions such as the following to guide
word choice, and text structure. As each component
media platforms as agents to learners as they compare and contrast.
of Author’s Craft is taught and practiced, gather
inform, influence, disinform, bully,
information using the specific section(s0 of the
etc. ● Which did you enjoy more – the book or the
graphic organiser below.
movie? Why?
● Did the main characters look and act like you
expected? Why or why not?
62
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4.12 begin to explore an author’s use of ● Did the main setting look like you expected?
implied and explicit messages through a Why or why not?
critical lens: ● Which scenes in the movie were different from
- in all genres how they were in the book?
- in advertisements ● What scenes do you wish hadn’t been changed?
● What scenes were better because of the
- in product labels
change?
● What parts of the book did the movie leave
4.13 begin to develop understanding of
out?
an illustrator’s use of implied and
● What scenes were added to the movie that
explicit messages
weren’t in the book?
● What were similar and different between the
4.14 begin to collect interesting
book and the movie?
examples of language use and apply to
writing: https://teachingmadepractical.com/compare-and-contrast-a-book-and-movie-
-interesting vocabulary activities/
-interesting phrases or expressions
Reciprocal Teaching - Fab Four: (SCO 4.1, 4.2)
https://15worksheets.com/
3-2-1: Using the 3-2-1 strategy, teachers gain
insights into the learners’ comprehension,
engagement, and analytical thinking skills related to
the text they have read. After reading an
informational text, learners identify and write down
nicole-kaye.squarespace.com
three facts. This is to assess ability to recall
significant details. After, have them highlight and jot
Conduct a shared reading activity to discuss an authors’
down two interesting points or aspects of the text to
work collaboratively using the reciprocal teaching
gauge their engagement and then they formulate one
strategy – predicting, summarizing clarifying and
question about any information in the text. This
63
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
question should assess their critical thinking skills questioning (see additional content for more
and their ability to delve deeper into the content. information on reciprocal teaching)
3-2-1 Strategy - informational text Predict: Before reading the text, encourage learners to
make predictions about the author's work based on
Yes No
the title, cover, or any introductory information.
Clarify: While reading, learners identify any confusing
Identify 3 facts from the text p arts related to the author's craft. Encourage them to
1. ask questions for clarification.
2.
3. Question: Ask learners to generate questions about
the author's craft as they read. These questions can
Write 2 interesting information you would f ocus on the author's style, message, word choice, what
like to share from the text learners wonder about etc.
1.
2. Summarize: After reading, guide learners to
summarize key points or main ideas of sections of the
Write 1 question you have about any
text or learners can summarize what they have learned
information from the text
about the author's craft.
1.
Encourage learners as they work through the text to
Assess whether learners were able to complete the
create visual representations to enhance
table effectively.
comprehension. https://www.readwritethink.org/classroom-
resources/lesson-plans/reciprocal-revision-making-peer
PRODUCTS
Keeping Track: (SCO 4.4)
Learners need opportunities to share what they are Ask learners to track the progress of the
learning. Learners complete T-charts based on the text visually and creatively they are
genre they are reading. reading by continuously analyzing
character and plot development.
64
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will:
Complete a T-Chart based on a narrative text read or
viewed. - outline storyboards and concept maps to show
plot and character development (See additional
content for more information on storyboards.)
Characteristics of main character Evidence from text - show connections between key textual
concepts
- draw pictures to illustrate changes in characters’
appearance, behaviours, and circumstances.
Problems faced by the main Solution to problems
character
https://www.imagineforest.com/blog/free-
storyboard-template/
INTEGRATING THE SUBJECTS
Cloze passage : Cross-Curricular Projects: Create projects that require
Provide a passage with certain words missing for learners to read and research across different subjects,
learners to fill in, testing their understanding of for example, a science project that involves reading
context clues. Assess their understanding of the text, informational texts and writing reports.
vocabulary knowledge, and ability to use context
clues to fill in missing words.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS - After reading,
learners engage in different writing activities that
focus on Author's Craft such as:
- unusual representations of book reports/book
reviews such as cereal box report ( see below)
65
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
- select a character from a book and
create a detailed profile including traits, motivations,
and actions of the character.
Cereal box book report
https://classroomcookbook.school.blog/2018/01/31/cereal-box-book-reports/
For more suggestions re unusual book reports: search
for 3D book reports images.
Read and view to develop understanding and recognise
https://worksheetdigital.com/product/cloze-passage-at-the-zoo/
use of genres and text features influence meaning
SELF ASSESSMENT
Building Bridges to Meaning. From Reader to
Learners create their written responses to text read.
Actor!: (SCO 4.5)
Engage learners in whole-class reading of dramas and
My Reading Response Sheet
expose them to discussion about how the author uses
the language and structure to convey the message and
purpose of the story.
Title: ______________________
Author: ____________________
Genre: ____________________
In this text, I learned . . .
Some new words I learned …..
I really enjoyed …..
https://www.shutterstock.com/search/actors-reading-
I had difficulties with ……..
scripts?image_type=vector
I used these strategies
66
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
PEER ASSESSMENT Encourage learners to engage in creative expression by
asking them to use drama to retell a story or poem that
Fluency: Assign roles to each learner based on the they have read. Allow them to highlight key scenes and
drama scripts. Allow them to perform in front of the discuss how the author used these scenes to portray
class. Choose learners as judges and guide them to the message of the text. Assess learners ability to
give feedback on oral reading fluency skills to their appreciate the author's craft as they comprehend and
peers using specific criteria. synthesize the content of the text.
Learners will read and discuss the Author's Craft as
they:
- read a specific text and will then re-enact key
scenes/events. This can be done independently
or in small groups
- dramatize themes from the text
- portray lessons that they have learnt from the
text through dramatization, mimes, and
drawings
https://www.readwritethink.org/classroom-
resources/printouts/readers-theatre-rubric
Visual text comprehension : (SCO 4.7, 4.8)
67
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://lilbutmightyenglish.com/blog/understanding-purpose-related-questions-
in-visual-text-comprehension/
Visual texts are used to convey messages and
communicate ideas in various ways. Teachers can
effectively teach reading comprehension using visual
texts, helping students develop a deeper understanding
of the content. These texts can include print media
such as posters, brochures, flyers, maps, photographs,
illustrations, comic strips, as well as non-print ones like
websites, videos, animations, and online
advertisements.
Encourage learners to observe the visuals carefully and
discuss the author and purpose (e.g., to persuade,
inform, advertise, or instruct). Connect the visual text
to students' prior knowledge and experiences and have
them make connections between the visual elements
and the text to deepen understanding.
Allow learners to analyze captions or labels in the
visuals to gain context. Discuss how different
perspectives are portrayed in the visual text. Facilitate
group discussions where students can share their
interpretations of the visual text.
Ask different levels of questions to deepen learners'
understanding of visual texts and prompt learners to
ask their own questions.
68
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
BRAIDING THE STRANDS - Use visual aids as
prompts for storytelling activities. Provide learners
with a picture or diagram and ask them to create a
story that explains what they see paying attention to
incorporating the elements of a story. After
storytelling, encourage classmates to ask questions
about each other’s stories based on the visuals
presented.
Close Reading (S.C.O. 4.9)
https://www.weareteachers.com/strategies-for-close-reading/
Engaging in close reading involves going beyond mere
comprehension to delve into interpretation and
analysis of a text.
Choose text that is appropriate in length and is
engaging for learners. Provide some background
information about the text or topic to build their
interest and understanding.
Read the text silently or aloud. Pose open-ended
questions to encourage critical thinking and deeper
understanding of the text.
69
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Encourage learners to read and reread text each time
for a different purpose. For example, teach learners to
- determine the author’s purpose and point of view
- look for details, patterns, and themes in the text
- examine the ways the author uses language and
words to create meaning
make connections by asking questions such as “What
does this text cause me to think or wonder about?
Allow learners to reflect on the text they've read by
creating a visual representation.
read and view to develop understanding of how
vocabulary and language use influence the meaning and
mood of the text
Descriptive Language Activity: (SCO 4.10)
Provide learners with excerpts from the selected texts,
in both home language and Standard English that
contain vivid descriptions of the character. Identify
adjectives and sensory details used to describe the
characters’ appearance, personality, and behaviour.
Encourage learners to discuss how these descriptions
help them form a mental image of the characters.
Learners discuss how the use of different words adds
depth to the characters’ portrayal.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS
Allow learners to retell stories using home language
and Standard English.
70
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Implicit and Explicit messages (SCO. 4.12)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=GfpOMHkYyeg
Discuss with learners the difference between implicit
and explicit messages. Explicit messages are direct and
clear to the audience, while implicit messages are more
subtle and might need some interpretation to grasp the
underlying meaning. Demonstrate to learners how to
spot explicit and implicit messages in familiar food
labels or well-known advertisements they have come
across. Encourage them to focus on the choice of
words, visual components, and the overall atmosphere
to reveal any hidden implications or suggestions.
Divide learners into groups and have them watch a
commercial on YouTube.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aqHtLlF4pQI
Task them with identifying both the implicit and
explicit messages being presented. Lead a discussion
about the targeted message and how visual elements,
71
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
music, and language are utilized to sway the audience's
perspective.
Word Mapping: (SCO 4.13) Present learners with
models of word maps that display various forms of
word associations (e.g.,
synonyms, antonyms, etc.)
This will help them to make
connections between related
words and introduce them to
new vocabulary.
Learners will:
- Create visual word maps that help them to connect
new vocabulary with related words such as the
matching of synonyms or antonyms.
- Associate new vocabulary with familiar concepts or
experiences. This will help them to make meaningful
connections and to enhance their understanding of
how words can influence meaning and mood.
Contextual Processing: (SCO 4.13, 4.14) Encourage
learners to use context to figure out new vocabulary
that they encounter in selected text.
Select a passage in the text where the meaning of
unfamiliar words is apparent from the surrounding
context. Guide learners in identifying the meanings of
72
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
these words by asking probing questions that will lead
them to make use of context clues.
Encourage learners to write down the meanings of
these words in their own words and verify the
definitions with the use of a dictionary.
INTEGRATING THE SUBJECTS
Making cross-curricular connections:
Select both fiction and nonfiction texts for in-class
reading that relate to other subject areas or assign
readings with content from other subject areas (such as
science-based articles, newspaper stories about social
issues, etc.).
73
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
ELO 4 focuses on the meaning of text and the author’s craft. Students will understand how authors make use of vocabulary, language, different
genres, text features and style to influence the meaning of their text.
1) Have a series of books from particular authors
Global Digital Library Global Digital Library
Bloom Library Bloom Library
2) Compare and contrast fiction and nonfiction text
By understanding the distinct characteristics of fiction and nonfiction, students will gain deeper insight into the different ways in which authors craft their
writing to inform, entertain and persuade readers.
Fiction vs. Nonfiction: Definitions and Examples.
3) Understanding text features
Text is extremely important. Teachers need to help students recognize features within a text that can enhance comprehension.
Nonfiction Text Features | Jack Hartmann
74
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Nonfiction Text Features Anchor Chart (including a freebie!) | Crafting Connections
4) Use of literary devices
By identifying and applying figurative devices, understanding of text is significantly enhanced. It helps readers to unlock the full potential of a text.
Similes, Metaphors, Onomatopoeia, Personification and Alliteration
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
1) Understand the PIE strategy/purpose
The PIE strategy is a method that can be applied to various types of text to improve reading comprehension by guiding readers through a structured process of
understanding and analyzing texts.
What is the author’s purpose?
Going Beyond PIE: 5 Ways to Teach Students How to Find the Author's Purpose
75
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
2) Understand author’s style
Understanding an author's style enriches the reading experience by deepening comprehension, fostering critical thinking skills, and cultivating a deeper
appreciation for literature as a form of artistic expression.
Guiding Students Through Expository Text with Text Feature Walks | Reading Rockets.
3) Compare and contrast fiction and nonfiction
By understanding the distinct characteristics of fiction and nonfiction, students will gain deeper insight into the different ways in which authors craft their
writing to inform, entertain and persuade readers.
What is the difference between fiction and nonfiction?
76
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
4) Character Development
Teaching character development in reading enriches the reading experience, promotes critical thinking and empathy, fosters cultural understanding, and
empowers readers to engage more deeply with literature.
Analyze how an author develops characters' perspectives
5) Knowledge of implied and explicit messages/morals through a critical lens (moral
of the story, theme)
Understanding implied and explicit messages involves analyzing the text to uncover deeper meanings, themes, and moral lessons.
Explicit vs. Implicit: Reading Between the Lines - ESLBUZZ
77
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
ESSENTIAL LEARNING OUTCOME 5: Reading and Viewing
Introduction to the Subject: Language is the foundation of communication and the primary instrument of thought. The study of
Language Arts provides access to multiple and interrelated oral, aural, written, and visual ways of representing, exploring, problem solving,
communicating, and sharing meaning. Through listening, speaking, writing, representing, reading, and viewing a wide range of text and text
form, the student continues to develop an awareness of culture, personal identity, and the strategies needed to participate, communicate,
and reflect critically on thought and action.
Strand: Writing and Representing strategies and skills provide opportunities for learners to communicate with their peers and other
meaningful audiences within and beyond their community using paper and digital formats. The process of writing includes planning,
organizing, revising, refining, and sharing feedback. Throughout this process, ongoing problem solving and critical thinking strategies,
applicable to subject areas and to life develop.
Essential Learning Outcome 5: Learners will generate, gather, and organize thoughts to explore, clarify and reflect on thoughts, feelings,
and experiences as they create a written or representative draft, independently and collaboratively, for a range of audiences and purposes.
Grade Four Level Expectations:
Write for pleasure and personal growth
● sustain independent writing for greater amounts of time
● becoming more comfortable as they describe and explain their choices of vocabulary, format, and style
● reflect on and identify strengths as writers, areas for improvement and the strategies found most helpful at different stages of the writing process.
Engage in the writing process
● generate, gather, and organize ideas and information from a wider range of background knowledge and reading experiences to write for an intended purpose
and audience
● use the revision process to determine whether the ideas, information and vocabulary are relevant and adequate for their purpose,
● draft and revise writing, using a variety of informational, literary, and graphic forms and stylistic elements appropriate for the purpose and audience.
● become more independent as they use the stages of the writing process to develop, revise, edit and present their writing in a variety
of ways
● experiment with range of presentation style elements including print, script, fonts, graphics, and layout
78
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Explore language structures
● use sentences that are grammatically well formed and more complex in their writing
● gather new vocabulary to enhance writing project
● monitor language use for intended and unintended messages
apply more complex punctuation intentionally and meaningfully
Explore word solving
use knowledge of spelling patterns to monitor errors and self correct
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
By the end of Grade 4, the learner will be Provide opportunities for learners to create ELO 5 emphasizes the importance of brainstorming
expected to: and maintain personal writing portfolios which ideas, organizing thoughts, and outlining cohesive
write and represent to generate and gather include selections of: content before diving into the actual writing. Through
thoughts to explore ideas, feelings, and • drafts curriculum focussed lessons, exercises and prompts,
experiences • revisions students learn to develop clarity for their pieces during
the drafting phase, setting a strong foundation for their
• final copies
writing projects.
5.1 continue to use personal interests or completed throughout the year.
community experiences, music, books, Learners will be given the option of keeping
Writing and Representing lessons provide excellent
either digital or hard copies of writing.
documentaries, videos, pictures as writing
opportunities to braid the strands of Language Arts
prompts and Integrate all other subjects in the various genres of
Conversations
writing described in SCO 5.19.
5.2 maintain writing portfolios - drafts, revisions,
Teacher-student conference
personal writing prompts, etc. write and represent to generate and gather
Title: Drafting Reflection Exit Ticket
thoughts to explore ideas, feelings, and
5.3 use digital blogs, storytelling, nonfiction, news, experiences
and instructional sites to explore various genres of Objective: To encourage students to reflect
writing on their drafting process and identify areas for Getting Ready to Write (SCO 5.2) Compile and
improvement preserve a writing portfolio that contains drafts, edits,
and original compositions in various genres and styles.
5.4 brainstorm individually and collaboratively to
Task: At the end of each drafting session, Ensure all portfolio entries are dated.
gather ideas for their writing
distribute an exit ticket template and ask Personal dictionaries and thesauri may be included in
students to use a blank piece of paper to the portfolio.
5. Use a variety of paper-based and digital
choose and respond to one or two of the The learners are encouraged to:
resources to gather information to support and
following prompts: Over time, all prompts will - Write often.
enhance the brainstorming process be completed. Choosing one or two prompts
79
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
encourages the learners to examine their work - Participate in the writing process.
5.6 identify and maintain the topic, purpose, closely through various lenses. - Select their writing topic.
audience, and form of writing throughout the - Experiment with different forms and genres
1. What part of your draft are you most
brainstorming process. Begin each new
satisfied with? Why? My Writing Portfolio
writing project
(student illustrates cover with
5.7 reflect with greater depth on ideas gathered with a review of
________________________________ images of items of interest)
and add, revise, or delete to suit the topic and the genre of
genre writing to be
2. What area/s of your draft need to be
explored and provide a few examples of that genre. In
improved?
addition to providing samples of each genre, visit:
write and represent, using organizational
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t37PQgzlOl4
strategies to arrange thoughts to explore, ________________________________
clarify and reflect on ideas, feelings, and Come Explore with Me! (SCO 5.1, 5.3, 5:5, 5.6.)
experiences 3. How do you plan to address this? Begin an expository writing project by inviting learners
to view a documentary video about their island and use
________________________________
5.8 examine samples of different genres as models it to explore and gather information for their writing.
for organizing a sequence of events, changes in Learners use a graphic organizer to start planning their
4. Is there a specific section of draft you would
setting, and character development exposition about their island home. (see suggestions for
like feedback on?
graphic organisers in the IAS column)
After viewing the documentary, learners will discuss
5.9 develop competence in organizing and _______________________________
the following:
arranging ideas and information to write for an
● features of the type of writing
intended purpose and audience. 5. If so, please identify it and explain what
discoveries made.
kind of feedback you are seeking.
facts and opinions expressed.
5.10 organize and strengthen writing during
After completing the ticket, teacher and
drafting stage
learner discuss areas of challenge.
5.11 create and use simple paper based or digital
____________________________________
graphic organizers to aid the organization of
https://www.facebook.com/share/v/WJaondU21qLWznGk/?mibextid=o
ideas (e.g., five-finger plan, story map, web, list,
Observation FDknk
five Ws, and graphic organizers for specific
forms of writing.) Observation and Documentation: Observe Role playing media personnel (SCO 5.3)
learners as they engage in prewriting activities.
Use brief anecdotal record ((phrases or short
80
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5.12 continue to participate in and contribute to sentences) to document the process to provide
independent and shared writing opportunities valuable insights into their strengths and areas
(e.g., posters for school events, thank-you letters for improvement.
to classroom guests, lists, recipes, labels, etc.)
Anecdotal records include: Introduce this lesson by sharing a topic of community
throughout the writing process
interest (a special event, a concern about the
Date environment, a happy event, etc.) with the class.
write and represent to create a written or
Choose a group of children and role play the roles of
representative draft
Focus: reporters and journalists to investigate and cover
current events or issues in their community or country.
5.14 explore and experiment with various ways to Accomplishments
express their thoughts and ideas in various text Assign specific roles to learners such as journalists, and
forms Next steps photographers. Students will use the experience to
prewrite or create drafts based on a given topic.
Peer Assessment
5.15 continue to utilize strategies to organize ideas
into a draft that supports the topic, enhances
Peer Conferences: One-to-one conferences
clarity, and sequences logically
between the learner and peer provide
INTEGRATING THE SUBJECTS: Social
personalized feedback and assessment of
5.16 demonstrate understanding by using linking Studies: In Social Studies class students incorporate their
prewriting strategies.
study on the history of their island into their prewriting and
words and phrases to develop a logical
drafts.
progression of ideas and thoughts (e.g., because, Remind peers to:
therefore, since, for example) to connect opinions
and reasons - read their peer’s work carefully
Using Technology to Collaborate (SCO 5.5)
- begin the conference with a statement about
5.17 explore and represent in written pieces: Prearrange opportunities for learners to connect with
something down well
- introductory/topic sentences other classes in the school, country, OECS or world.
- concluding sentences Utilise real-time tools such as Microsoft Teams to
- a question about the passage that indicates an
- paragraphs enable learners to participate in real-time collaboration
interest in the subject or topic.
- a range of vocabulary to match the genre and conversations about topics of interest. from various
places. Before conversations begin, focus on the
purpose of the writing Note: At this stage, learners are expected to
writing genre to be studied and review the genre while
interact with their peer’s text, not to judge it.
introducing the topic to the learners.
5.18 develop purpose and use of form of simple,
compound, and complex sentences.
81
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Self Assessment Provide learners with a paper based or digital
5.19 build on existing knowledge of the various “notepad” to make notes or quick illustrations about
genres: Writing portfolio drafting and revision the topic. These notes and illustrations provide the
checklist. content to develop brainstorms.
- narrative writing
Before this type of collaboration:
-expository writing
NOTE: this provides an excellent alternative - review digital letter writing formats
-descriptive writing
to the exit slip assessment above. - assign groups of learners to write a digital invitation
-persuasive writing
to digital partners
-poetry - (rhyme, limerick, shape)
Drafting:
-book reports
When responses are received and collaboration is about
● Did I complete all assigned writing to begin, create a peer support network so that learners
5.20 write a draft of three or four paragraphs of tasks for my draft? can guide one another through printed and digital
the assigned genre ● Are my ideas clear and make sense? materials that will be discussed.
● Are my ideas in the correct order?
5.21 create drafts using alternate formats such as ● Are my ideas creative? Use these conversations, notes, prewriting, and drafts
storyboard, comics, posters, etc. to develop a writing project on a chosen genre.
Revisions:
5.22 participate in opportunities to share ideas and
● Did I look at the suggestions from my
initial drafts with peers
teacher?
● Did I make changes to my writing to
5.23 produce fiction, non-fiction, poetry, and make it better organized?
visual drafts that incorporate content from other ● Did I try to make my writing better
core areas after thinking about what I can do
differently?
write and represent, using organizational
strategies to arrange thoughts to explore, clarify
and reflect on ideas, feelings, and experiences
Product
Title: Graphic Organiser for Prewriting
INTEGRATING THE SUBJECTS: Nonfiction,
Objective: The objective of this activity is to writing Science experiments
utilize mind mapping as a prewriting tool to
brainstorm and organize ideas visually before
82
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
beginning the writing process. This provides Nonfiction Sort and Sequence (SCO 5.9)
the teacher with evidence of the learner’s
planning and organisation. Teachers use this 1. Discuss the concept and importance of
information to plan next steps lessons organising ideas and information in the genre being
focussed on main idea and organisation. studied. The following example describes how to
move from brainstorming ideas to organising the
Independent Practice first draft. Explain that the goal of this pre-writing
activity is to practice organizing ideas in the correct
- Assign each student a writing prompt or order.
topic to brainstorm using a graphic organiser.
Making
Graphic organisers are available in the Smart Goop
Art tab of Word or by searching Grade 4 mind
mapping graphic organisers. Text
- Provide time for students to work
independently on their graphic organisers,
encouraging them to explore different ideas ● Provide students with a title such as Making
and connections. Goop. set of index cards or small pieces of
paper with specific topics on each card
Sharing and Reflection (materials, procedure, uses)
● On separate cards, learners write the topics
- Invite students to share their graphic that would fit under reach subheading and
organisers with the class, explaining their arrange them logical order. Encourage learners
thought process and connections. to think about which idea should come first,
second, third, etc., to create a sequential
- Facilitate a discussion on the effectiveness description of each subtopic.
of using graphic organisers for prewriting and ● Once students have arranged their cards, have
how it helped them organize their ideas. them share their sequences with a partner or
the whole class. Encourage them to explain
- Encourage students to reflect on how they why they chose a particular order for their
can incorporate graphic organisers into their ideas.
future writing processes.
83
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Conclusion: This activity can be replicated for any genre
(Adventure Story: Settings, Characters, Plot)
By engaging in this prewriting activity using
graphic organisers, students will develop their Organize your ideas using a Graphic Organizer
ability to brainstorm and organize ideas (SCO 5.11)
visually, enhancing their overall writing
process. 1. Write or draw the main topic in the centre of the
organizer (e.g., "My Dream Bedroom").
2. Write or draw each idea or piece of information
Journaling as Formative Self Assessment related to the topic in the appropriate column.
Encourage students to think about the logical sequence
Students keep a digital journal or use a of their ideas.
notebook or folder to record their entries.
3. Use transition words or phrases to connect the ideas,
if necessary.
Learners benefit most from journaling when
they do it consistently.
4. Once all ideas are organized, students can use this
graphic organizer as a guide for gathering ideas and
Have students engage in journal writing on a
organizing their ideas for their drafts.
regular basis. This can be daily or twice per
week for 5-15 minutes.
My Dream Room
Drawing
Prompt learners to write about intriguing
topics by providing thought provoking
questions, such as: Type of Furniture Color Comfort
Room and Decor Scheme and
What makes people happy?
Relaxation
If I could do anything I wanted it, I would . . .
What makes a good friend?
These 10 words describe me
84
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
I would like to be better at . . . Bedroom Describe the Describe the Describe
type of color how you
I would like to invent . . . furniture and scheme for would make
decorations your dream your dream
After each journaling session, provide learners
you would bedroom bedroom a
with an opportunity to whisper read their
entries to themselves. Encourage them to like in your comfortable
listen to themselves as if they were hearing dream and relaxing
their writing for the first time. This bedroom space.
opportunity to “hear their meaning” and self
assess.
Poster Creation Competition (SCO 5.12)
Share visually appealing posters with the class and
discuss how the creators of the poster organised the
information, images, fonts, and colours.
Draft visually appealing posters from information
gathered in the prewriting / brainstorming stage.
Encourage students to organise their brainstorm ideas
for their posters, such as what information they want
to include (e.g., water conservation at school: how to
conserve water, who should conserve water,
importance of water conservation) and decide what will
be used and where it will be placed.
85
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
INTEGRATING THE
SUBJECTS Science:
Exploring Water Conservation
Discuss how water conservation and its
importance can impact human lives and
wider ecosystems.
write and represent to create a
written or representative draft
Strengthen Your Writing (SCO 5.10, 5.19, 5.20)
Note: This ILS provides an opportunity to connect
instruction to self and peer assessment by
demonstrating and providing practice in using self-
checks.
1. Use completed graphic organizers, such as those
listed above, to write a first draft of 3 or 4 paragraphs.
2. Use a simple checklist to ensure that all areas from
the graphic organiser were included in their first draft.
Items Yes No
Have I identified my dream room?
Did I describe my dream room?
Did I describe the color scheme for your
dream bedroom?
Did I describe how you would make your
dream bedroom a comfortable and relaxing
space?
86
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will share their writing with a partner or small
group. This will be done to encourage peer feedback
focusing on organization and clarity of ideas.
After peer sharing, learners will be given time to revise
and edit their paragraphs based on the feedback
received.
As a closing activity, the learners will share their revised
paragraphs with the class or display them in the
classroom.
(SCO 5.19) Write a poem about one of your
country’s celebrations (Carnival). Decide on the
style/form of poetry to be studied and share a variety
of poems with learners. For examples, visit
https://discoverpoetry.com/poems/poems-for-4th-graders/
● Encourage learners to write a poem about
Carnival in their specific island.
● Encourage them to use descriptive language
and sensory details to bring the festivities to
life in the poem.
● Learners can explore different poetic forms
such as haikus, acrostic poems, or free verse
poems about a cultural celebration in their
country.
It’s All About Vincy Mas
In St. Vincent, it's Vincy Mas, a time of joy and cheer,
Where colors dance in the streets, spreading festive cheer.
Calypso rhythms fill the air, as costumes brightly shine,
From dawn till dusk, we celebrate, our island's grand design.
With music, dance, and laughter, our spirits soar so high,
87
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Vincy Mas, a carnival of culture, beneath the Caribbean sky.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS
Gallery Walk and Response: Braid Writing and
Representing with Speaking and Listening. Organize a
gallery walk where learners explore visual
representations, such as photographs, paintings, or
diagrams, related to different subject areas. They would
then respond to these visuals through writing,
expressing their interpretations, emotions, or
connections to the subject matter. This activity
encourages creativity, observational skills, and the
ability to generate ideas for writing across disciplines.
Debate and Persuasive Writing: Organize debates
on controversial topics relevant to different subject
areas. These can include social issues and cultural
practices in different communities in their country.
Before the debate learners will engage in prewriting
activities to research their assigned positions, gather
evidence, and outline their arguments.
88
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
ELO 5 focuses on writing. Students will model their writing after text interactions from previous ELOs. They will write for pleasure
and personal growth. It also focuses on pre-writing and drafting with the use of story maps, webs, and graphic organizers.
Remind students frequently to unleash their ideas, use their conversations, expand on their interests, or think about “wild and crazy” words
and/or events to spark their ideas.
http://fourthgradefourteeners.weebly.com/the-writing-process.html NOTE: This site provides lots of useful ideas for
engaging learners in writing.
The Alphabetability prewriting strategy encourages learners to brainstorm all of the words associated with a topic or story line.
Learners work individually or in groups to brainstorm words. Some of the words are then developed into ideas, the ideas are developed into
sentences and voila! – a draft is written.
89
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
https://www.weareteachers.com/clever-pre-writing-activity/
Drawing a picture or acting out an idea are also excellent ways to provide students with engaging ways to develop and expand on an idea.
CONTENT KNOWLEDGE FOR TEACHER:
1) Writing process
Writers seldom submit unaltered work to an audience (with the possible exception of text messages). Instead, writers follow a process. The
writing process refers to steps most writers take in creating a finished written product
The Writing Process
2) Language structure
Language Structures refer to sentence-level comprehension of text, including how the arrangement of words within sentences impacts the
meaning.
Language Structures | Elementary Literacy | Surrey Schools ONE.
3) Digital blocks
MAP SKILLS DIGITAL ELA Centers & Academic Vocabulary Gr 3 4 | Made By Teachers
90
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
4) Brainstorming strategies
Brainstorming is a method of generating ideas. Brainstorming can be done by individuals to prepare for writing or by groups to solve problems.
Writers use brainstorming to generate ideas to write about.
HOW TO GET IDEAS FOR WRITING: 3 Ways How to Brainstorm for an Essay!
5) Story maps, webs, and graphic organizers.
Story maps, webs and graphic organizers help students learn the elements of a book or story. The most basic story maps focus on the beginning,
middle, and end of the story. More advanced organizers focus more on plot or character traits.
Story Maps | Reading Rockets
Graphic Organisers - The Bell Foundation
Free Graphic Organizer Templates | Houghton Mifflin Harcourt
6) Paragraph writing
A paragraph typically consists of three elements: a topic sentence, supporting sentences, and a concluding sentence.
How to Write a Paragraph for Kids: Teaching Lesson in English
7) Vocabulary to match the genre of writing
Transitional words and phrases connect and relate ideas, sentences, and paragraphs. They assist in the logical flow of ideas as they signal the
relationship between sentences and paragraphs. Each genre of writing lends itself to specific transitional words and phrases depending on the
writer’s purpose for writing.
298 Transition Words And Phrases With Sentence Examples For Content Writers
8) Sensory words for descriptive writing
Sensory language helps readers experience your words, almost as if they’re present, right in the middle of what you are trying to describe.
Sensory Word List | CDN
91
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
ESSENTIAL LEARNING OUTCOME 6: Writing and Representing
Introduction to the Subject: Language is the foundation of communication and the primary instrument of thought. The study of
Language Arts provides access to multiple and interrelated oral, aural, written, and visual ways of representing, exploring, problem
solving, communicating, and sharing meaning. Through listening, speaking, writing, representing, reading, and viewing a wide range of
text and text form, the student continues to develop an awareness of culture, personal identity, and the strategies needed to
participate, communicate, and reflect critically on thought and action.
Strand: Writing and Representing strategies and skills provide opportunities for learners to communicate with their peers and other
meaningful audiences within and beyond their community using paper and digital formats. The process of writing includes planning,
organizing, revising, refining, and sharing feedback. Throughout this process, ongoing problem solving and critical thinking strategies,
applicable to subject areas and to life develop.
Essential Learning Outcome 6: Students will revise the organization and language use in drafted writing or representation,
collaboratively and independently, for a variety of purposes and audiences.
Grade Level Expectations for Writing and Representing
Write for pleasure and personal growth
● sustain independent writing for greater amounts of time
● becoming more comfortable as they describe and explain their choices of vocabulary, format, and style
● reflect on and identify strengths as writers, areas for improvement and the strategies found most helpful at different stages of the writing process.
Engage in the writing process
● generate, gather, and organize ideas and information from a wider range of background knowledge and reading experiences to write for an intended purpose
and audience
● use the revision process to determine whether the ideas, information and vocabulary are relevant and adequate for their purpose,
● draft and revise writing, using a variety of informational, literary, and graphic forms and stylistic elements appropriate for the purpose and audience.
● become more independent as they use the stages of the writing process to develop, revise, edit and present their writing in a variety
of ways
● experiment with range of presentation style elements including print, script, fonts, graphics, and layout
92
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Explore language structures
● use sentences that are grammatically well formed and more complex in their writing
● gather new vocabulary to enhance writing project
● monitor language use for intended and unintended messages
apply more complex punctuation intentionally and meaningfully
Explore word solving
● use knowledge of spelling patterns to monitor errors and self correct
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
By the end of Grade 4, the learners will be Formative assessment provides ELO 6 focuses on working independently and
expected to: opportunities for the teacher to gather collaboratively in the revision of the draft.
write and represent to revise information through COP: Conversation,
organization styles of draft writing and Observation and Product. This provides Throughout this ELO, learners develop their use
representation teachers with information about e of strategies to assist them with monitoring and
learning prior to instruction, observe revising their work.
6.1 continue to develop competence in the learners’ progress during and after The activities and strategies in this section enhance
use of self-assessment strategies and learning and to plan next steps for learners’ ability to acknowledge what has been
checklists to improve organisation of the instruction. done well and modify a draft to create stronger
draft pieces.
In ELO 6, Throughout the term and Connect the IAS column to the ILS column by
6.2 continue to use feedback given by peers year, the teachers and learners will use a encouraging learners to:
and teachers to strengthen the organization variety of assessment tools to engage in ● self assess their pieces
of the draft independent and peer revision of their ● revise their pieces with the aid of peers
drafts. The teacher will facilitate the ● revise their work with the aid of the
6.3 focus revisions on creating print, visual revision process by providing feedback to teacher
and digital texts with increasingly engaging learners. ● utilize strategies in revision
beginnings and lead sentences ● use strategies in sentence creation
● utilize strategies which add richness and
6.4 further explore how the middle of the Teacher formative assessment depth to their pieces. For example, using
draft evolves Conversation sensory and other devices.
Prepare for a conversation by reading a
learner’s draft or revisions. Engage
93
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6.5 revise endings to enhance the written learners in dialogue based on what they write and represent to revise organization styles of
drafts are writing or have written. Begin the draft writing and representing
conversation by asking what the learner Learning to self assess (SCO 6.1)
Provide learners with checklists to monitor and self
write and represent to develop feels has been accomplished, then
assess their writing. Create a sample of writing and use
language use when revising written provide the learner with comments,
the checklists provided in the IAS column to
drafts (vocabulary) specific to the writing, about the gains the
demonstrate how to use and think about self
learner has made.
assessment. After the demonstration, provide time for
6.6 expand vocabulary by incorporating Next, repeat this process with goals for
learners to practice individually and/ or with peers.
new and diverse words into written drafts the next steps of instruction.
during the revising process Revising strategies (SCO 6.3)
Question the learners about the Visit sites that provide writing samples of various grade
6.7develop competence in self-monitoring information in their completed checklist levels of learners. For example:
of errors in word use and provide feedback. https://sblrsdstor.blob.core.windows.net/docs/04e251a6-d5cd-46f6-945c-
46f09f695945_K-
(See below)
4%20Leveled%20Writing%20Samples%20Levels%203%20and%204%20on
ly%20May%202013%20Updated%20March%202014.pdfUsing a sample of
writing
6.8 use words in context, understanding Self assessment for organisation of
how the meaning of words can shift based writing https://www.learnalberta.ca/content/eslapb/writing_samples.html
on the surrounding sentences Self-assessment Checklist
● Provide the learners with frequent Project a writing sample and read it aloud to the class.
6.9 experiment with different language opportunities to use checklists to Next, discuss how to apply each of the revision
strategies listed below.
styles, self assess their drafts with focus
Model the ARMS strategy (shown below) using a
including figurative language such as on organisation.
writing sample projected on the board. Schedule
similes, metaphor, and personification, to
opportunities for students to apply these strategies to
convey ideas more vividly ● Checklists should focus learners’
their own revisions.
attention to the introduction, ,
6.10 create and maintain a personal word and conclusion of the piece.
bank, recording new words encountered ● Learners will use the checklist by
marking a tick or an x next to
6.11 continue to use sensory verbs, each statement after they have
adjectives, and adverbs to enliven read the piece. A tick indicates it
vocabulary and word use
94
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
is included in the writing and an x
6.12 use a paper-based or digital dictionary indicates it is missing.
or thesaurus to clarify the meaning of
keywords and enrich written pieces. ● The checklists may vary
according to genre.
write and represent to develop
language use when revising written ● The checklist below is an example
drafts (grammar and sentence fluency) of one which can be used in
expository writing
6.13 apply knowledge of subject verb Leads and Conclusions (SCO 6.5)
agreement within sentence structure to Support learners by providing beginning prompts
notice areas or writing requiring revision (Leads) and Conclusions to support and scaffold
writers, particularly weaker writers, for example:
Leads
6.14 confer with peers about the flow and
It was a lovely morning with a hint of rain in the air…
clarity of sentences and paragraphs
My community is the best in my country for several reasons…
-Conclusions
6.15 begin to use a simple digital grammar
The beauty, resources and friendly nature of the villages combine
checker
to make my community the best in the country.
6.16 consider the use of alternate lengths Note: Conclusions may also be used as beginning
and formats of sentences and paragraphs prompts to teach learners the technique of beginning
with the end and reflecting on what happened.
Learners who are ready for a challenge may enjoy this.
After that day, we never saw Authur again.
https://worksheetplace.com/index.php?function=DisplayShe
write and represent to develop language et&sheet=Expository-Writing-
use Checklist&links=3&id=6352&link1=43&link2=154&link3=1 Samples of Interesting Beginning prompts (or Leads)
3
05
- 2-1 strategy
are available at https://teachingfourth.com/informational-writing-
leads-anchor-chart/
6.17 understand and use formal, informal,
Home Language and Standard English as This tool is used at the end of the lesson.
appropriate to the purpose, topic, setting,
plot line and characters in writing
95
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
It allows learners to reflect on and talk
6.18 continue to engage in individual and about or write about. Create a 3-2-1
peer revision opportunities to share drafts reflection tool that includes:
and provide/ receive feedback on elements ● 3 things they have learned about
of grammar and sentence fluency such as: improving their writing
-use of simple verb tenses (e.g., I walked; I ● 2 things I will change
walk; I will walk) ● 1 thing I am still wondering about
-comparative and superlative adjectives and
adverbs, Observation
-form and use possessives. Observing learners while writing and
-subject and verb agreement making Samples of concluding sentences are available at:
-use of simple, compound, and complex anecdotal notes can be a valuable https://youtu.be/GJMQWNd1TT8
sentence patterns assessment tool.
-determining complete and incomplete Anecdotal notes allow teachers to record
sentences specific
observations and behaviours of learners
while they are writing and reviewing their
writing. Choose 1 or two of the questions
below to focus on after h opportunity to
write.
Choose 1-3 learners each day to observe
BRAIDING THE STRANDS: Reading
and have conversations with.
and Writing
● Document learners' strengths
and the focus next steps of
Peer Reading: In groups of four, encourage
instruction.
learners to read three selected children’s stories.
● Pay attention to how focused Then they will:
and engaged the learners are. Are
they actively and meaningfully ● identify the Leads used in each story
engaged in the drafting, ● identify the conclusions used in each story
reviewing, and organizing their ● discuss in their group what they believe are
the most effective/interesting Leads and
thoughts?
conclusions
96
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Look for evidence of each ● write down effective beginning and
endings for future use.
learner’s level of
write and represent to develop language use when
confidence as they engage in the writing
revising written drafts (vocabulary)
process:
- Do they have a topic?
Replace overused words. (SCO 6.6, 6:10, 6:12)
- Do they support the topic with a variety
Increase learners’ vocabulary by providing a few words
of
that can be used to replace overworked and overused
ideas?
words as learners revise their pieces.
- Is there evidence of a plan?
- Do they use a graphic organiser to put Visit: https://minds-in-bloom.com/no-more-overused-words/ (or see
below) for suggestions of how to encourage learners to
their
explore new vocabulary; for example:
ideas in order?
-write a “boring sentence” on the board and ask
- Is their writing reflective of their plans?
learners to draw it. Replace the boring words in the
Observing these writing behaviours
sentence with “vibrant” words and ask the learners to
provide
illustrate the sentence a second time. Discuss how the
the teacher with information about each
word choices had a positive effect on the images.
learner’s level of comfort and how
- As writing continues throughout the term and year,
support is
create a bulletin board of overused words, and
best planned.
encourage learners to “collect” replacements to add to
the board
Peer Assessment for organisation of
writing
Peer Review Forms
1. Writing is a collaborative effort.
Encourage learners to use peer
review forms to improve the
organisation of the drafts of their
peers .
2. The peer review/feedback forms - Encourage learners to take the time to think about
below can be used to aid learners' how to include a wider variety of words.
97
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
review and revise their drafts in
descriptive writing and narrative Context clues (SCO 6.8)
writing. Provide learners with a reminder of how context clues
provide additional information for readers. Context
3. Learners can use them to assess clues can be either synonyms, antonyms, or definitions
the beginning, setting, characters in a sentence. Understanding how context clues work
and vocabulary of their peers' will enable learners to intentionally create pieces that
pieces. can be easily understood by readers.
Types of context clues
Synonym He is a happy jovial man.
Antonym Ann stood tall in the yard;
then she collapsed to the
ground.
Definition Davis is a diligent worker
who works hard at all times.
SVG
OHPC Team
INTEGRATING SUBJECTS Learners
PRODUCT apply the strategies learned in their language arts
Reflective Journal classroom to other subject areas. They are often
challenged to understand their content area texts.
● Provide learners with an
organizational strategy (reflective The context clue chart above can be a valuable support
to aid learners’ understanding of new and unfamiliar
strategy) to talk about or record
words in their content areas.
their thoughts of the writing
98
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
process including their drafts, Figurative device selector (SCO 6.9)
reviews, and editing. Provide instruction in individual figurative devices.
Introducing and provide time to use a figurative device
● The journal provides a method enables learners to produce writing that is appealing to
of both teacher assessment and the reader. The device selector below is a tool learners
self assessment of different stages can use individually or in groups to decide which
of the writing process. figurative device (simile, metaphor, and personification)
can be used in their pieces.
● The reflective journal below will Literary Device Selector
allow students to reflect on their
learning by responding to the
questions in the journal.
● NOTE: Before presenting the My
Improvement Plan template, ask
learners what they feel they have
done well. This allows the
students to think about
improvement plans as building on
what they know, rather than
fixing mistakes.
SVG OHPC Team
BRAIDING THE STRANDS
Engage learners in Read Aloud of text that is rich with
figurative language. Learners identify some examples of
figurative language used and talk about the
effectiveness. Visit: More Parts for examples of
metaphors such as “give me a hand” and “crack you
up”. Remember that metaphors are often culturally
specific, so choose examples that resonate with the
learners.
99
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qaQuwHp6L5E
The following provides examples of figurative
language. Focus on one literary device at a time (simile,
metaphor, personification) and provide time for
practice
You're Toast Read Aloud by Mrs. Wade (youtube.com)
write and represent to develop language use when
revising written drafts (grammar and sentence
fluency)
https://keepemthinking.com/2019/05/self-reflection-are-
you-a-reflective-teacher/
Subject Verb agreement (SCO 6.13)
Visithttps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L9mbOc2RmEE
for simple step by step examples of how to teach
subject verb agreement in content. Please note that
while this site refers to examples that may not be in
every classroom, the strategies are strong enough to be
applied to any text.
Digital grammar checker (SCO 6.15)
Introduce students to a simple digital grammar checker.
This activity can be done in a computer lab or on
learners’ individual devices.
● A good way to begin is in Microsoft Word.
● Show learners how to open a page in Word.
100
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Model the creation of a simple sentence or
two. Deliberately make mistakes and then
correct them using the grammar checker.
● Allow students to create their sentences and
utilize the checker .
●
Sentence Checker (SCO 6.13)
Connect lessons focussed on revising to self
assessment by demonstrating how to use the Sentence
Checker, which supports learners’ ability to monitor
the creation of their sentences. As they write and revise
encourage them to revise their sentences based on the
guidelines in the sentence checker below-
My sentence checker
Read your sentences carefully! Can you place a tick
next to each sentence below?
I use different types of sentences and:
● my sentences begin with capital letters
● my sentences end with a full stop OR a
question mark OR an exclamation mark
● my sentences contain at least one complete
verb (an action word)
● My sentences make sense on their own
● My sentences are full sentences and not
fragments
● My topic sentence introduces the supporting
sentences in my paragraph
● My sentences are not too long.
101
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● My sentences are not too short
INTEGRATING SUBJECTS It is
important that learners understand that writing well is
required for all subject areas. The activity below is
designed to foster that awareness.
Bring a subject to class!
● Encourage learners to select a piece of writing
that they created in their Science or Social
Studies class.
● The piece must not be shorter than three
sentences and should not exceed ten
sentences.
● Learners will then use the sentence checker
above to self-correct and assess their own
piece.
write and represent to develop language use
Language Wheel (SCO 6.17)
Choose a selection of short texts to share with the
class. After each sharing, demonstrate how the graphic
organizer below provides the questions to assist them
in determining when their home language or standard
English; or formal or informal language should be
used. This can be displayed on the classroom wall for
ease of reference.
102
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
As learners revise their drafts, encourage them to use
the language wheel to review their language use.
Language Wheel
Comparative and Superlative Adjectives (SCO
6.18)
Visit https://www.eslkidstuff.com/lesson-
plans/comparative-adjectives.html for a hands on
lesson about discovering and using comparative and
superlative adjectives. Beginning with learners
collecting a selection of digital, paper based (or hand
drawn) images , they learn to name, organise, and
categorise the images using comparative and superlative
form.
103
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
ELO 6 focuses on the revision and organization of writing. Students will continue engaging in the writing process to improve their
writing.
1. ReadWriteThink: This website offers a variety of interactive tools and resources for writing and literacy, including graphic organizers,
essay maps, and peer review activities. https://www.readwritethink.org/classroom-resources/student-interactives/graphic-organizers-
30017.html
2. YouTube videos: YouTube videos can serve as powerful educational tools that support and enhance student learning across various
subjects and grade levels.
Writing a Personal Narrative - Episode 1: Brainstorming a Story for Kids
Writing a Personal Narrative for Kids - Episode 2: Making a Plan
Writing a Personal Narrative for Kids - Episode 3: Writing an Introduction
Writing a Personal Narrative for Kids - Episode 4: Writing a Draft
Writing a Personal Narrative for Kids - Episode 5: Writing a Closing or Conclusion
Writing a Personal Narrative for Kids - Episode 6: Revising
Writing a Personal Narrative for Kids - Episode 7: Editing
Writing a Personal Narrative for Kids - Episode 8: Publishing for Kids
104
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
3. Google Docs: Google Docs offers collaborative writing and editing features, allowing students to work together on documents in real
time and provide feedback to each other. Website: Google Docs: Online Document Editor
4. Storyboard That: This website allows students to create digital storyboards, which can help with planning and organizing ideas before
writing.
https://www.storyboardthat.com/
Mindmeister: Provides a visually engaging and collaborative platform to organize information, enhance comprehension, and boost
productivity in their academic endeavors. https://www.mindmeister.com/
5. Graphic Organizers: Provide students with graphic organizers such as story maps, Venn diagrams, or cause and effect charts. Ask
them to use these tools to organize their ideas before writing. https://www.researchgate.net/figure/A-story-map-template-for-planning-
a-story_fig1_309203731
6. Storybird: Storybird is a digital storytelling platform that allows students to create, revise, and organize their writing through the
creation of illustrated stories. Students can collaborate with classmates, receive feedback, and revise their stories to improve narrative
structure and coherence.
https://storybird.com/
105
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher
1) Editing checklist – peer and self - The "Editing Checklist – Peer and Self" from ReadWriteThink is beneficial for editing because it
provides a comprehensive and user-friendly guide for students to review their writing independently or with peers, covering various
aspects such as grammar, punctuation, spelling, organization, and coherence.
https://www.readwritethink.org/sites/default/files/Editing%20Checklist.pdf
2) Rubric for writing editing - Writing Rubrics
● Quick Rubric: Quick Rubric is a user-friendly platform that allows users to create, edit, and share rubrics quickly and easily. Users
can choose from a variety of customizable templates or create their rubrics from scratch. Website: https://www.quickrubric.com/
● RubricBuilder: RubricBuilder is a simple online tool that allows users to create rubrics for writing, editing, and other assignments.
Users can add criteria, descriptions, and scoring levels to create a customized rubric in minutes. Website:
https://rubricbuilder.com/
106
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
3. How to Create a Story Map for Kids - Planning Your Narrative Writing provides step-by-step guidance for children to craft engaging
narratives through structured story mapping. How
4. Transition Words To teach how transition words are used, do a Think Aloud during Teacher Read Aloud to pause and point out
transition words and how they are used in context. Over time, collect a variety of useful transition words and encourage learners to use
them in their writing.
https://rockinresources.com/2015/07/writing-mini-lesson-25-revising.html
5. Descriptive Words provides an extensive collection of vivid adjectives and adverbs to enrich writing and evoke sensory imagery.
Once again, use a Think Aloud during Teacher Read Aloud to bring attention to descriptive words. https://www.yourdictionary.com/articles/ descriptive-
words-adjectives-adverbs-participles
6. Creately offers an online graphic organizer tool, facilitating collaborative brainstorming and visual representation of ideas in various
formats. https://creately.com/Online-Graphic-Organizer
7. Scholastic's Graphic Organizers These printables provides educators with a wealth of printable graphic organizers to support
teaching across various subjects and grade levels, fostering critical thinking and organization skills in students."
https://www.scholastic.com/teachers/lesson-plans/teaching-content/graphic-organizers-printables/
107
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
8. Understanding of differentiation. Teachers should understand differentiation when teaching writing because it allows them to
address the diverse needs, learning styles, and abilities of their students effectively. By implementing differentiated instruction, teachers
can tailor writing instruction to accommodate individual student strengths, interests, and readiness levels.
https://www.prodigygame.com/main-en/blog/differentiated-instruction-strategies-examples-download/
9. Sentence Structure to Enhance Writing: Understanding sentence structure to enhance writing is crucial as it allows individuals to
craft more engaging, coherent, and effective written communication that captivates readers and conveys ideas with clarity and precision.
How to Vary Sentence Structure in Your Writing - 2024 - MasterClass
10. The website "Writing Conferences" offers valuable insights and strategies for educators to conduct writing conferences, fostering
individualized feedback and support to improve student's writing skills and create a collaborative community of writers in the classroom.
Writing Conferences | Reading Rockets.
11. Education.com offers lesson plans, worksheets, and activities designed to improve students' writing skills. Teachers can visit this site
for materials on the writing process. Teachers can find resources for teaching brainstorming, drafting, revising, editing, and publishing.
www.education.com
108
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
ESSENTIAL LEARNING OUTCOME 7: Writing and Representing
Introduction to the Subject: Language is the foundation of communication and the primary instrument of thought. The study of Language Arts provides access
to multiple and interrelated oral, aural, written, and visual ways of representing, exploring, problem solving, communicating, and sharing meaning. Through
listening, speaking, writing, representing, reading, and viewing a wide range of text and text form, the student continues to develop an awareness of culture,
personal identity, and the strategies needed to participate, communicate, and reflect critically on thought and action.
Strand: Writing and Representing strategies and skills provide opportunities for learners to communicate with their peers and other meaningful audiences
within and beyond their community using paper and digital formats. The process of writing includes planning, organizing, revising, refining, and sharing feedback.
Throughout this process, ongoing problem solving and critical thinking strategies, applicable to subject areas and to life develop.
Essential Learning Outcome 7: Students will use their knowledge of spoken language, written language and writing conventions to refine the precision and
enhance the meaning and clarity of their written work.
Grade Level Expectations:
Write for pleasure and personal growth
● sustain independent writing for greater amounts of time
● becoming more comfortable as they describe and explain their choices of vocabulary, format, and style
● reflect on and identify strengths as writers, areas for improvement and the strategies found most helpful at different stages of the writing process.
Engage in the writing process
● generate, gather, and organize ideas and information from a wider range of background knowledge and reading experiences to write for an intended purpose and audience
● use the revision process to determine whether the ideas, information and vocabulary are relevant and adequate for their purpose,
● draft and revise writing, using a variety of informational, literary, and graphic forms and stylistic elements appropriate for the purpose and audience.
● become more independent as they use the stages of the writing process to develop, revise, edit and present their writing in a variety of ways
● experiment with range of presentation style elements including print, script, fonts, graphics, and layout
Explore language structures
● use sentences that are grammatically well formed and more complex in their writing
● gather new vocabulary to enhance writing project
● monitor language use for intended and unintended messages and apply more complex punctuation intentionally and meaningfully
Explore word solving
● use knowledge of spelling patterns to monitor errors and self correct
109
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum
Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
By the end of Grade 4, Learners will use a variety of tools (checklists, rubrics, peer ELO 7 Focuses on refining learners’ written pieces
learners will be expected to: review forms, etc.) to refine and publish their work in using their knowledge of the conventions of writing
develop and make use of suitable formats (written, digital). Examples are shown (spelling, punctuation, and presentations) to produce
below. completed pieces.
the writing conventions
to enhance the meaning
Assessment is a critical component of effective writing develop and make use of the writing
and clarity of their
instruction. It provides the teacher with opportunities to conventions to enhance the meaning and
written work with
identify learners’ strengths, a focus for next steps of
clarity of their written work with increased
increased attention to
instruction, and giving meaningful feedback to learners.
attention to develop spelling conventions
develop spelling
It is also an important tool for teachers to evaluate
conventions instructional approaches
Note: At the beginning of each term, search for a
list of Grade 4 spelling words. While it’s not
7.1 continue to apply learning Conversations
necessary to teach each of these individually, these
and further develop Conferencing during the writing process provides learners lists provide a general sense of the types of words
proficiency in spelling, with an excellent opportunity to share and get feedback this age of learners typically learn and the spelling
contributing to the overall about their drafts from both their peers and teacher. patterns within those words. These word lists also
quality of written work Teacher-Learners conferences allow teachers to guide, provide teachers with examples for teaching word
support and empower students as they actively engage in the patterns, roots, prefixes etc. through games and
7.2 transfer understanding writing process. group activities.
of spelling conventions
across various subjects Teacher/Peer Review (Hamburger Model) (SCO 7.1) Spelling rules!
Learners will provide feedback using this model by first
providing positive feedback and then areas for improvement. Encourage learners to create a personal spelling list
7.3 further develop self
The final feedback will also be positive. of words they found difficult to spell. This list may
monitoring strategies to
be included in their writing portfolio. As learners are
notice and correct spelling
Teachers will engage learners in conversations that provide writing, it is their responsibility to monitor their
errors opportunities for learners to share concerns, express ideas spelling and check their portfolio spelling list for
and receive support. correct spelling.
write and represent to
develop punctuation Throughout the term and year, provide
conventions to enhance the opportunities for learners to review their word lists
meaning and clarity of their and group them according to various categories,
written work. such as:
110
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum
Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
- words with ei or ie
7.4 develop proficiency in the - plurals
use of punctuation - words with prefixes
- words with suffixes
conventions, including:
- short words that are tricky
- full stops
- long words I want to remember
- commas
etc.
- apostrophes
- other punctuation marks as
Taking a final look! (SCO 7.1, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5)
needed
Invite learners to take a final look at their draft
to accurately convey meaning writing piece by using the CUPS editing strategy.
and enhance the clarity of
written work. Model the CUPS strategy (shown below) using a
7.5 begin to make decision writing sample projected on the board. Learners
about the strategic use of will then be allotted time to work on their draft
piece using the CUPS strategy.
punctuation, considering the
potential impact on sentence
structure and overall
coherence of the passage
https://tinyurl.com/4j7bp2dj
7.6 connect punctuation Self Assessment Checklist
choice to decisions about A checklist such as the one below provides learners with a
comprehensive review of their writing. It is strongly
style and format
suggested that this format of checklist be separated into
write and represent to
sections so the learner has a focus for an overall review of
develop presentation
the final draft.
formats to enhance the
meaning and clarity of their
written work.
7.7 develop the ability to
choose a variety presentation
formats throughout the year
111
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum
Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
based on the nature of the Teaching…Editing – ‘CUPS’ – The English Classroom
content and the intended
Meaningful Spelling practice (SCO 7.3)
audience
Apply a variety of digital and/or artistic tools to
ensure learners have various ways to connect
7.8 integrate visual elements,
unusual spelling with the meaning of the work.
including images, charts,
For example:
graphs, and other graphics, - use markers or digital highlighting present the root
into written work to enhance of a tricky word in another colour
overall clarity and appeal to - provide a drawing or clip art picture of the word
the reader. - underline the tricky part of the word
- create an identifiable chant the letters
-do an online search for a passage (or a quote, or a
7.9 publish written work to
lyric) that includes the difficult word
varying audiences using
- connect to another word with the same unusual
different tools.
spelling pattern and highlight the similar letter
pattern
7.10 engage in collaborative
- do on online search for the word in text passage
projects to create and present
written content using various Write and represent to develop punctuation
formats. conventions to enhance the meaning and clarity
of written work.
7.11 add titles, cover images,
tables of content, glossaries, Proofreading Explorers (SCO 7.4, 7.5)
book blurbs, information https://empoweringeducation.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/4th-grade- Display sample writing pieces and model the use of
Informative-Checklist-for-Students.pdf inserting proofreading marks to edit writing pieces.
about the author, etc. as
Make proofreading charts easily accessible to
needed
Peer Review students (on display in the classroom, laminated
Peer review is a strategy that can be used as learners’ share cards, etc.)
their writing with peers for constructive feedback, and then
use the feedback given to improve their work.
• a dot in the margin indicates there is a
spelling error on the line. The learner must
find it and fix it.
112
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum
Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• a wavy line in the margin indicates
punctuation is missing. The learner must
find it and fix it.
• a P in the margin indicates a new paragraph
is needed
Learners will use the codes to proofread their
writing.
Braiding The Strands
Learners’ Selfie Broadcasting (SCO 7.5) Invite
learners to record themselves reading their written
final drafts, then share/broadcast with classmates.
The classmates will listen and critique/provide
feedback. They may also create class podcasts.
Observations
This is how it is done Provide learners with good
Observing and documenting learners’ progress is key to
pieces of writing that consist of correct usage of
providing quality education to all learners. Engaging in
punctuation marks and show the overall impact on
observation allows educators to understand and support each
sentence structure by:
learner’s unique learning journey. Through observation
teachers can examine the daily experiences, achievements,
-Removing all punctuation and paragraphing and
and challenges of each learner.
asking a group of learners to read the passage aloud.
Using Anecdotal Records
- Displaying the original well punctuated version and
Anecdotal records are brief written records or notes
asking the same group of learners to read the
documenting what a child says or does during classroom
passage aloud again.
activities and routines.
When writing an anecdotal observation: - Invite learners to share the experience of reading
punctuated and nonpunctuated text.
113
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum
Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● always include the date and time, names, and the After revisiting this activity with 2-3 groups, remind
focus of the conversation (spelling focus, each learner to “whisper read” their final drafts
punctuation focus, presentation focus) aloud to ensure punctuation is in place.
● share your notes with the learner, always beginning
with a positive comment about an actual write and represent to develop presentation
achievement, followed by, an “now you are ready to formats to enhance the meaning and clarity of
learn about . . .” focus.
their written work.
Product
Product-based assessment focuses on providing
opportunities for learners to create final products as part of Multimedia Presentation (SCO 7.7)
the assessment process. In the writing process, learners will Incorporate a variety of presentation formats such
give attention to using various tools to refine their writing in as videos, audio clips, images, and interactive
the creation of a final piece . elements to support diverse learning styles and
appeal for a wide range of audiences.
Checking learner spelling
Learners will consider their audiences and the
Rather than underlining or correcting every spelling error in content of writing pieces and select suitable
a learner’s writing, provide them with the opportunity to gain presentation formats.
independence in monitoring and self correcting.
Open Mic/Author’s Chair (SCO 7.9)
Place a dot in the margin where a spelling error is noticed. Create opportunities for learners to use an author's
When the learner notices the dot, they must find the error chair (use a chair that is decorated appropriately).
and correct.
NOTE: It’s not necessary to make note of every spelling Learners will read their final pieces aloud to their
error. Choose errors that will be most helpful to learners. peers.
https://www.smore.com/8xrgd-author-s-chair
Self assessing the portfolio
Multiple Presentation Options (SCO 7.10)
Learners may use checklists such as the one shown below to
Engage learners in collaborative writing activities in
assess the quality/completeness of their writing portfolios.
the creation of authentic written pieces. For
example, learners may write newsletters highlighting
some aspects of their school’s life, or they may write
114
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum
Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
biographies of prominent community members.
Written work will be published for in person or
digital audiences.
Learners will use flexible presentation formats like
podcasts, videos, multimedia presentations, or
written reports to share their collaborative work.
Books of all shapes and sizes (SCO 7.9-7.11)
As each writing project is completed, share a
different book making styles:
- folded books
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=21qi9ZcQVto
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fZycb4ADYJw
- storyboard
https://www.khanacademy.org/humanities/hass-
In rating learners’ writing portfolios, the overall product is
storytelling/imagineering-in-a-box/lesson-2-designing-
brought under scrutiny. One purpose of the writing portfolio attractions/a/exercise-4-storyboards
is to document learners’ growth. Rubrics, such as the
example below, are useful tools in rating learners’ portfolios. - PPTs
- Pop up book
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tga4uvgDQGw
This video is also a great opportunity for learners to
apply their instruction following strategies.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS
Reading Journal
In journals, learners are free to express their ideas in
any way that they feel is productive. Reading
journals are particularly effective in encouraging
115
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum
Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
learners to use the writing process to deepen their
understanding of materials that they read.
SUBJECT INTEGRATION
Learners will view short documentaries on science
or other core areas topics, and then write reports.
Social Studies
Learners will look at current trends and issues
nationally, regionally, and internationally and prepare
news articles. Mock newsrooms can be established
to allow learners to write and present news items.
SVG OHPC Team
Journal writing
Journal writing is a tool that can be used to benefit learners as
they write to learn. They can write on topics of interest,
personal experiences, make notes from observation, reflection
on what is written, read, or viewed, and to connect new
information to what is known.
116
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum
Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.waterford.org/resources/journal-prompts-for-kids/
117
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
ELO 7 focuses on students refining their writing for publishing and sharing. Students will use their knowledge of spoken language,
written language and writing conventions to refine the precision of their writing and enhance the meaning and clarity of their written
work. The following suggested resources and materials would assist the teacher in accomplishing the ELO.
1) Different aps (book creator, blooms) to share writing
https://www.scholastic.com/parents/school-success/learning-toolkit-blog/websites-where-kids-can-create-books.html
https://www.splashlearn.com/blog/writing-apps-for-kids/
2) Creating Writing portfolios
Visit https://jenniferfindley.com/writing-portfolios/ for information about the purpose, design, and use of writing portfolios.
3) Author’s chair
https://teachingmyfriends.blogspot.com/2013/08/authors-chair-share-chair.html
118
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
Steps in the Author’s Chair Activity
1. Decide on a special chair to be your classroom author's chair. This chair should not just be any ordinary chair- it should stand out, be bright, and
students should look forward to getting to share their writing in it!
2. Explain how the author's chair will be used.
3. Sit in the author's chair. Only one learner can sit in the author's chair at once. Classmates can gather around in a circle on the carpet.
4. Share writing.
5. Invite listeners to comment. Learners on the carpet are still supposed to still raise their hand if they wish to comment or suggest to the reader.
https://www.smore.com/8xrgd-author-s-chair
6. Call on classmates. It is the job of the reader to decide who they wish to
call on. Before beginning the sharing process, the teacher should clarify how many students the author gets to call on after reading- for
example, each student will receive two positive comments from their classmates and one thing that was confusing to the reader.
Additional Use Content Knowledge for the Teacher
Additional content knowledge which would be essential to assist students in the process of publishing their pieces of writing are as
follows
1) Information on publishing
What to do with student writing? Publish it.
https://teacheroffduty.com/ideas-publishing-student-writing/
https://www.schoolmatepublishing.com/?ref=gsmpsc&gad_source=1&gclid=Cj0KCQiAwbitBhDIARIsABfFYILTgzka1WtnfOCbOLKRBM_uLqTvNvD7I8ox64KDknpQNFdaqJosXCcaAqfJEALw_w
cB
2) Illustration for writing (blurbs)
https://www.writersandartists.co.uk/advice/how-to-write-a-book-blurb#:~:text=Think%20about%20what%20goes%20on,not%20give%20away%20the%20ending.
119
Grade 4 Language Arts Curriculum
https://kidslearntoblog.com/10-best-writing-websites-kids/
3) Author’s chair
https://www.learningforjustice.org/classroom-resources/teaching-strategies/responding-to-the-readaloud-text/authors-chair
4) Uses of independent writing
https://www.education.vic.gov.au/school/teachers/teachingresources/discipline/english/literacy/writing/Pages/teachingpracindepend
ent.aspx
5) Creating a class blog
https://teacherchallenge.edublogs.org/step-1-set-up-your-class-blog/
120
