December 2023
OHCP Grade Two Language Arts Curriculum
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
INTRODUCTION
The design and content of the OHPC Language Arts curriculum provide teachers with opportunities to not only reflect on the best of existing practices,
but also opportunities to learn about and implement evidence-based shifts in pedagogy that ensure all learners have the best possible chance to succeed.
As with any new curriculum there will be questions. Frequently asked “up front” concerns are addressed below as part of the Introduction which provides
an overview of implementation of the Language Arts OHPC.
I. Frequently Asked Questions
1. If I were to peek inside a Primary School classroom using the curriculum, what would I see?
The chart below provides an overview of the wide range of daily learning opportunities included in the Language Arts OHPC.
Examples of Daily Opportunities to Engage in Language Arts Learning
Listening and Speaking Reading and Viewing Writing and Representing
Learners have daily opportunities to: L e a r n e r s h a v e d a i l y o p p o r t unities to: Learners have daily opportunities to:
- discuss topics of Learner interest - browse through a wide range of - explore formal and informal writing in
- listen, reflect on and contribute to paper-based books, magazines, digital various genres throughout the day
stories, poems, nonfiction, music, texts, etc. on topics of interest - co-construct or independently write on
conversations, etc. - engage in reading throughout the day topics of interest using various genres
- participate in lessons that build - interact with engaging texts, lessons and - apply writing lessons in various genres to
strategies in listening and speaking that build reading skills and strategies demonstrate understanding of
- view listening and speaking as a tool to - share reading with small groups of peers organisation, ideas style, form, and
communicate with peers, the conventions
community and the world - share writing with peers and the
community
Throughout the day, Learners receive regular feedback from the teacher about progress made and the next steps of learning.
2
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
2. Will this curriculum improve the literacy rates for all Learners in OHPC?
This curriculum reflects the principles and practices of international research about equitable and effective instructional practices that increase
learners’ levels of engagement and learning success.
3. Does instruction designed from this curriculum provide an equitable learning experience for all Learners?
Yes. Suggestions to differentiate instruction for Learners who excel, Learner who make average progress and Learners who struggle are provided.
4. Does this curriculum recognise and celebrate on the culture and context of OECS?
Yes. Teachers will find local images, stories, songs, poetry to use as anchors or prompts throughout the curriculum. Home and community
languages and knowledge are valued as foundational building blocks to learning and ensure the culture and context of OHPC are visible, valued
and preserved.
5. How do the strands of Language Arts connect?
While Speaking and Listening, Reading and Viewing, Writing and Representing are presented as different strands, teachers know that learning
about one strand supports learning about other strands. Strands may be taught independently or integrated with other strands in Language Arts
AND among the other strands.
6. Does the curriculum provide opportunities to integrate Language Arts with other subject areas?
Yes. The use of local, national, and international images, nonfiction, poetic, visual and lyrical texts provide anchors to connect Language arts
learning with the content of all other subject areas. For example:
a)The leaf of a flamboyant tree can be used as an anchor to teach descriptive language (Language Arts), plant study (Science), symmetry
(Mathematics and Art) and food study (Health &Wellbeing).
b)A science experiment focussed on the states of matter can be used as an anchor for interpreting cyclical diagrams (Mathematics), descriptive
language in Language Arts and representing the states of matter in artistic formats (the Arts).
II. Creating Welcoming, Learner Responsive and Engaging Classroom Spaces for Language Arts Learning
Responsive classrooms provide opportunities and learning spaces for learners to work in small groups or individually, etc. Every classroom should be a
space that invites learning. This includes:
3
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
➢ a classroom library with books, magazines, pamphlets, etc. of all genres
➢ walls with Learner and teacher generated poems, stories, schedules, and reference information (Word Wall, What We’ve Learned, Classroom Rules,
etc.) written in large font for ease of viewing throughout the room
➢ a space for multi-subject exploration (realia table, writing table, science space, math manipulatives, etc.)
➢ learning centers that invite Learners to explore writing, reading, listening and technology.
➢ Opportunities to use the school outdoor space and community as learning spaces
III. Using Formative Assessment as an Opportunity to Observe Learner Learning
There are many opportunities to observe learners learning, to assign tasks for Learners to demonstrate learning, and to provide feedback to Learners. The
OHPC provide teachers with a wide range of formative assessment strategies to inform these observations, such as grade level rubrics and checklists,
graphic organizers, opportunities for visual, oral, and written displays of learning and quizzes. Suggestions for self-assessments encourage learners to
monitor their work and use fix up strategies as needed. Suggestions for peer assessments provide opportunities for peer collaboration about the focus of
learning and not on judging a peer’s learning.
An important part of teacher observations of learning is feedback: sharing information about what has been accomplished and how these
accomplishments provide the foundation for the next steps of their learning.
4
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome One
Introduction to the Subject
Listening and Speaking are foundational for all learning. The strategies and skills of listening and speaking allow learners to contribute meaningfully to
social environments. As learners receive, reflect on, and communicate ideas, they develop increasing proficiency in cognitive organization, critical thinking,
and problem solving. Listening and speaking strategies and skills are foundational for the development of reading, viewing, writing, and representing.
Strand: Listening and Speaking
Essential Learning Outcome 1: Listening and Speaking
The learner will explore, use, and critically apply oral language for pleasure, personal growth, to form and foster relationships and to develop an
appreciation and celebration of culture and of oral languages.
Grade Two Expectations for Speaking and Listening
For pleasure and personal growth
● Listen to music, stories, information, conversation, and environmental sounds for personal enjoyment.
● Demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in sharing the experiences of others and with oral stories, and information sharing.
● Begin to be aware of how purposeful oral language provides a receptive or expressive venue for sharing emotions.
To form and foster relationships
● Listen to identify emotional tone and respond with empathy.
● Explain their own views, consider, and respond respectfully to the views of others and take part in frequent small group and class discussions.
● Appreciate the diversity of their Home Language(s) and Standard English.
To develop and serve as cognitive tools for engaging in and sharing learning
● Continue to observe and practice using tone, fluency, intonation, impact, meaning, and mood.
● Begin to apply listening comprehension strategies enhance understanding of fiction and nonfiction oral language experiences.
● Develop questioning skills that go beyond the literal level.
● Make simple comparisons and contrasts.
● Further develop oral language vocabularies in all subject areas.
● Further develop understanding of the purpose and authentic use of grammatically structured sentences.
● Continue to develop their understanding of oral word analysis skills.
● Demonstrate understanding by providing a summary of an oral presentation.
● Continue to develop oral fluency and meaningful phrasing.
● Further develop how to maintain focus and order while sharing information.
● Apply lessons in phonological awareness to make predictions about meaningful manipulation of phonemes.
● Develop an understanding of when and why either Home Language(s) or Standard English is appropriate for presentations and discussions.
5
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Suggested Learning Strategies
Outcomes
The learner will speak and Establishing Record Keeping for Teacher NOTE: Learning and Assessment go hand in hand. As
listen: Observation of Learning learners are engaged in the learning strategies listed below,
observe, and listen as learners engage in conversations,
For pleasure, personal Before classes begin, create an electronic or hard copy movement, the creation of products and share ideas.
growth Observation of Student Learning Journal to record brief, Record observations in the Observation of learner
dated comments about learner progress thus far and to Learning Journal.
1.1 Engage with various
determine next steps for instruction.
genres of music, oral
The Inclusive Learning Strategies below provide some
poetry, and oral stories
Gathering information through Teacher Conversation suggestions; additional support and resources are found
for pleasure.
below these columns in the Teacher Content and
1.2 Offer thoughts and Observation and Products Additional Resources sections.
opinions on the
meaning and mood of CONVERSATIONS: The learner will speak and listen:
music, stories, for pleasure, personal growth,
and poetry. Learner Interest Inventory
Tell me a story (SCO 1.1, 1.2, 1.4, 1.5) Celebrate a
1.3 Sustain one-to-one Early in the year and throughout the year, have a
culture of classroom story telling. Share a story of a
conversations and conversation with learners about their interests. Use this
community event in your life with the class and engage
contribute to small and information to make choices for all strands of language
large group interactions the class in a discussion about the event. Encourage
Arts, such as Teacher Read Aloud, areas of research, topics
with peers. learners to share stories about community in their lives or
for conversation, books for independent reading, topics
a story they have learned from their parents or
for writing projects, etc. The sample below should be
1.4 Continue to develop grandparents.
adapted for the ages and stages of the classroom.
comfort while engaging After the story sharing, the storyteller asks learners
in interactions with
questions to engage learners in discussion:
adults.
- Did you like the story? Why/why not?
-Which characters in the story reminded you of people
1.5 Describe a personal
you know?
experience in sequential
order. -Have you ever heard this story before or one which was
similar to this one? If so, share your story with us.
-If you had to change the ending (or beginning) of the
1.6 Continue to develop
story, how would you?
6
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Suggested Learning Strategies
Outcomes
vocabulary that reflects https://www.smekenseducation.com/interest-inventories- -What lessons can we learn from this story?
interests as well as for-your-r/ etc.
application of
synonyms, antonyms,
and descriptive words Integration - Social Studies
to build more complex This activity integrates well with the Social Studies
sentences. outcome where learners are required to give examples of
local folktales and illustrate how these serve as expressions
of culture.
1.7 Use some transition
words to connect
phrases.
1.8 Respond to and give
BRAIDING THE STRANDS: Learners write simple
instructions that
versions of the
involve 3-4 steps.
stories that they shared or listened to for composition
writing.
1.9 Demonstrate
application of oral
comprehension
strategies such as: Please Read to Me!: ( SCO 1.1, 1.2, 1.9, 1.10)
- visualising
Schedule Teacher Read Alouds every day. Before reading
- predicting
a story aloud to learners, introduce the title and author of
- connecting
the text. Provide a one sentence overview of the story
- analysis
and do a picture walk through the text. Then Read the
- synthesising
story, pausing every now and then to ask questions to
- determining Questioning: After an anchor activity to introduce a develop learners’ listening comprehension strategies, such
importance lesson, ask individual learners or groups of learners’ as predicting, visualising, analysing, etc.
questions that focus on understanding at a literal level and
To form and foster beyond. (See the Additional Resources section for Predicting: What do you think will happen next? Why do
relationships you think this?
7
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Suggested Learning Strategies
Outcomes
1.10 Describe, share, and suggestions about questions that develop critical thinking.) Visualising? As I read the next section, listen carefully and
discuss thoughts, As learners respond, observe: make a picture in your head about what is happening. I’ll
feelings, and
ask some of you to share your “in your head” pictures.
experiences.
● learner’s choice of spoken language Analysis: What three things do you know about this
● learner’s comfort switching from home language (Character, event, etc.?)
1.11 Ask and respond to to Standard English
questions to clarify
● understanding of how we “share” a conversation See Additional resources for more information about the
information and to
● empathy for peers comprehension strategies.
explore possibilities or
● comfort level asking questions
solutions to problems.
● oral responses to literal W4 + H questions, such as:
Who? What? When? Where ? How?
1.12 Consider others’ ideas
● oral responses to questions to demonstrate deeper
and ask/ respond to
understanding, such as: Why, What if? How do you
questions to clarify
know? etc.
information and to
explore possibilities or ● use the correct word order to create a question.
solutions to problems.
Opposites/Synonym Chant
1.13 Recognize some BRAIDING THE STRANDS: Teacher Read Alouds
Draw a hopscotch box then write words in each box. Place
examples of unfair and braid listening and speaking with reading and viewing.
an object on a word. As you read the word in each box
hurtful vocabulary, and Note: Books chosen for Teacher Read Alouds should
aloud, ask the class / a group / a learner to give an
begin to make reflect learner interests ( See Learner Inventory in the IAS
opposite or synonym (depending on the concept the
vocabulary choices teacher has taught and wishes to reinforce) for the word in column).
that affirm rather than the box. When the answer is correct, the class / group /
hurt people. learner “hops” to the next box. Make note of learners’
understanding of the concept focussed on. Listening to the words ( SCO 1.6, 1.7) Introduce
vocabulary lessons in authentic ways by pausing during a
1.14 Experiment with the
Teacher Read Aloud. As you read, pause and discuss a
impact of intonation,
word that provides an example of an upcoming
expression, and tone vocabulary lesson. For example, when reading about an
while communicating enormous elephant, pause at the word enormous, discuss
ideas and feelings in the meaning and other ways of expressing the meaning.
small- and whole Repeat this a few other times with other words. Later,
8
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
group situations. Adaptation for developing vocabulary: After completing a during a lesson about synonyms, refer to the discussion
about enormous, etc. and connect the discussion to the use
To develop an of the word synonym. Repeat this lesson with antonyms.
appreciation and
celebration of culture
and of oral languages.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS: Many of the learning
strategies in Speaking and Listening can be braided with
1.15 Begin to make
other strands in Language Arts. During a writing activity,
vocabulary choices encourage learners to think about the synonyms that were
that affirm sensitivity discussed in the Teacher Read Aloud.
to the personal ideas,
cultural contexts, and Class chats: (SCO 1.3)Schedule short “Class Chats”
experiences of others. throughout the day on topics chosen from the Learner
Interest Inventory (see IAS column). While not every
child will participate every day, ensure that every child has
1.16 Use social
an opportunity to contribute in some way several times a
conventions, in range
week.
of conversations and
cooperative play
situations, (turn taking,
politeness, when to
speak, and when to INTEGRATING THE SUBJECTS: Use topics
listen) in multiple from other subjects, learner interest, school or
community events, etc. as topics for the conversation.
cultural contexts.
Encourage learners who are reluctant to contribute with
prompts such as, “(Name of Learner), give a thumbs up if
1.17 Use different forms you agree or a thumbs down if you don’t.” As learners
(Home Language, engage in chats, make notes about their progress in oral
communication in the Observation of learner Journal.
Standard English) of
language dependent
upon audience and
purpose.
1.18 Recognize that volume
9
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Suggested Learning Strategies
Outcomes
of voice needs to be unit on synonyms and antonyms , etc. the teacher will read
adjusted according to each pair of words and learners will indicate if the Follow me! ( SCO 1.8, 1.7 )
situation XC. meanings are similar or opposite and explain why. As a
follow up to demonstrate depth of understanding, ask
1.19 Continue to develop
some learner(s) to think of another word that is either
similar or opposite.
monitoring and self
correction of oral Teacher indicates to learners that she has hidden a special
To expand this activity beyond the spoken word, images
language use. gift/treat in the classroom/school. While the whole class
may replace the words.
listens, a small group of learners must follow the teacher’s
1.20 Develop automaticity instructions and work in groups to find the hidden treat.
E.g.: Hot / Cold = opposites. Why? What’s another word
with the meaningful An example of prompts which can be used is below:
for Hot? What’s another word for cold?
application of
1. First, go six steps to the back of the classroom
phonological End / finish = synonyms. Why? What’s another word for
2. Next, look behind the second desk. There you will
awareness in oral end? What’s another word for finish?
see a sheet of paper.
expression of
3. Throw the piece of paper in the wastebasket and
walk towards the door.
- rhyming
4. Finally, look behind the door for the hidden treat.
- onset and rime
- segmenting
NOTE: The “hidden treat” does not need to be an object;
- blending
choose a picture, a note, lyrics to a song for the class to
- beats in a word
sing, or a link to an interesting video to share with the
(syllables)
class. Repeat regularly so several groups each week have
an opportunity. Over time, the instructions will become
more complex and will use transition words; for example:
First, Search for an object in the classroom that begins
with the sound (sh.) Next, Place the object on the right
side of the door. Now, turn to your left and . . . etc.
Class Chats
To form and foster relationships
Make note of how a learner or group of learners share
information. Date each entry to maintain a record of
10
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Suggested Learning Strategies
Outcomes
progress. What’s That Sound? (SCO 1.10) Begin the year with a
focus on active listening. As a classroom management
strategy to signal a transition from one subject to the next
Name: or to calm the class down, pause and play a sound (see
link below) of common sounds and discuss what / who is
making the sound and why. Choose a sound that will
signal “end of subject time” or “time to listen carefully”,
Date:
etc.
Schedule time for learners to create their own tape
recordings of local sounds to share with their peers.
Benchmarks Sprouting Budding Blooming https://youtu.be/VdTzAVSnY1w
Listening to our feelings and emotions: (SCO 1.10,
- listens to 1.11, 1.12, 1.13, 1.14 )Teacher engages learners in a Read-
others aloud that focuses on a text that depicts a specific
- takes turn feeling/emotion (joy, sadness, loneliness, etc.). The class
speaking then discuss the feeling/emotion that was experienced by
- stays on the character/s as the teacher chooses one or two
questions from suggestions such as:
topic
-
1. How did the character feel?
asks/answer
2. What did you do to deal with this feeling?
s questions
3. Have you ever had a similar feeling?
- contributes
4. What causes you to feel that way?
to group
5. How did you deal with that feeling?
discussion
6. Which words made the character feel good?
-uses
7. Which words could have been hurtful?
appropriate
8. What’s another way to say that?
volume and
tone for
speaking
occasion
- extends
11
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Suggested Learning Strategies
Outcomes
peer’s ideas
Visit The Global Digital library for a wide
ADDITIO assortment of Teacher Read Aloud books
NAL that will support most classroom topics.
NOTES: https://digitallibrary.io/book/whats-
next/?topic=level-
2#h5pbookid=13989&section=top&chapter=h5p-
interactive-book-chapter-b93a5e2a-0840-4d1c-c4f2-
332e237517be Example: What’s Next?
To develop an appreciation and celebration of culture
OBSERVATIONS: and of oral languages.
Peer Assessment: Listening Critically ( SCO 1.15) Demonstrate critical
listening during a Teacher Read Aloud. (analysing what
Listen then draw: Learner listens to a peer as he/she retells
you hear, connecting it to your own knowledge, and
a story or describes an event. Learner draws a picture to
making judgements about it). Learners listen as the
represent details of the story or event. The storyteller
teacher reads a book, article, or other written text aloud
examines the drawing and talks about the different
on an issue of interest (suggested books/texts, No Dress
elements captured by the learner.
for Timmy, The Rosa Parks Story) and engage the learners
throughout the story with open-ended questions about
issues that could have multiple perspectives. Learners take
Here’s my picture of your story
positions, then identify reasons to support their positions.
They then evaluate the reasons and draw their own
conclusions. Provide additional opportunities for children
to practise critical listening:
· guest speakers in the classroom
· field trips that include oral presentations
· videos, TV programs
· classroom discussions/conversations
12
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Suggested Learning Strategies
Outcomes
Storyteller’s reflection on peer’s drawing
1. Picture captures most details of the story. BRAIDING THE STRANDS: Provide learners with
2. Some details captured in drawing. opportunities to respond in a variety of ways following
NOTE: When a learner is unsure of the peer’s image, such presentations. Students can respond by writing a
suggest a question such as, “Please tell me about your summary of the oral presentation; drawing a
picture” representation of what was presented, doing dramatic
presentation/ role play.
Self assessment: Poetry
Taking Turns ( SCO 1.16) Teach learners to take turns
Learner listens to a poem read aloud by the teacher then
by brainstorming with them to show what turn-taking
completes the self-assessment checklist below. After the
behaviours look like and sounds like.
self-assessment, the learner shares results with teacher or a
peer.
NOTE: The checklist below is a sample only; adapt the Taking Turns
checklist to include only the concepts that have been
taught.
Looks Like Sounds Like
-Nodding head or other -Have you finished?
gestures -Is it my turn?
-Making and -Do you want to say
maintaining eye contact more?
-Listening attentively -That’s interesting!
-Waiting until speaker is -May I go now?
finished -I respect what you’re
-Waiting for one's turn saying.
to speak -I’m ready to
-Raising your hands contribute.
13
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Suggested Learning Strategies
Outcomes
This is How We Say It ( 1.17) Explore Home Language
by sharing common spoken expressions to describe
various scenarios. Learners provide examples and the class
shares various ways to communicate information about
the scenario. Teacher will read the anchor text (Frenz
Agen – an OECS Write to Read book)
displayed below as a model of use of
home language and Standard English.
Suggested scenario: You want to share
a special event with your teacher or
peers. Say how you will communicate
this to your teacher using Standard
English and your friends using home language.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS:
PRODUCTS:
Phonological Awareness Checklist: Use a checklist to
Listening comprehension strategies are the same as
record learner progress in phonological
reading comprehension strategies. Throughout the day, as
awareness.https://www.readingrockets.org/sites/default/f learners listen to stories, poems, music, and nonfiction,
iles/Component_check.pdf encourage them to:
● Make predictions
Sound Segmentation ● Make connections
● Create visualizations
Teacher engages learners in the following activity to assess
● Analyze the parts of the piece
their ability to segment sounds.
● Summarize or synthesize what was heard
“How many sounds do you hear in the word, "cat "?
See Teacher Content section for more information about
“Now, tell me each sound in…” (The test teacher does not comprehension strategies.
stretch out the test words. He/She only stretches out the
word when giving the initial example). Catch the Beat, Hear the Rhyme: (SCO 1.20)
Schedule time to play with the sounds of language
1. mat (3) ____________
14
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Inclusive Assessment Strategies Suggested Learning Strategies
Outcomes
2. home (3) ____________ (simple cloze rhyming, clapping a beat to a song or poem,
3. on (2) ____________ tapping the beats to learner’s names, etc.).
4. shoe (2) ____________
5. stand (5) ____________ Sound Scavenger Hunt SCO 1.20) Say a letter sound, a
blend, a prefix, suffix, etc. aloud. Learners listen to the
Sound Blending sound then search the classroom or display image of a
scene/s to identify words and pictures with the same
Teacher engages learners in the following activity to assess beginning, ending, or medial sound(s), prefix, or suffix.
their ability to blend sounds. NOTE: As various word solving strategies are taught
throughout the year, this activity can be repeated with
“Listen to the sounds and tell me what this word is /’uh’, increasingly difficulty focus points.
‘s’/. (The word is /us/). Tell me what this word is….”
1. /m-e/ (me) ____________ Sound and match (1.20) Provide learners with
opportunities to review letter sounds and combinations
2. /s-oo-p/ (soup) ____________
using sites such as: https://www.starfall.com/h/ltr-
3. /h-a-t/ (hat) ____________
classic/?mg=m Provide opportunities for learners to
4. /t-ah-p/ (top) ____________
create their own recordings and/videos to share with
5. /s-p-oo-n/ (spoon) ____________
peers and learners in lower grades.
https://www.uen.org/syc/downloads/Handout6_QP
AS.pdf
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
How do we develop oral language(speaking and listening) in learners? Provide opportunities to develop oral language throughout the day and in all subjects,
e.g., sharing background information before field trip and after field trip, viewing videos or TV programmes, after listening to guest speaker, giving oral book talk,
dramatization, puppet show about a topic of interest, creating radio advertisements about an upcoming local event, etc., The sites below will provide more
information on oral language development strategies
● Key Strategies for developing oral language (1-3-6 strategy, jigsaw, discussion prompts, Think-pair-share Jigsaw)
● Audio books (create audio in different dialects and standard English) Listen and watch learning provides examples that can be supplemented with
local songs, stories, etc. in recordings made by learners.
● Listening centers create a designated space where learners can listen to audio recordings such as audiobooks or podcasts-Listening Center Ideas.
15
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
● Teachers’ guide to help with tone and pitch. Style After viewing the humorous video, learners can practice changing tone and pitch with sentences
from their own stories.
● Engage students in books talks - Book Talks
What is Active Listening?
Active listening involves paying attention not only to the words spoken but also to the speaker's tone of voice, body language, and other non-verbal cues. The goal of
active listening is to create a safe and open environment where the speaker can feel heard and understood. Below are links to help develop active listening skills in
learners.
https://umatter.princeton.edu/connecting/listening
Listening activities for small groups
16
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Engaging Listening Activities
Speaking and listening activities
Speaking and Listening Activities
What are examples of questions that provide practice in listening with critical thought? Critical thinking questions provide learners with opportunity to think
deeply, search for alternate perspectives, acknowledge others’ opinions, and consider the opportunities to problem solve with understanding and fairness. Examples
include the following, which have been adapted from the Hun School at Princeton. Choose a question or questions to suit the context.
WHAT DO YOU THINK YOU HEARD?
HOW DO YOU KNOW THIS?
HOW WOULD YOU SOLVE THIS PROBLEM?
DO YOU AGREE OR DISAGREE?
WHY?
HOW COULD WE AVOID THIS PROBLEM IN THE FUTURE?
WHY DOES IT MATTER?
HOW WOULD <INSERT NAME OF A PERSON OR AN ANIMAL> LOOK AT THIS ISSUE?
CAN YOU GIVE ME AN EXAMPLE?
HOW COULD IT HAVE ENDED DIFFERENTLY?
WHEN WILL WE BE ABLE TO TELL IF THIS IDEA WORKED?
WHY DO YOU THINK THEY ASKED THAT QUESTION?
WHO WOULD BE AFFECTED BY THIS?
WHAT CAN THIS STORY TEACH US ABOUT OUR OWN LIVES?
WHY IS THIS A PROBLEM?
What is the difference between a Teacher Read Aloud and an Interactive Read Aloud? A Teacher Read Aloud is for the learner and teachers’ pleasure and
should be a component of everyday. An interactive read aloud provides the teacher with the opportunity to use a text to demonstrate a key concept. Visit
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YyA7vA2JTUE for more information.
What are The Listening Comprehension Strategies? Because the goal of listening and speaking is to listen for meaning or speak to share information, the
listening comprehension strategies are very similar to the reading comprehension strategies: accessing background knowledge, main idea, predicting, visualising,
synthesising, analysing, determining importance.
What is a Book talk? A book talk is great way to braid the strands of Listening and Speaking with Reading and Viewing. The purpose of a book talk is to generate
interest in the book and encourage others to read it.
During a book talk, the speaker may provide information about aspects of the book that they found interesting or noteworthy. They may also read excerpts from the
book or show visual aids such as images or videos related to the story
17
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Book talk prompter
When I give a book talk I:
Speak clearly using a sharing voice
Talk about the author and the book
Show and talk about some pictures
Read interesting parts aloud
Make self and text connections
Talk about the book to get others
interested
18
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials:
Resources for Book Talks: Visit https://storylineonline.net/library/for a wide range of books
presented in video format. Provide learners with an opportunity to visit this site and listen
individually or in groups. After listening, groups prepare a book talk to share the story with peers.
Be a good listener Create a class anchor chart with students of what speakers and listeners should
do during group discussions e.g. https://teachinglearningloving.blogspot.com/2013/08/be-good-
listener-anchor-chart-freebie.html
Oral retelling
Use retelling props such as puppets to provide examples of how to retell sequentially
https://teachsimple.com/product/fiction-story-retell-anchor-chart
Five finger retell
Students can take turns describing one of the following story elements
Thumb – the characters are …..
Pointer – The setting is ….
Tall finger – The problem is……
Ring finger – The events are…….
Little finger – At the end…..
Self assessment Speaking Checklist
● Did I speak too slowly, too quickly, or just right?
● Was the tone of my voice too high, too low, or just right? yes no
● Did I speak loudly enough for the audience to hear me?
● Did I produce the correct intonation patterns of sentences?
● Did I have a good opening?
● Did I look at my audience?
● Did I speak with feeling?
● Did I support my ideas with facts and examples?
19
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
● Did I tell the audience how I feel about the topic?
● Did I use interesting, specific words?
● Did I use visuals to make the speech interesting?
Speaking and listening - Games.
Listening games help students build confidence and communicate with each other in fun ways. Students can listen attentively, think critically, and react
appropriately to each other's input.
This link shares some listening and speaking games and other listening activities.
Speaking and Listening Activities
Making poetry fun
● Choose poems student enjoy or allow students to choose their favourite poems.
● Read aloud with whole class, in pairs or individually.
● Experiment with expression, volume and speed.
How to teach poetry
Best grade 2 poems
Can you follow oral directions? This site provides some activities to reinforce learners’ ability to follow directions.
https://study.com/academy/popular/following-directions-activities-games.html
Create a chart depicting different emotions that students can use for role plays and during read aloud story time to show their feelings
about the story. http://www.clipartbest.com/emotion-faces
20
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Field Trips for discovery and to generate discussions. Students can write about their experiences and create booklets for reading.
Impromptu talk on topics from science and social studies content.
Elements from Local Culture:
Listen and discuss messages in local calypsos.
Invite community members to share stories in various dialects.
Caribbean Read Alouds
Kallaloo- A Caribbean Tale
Caribbean Dream - Book
Snake King: Dominica
Learners record/audios or podcasts for listening/monitoring activity : intonation, expressions tones.
Listen and watch:
Speaking and Listening Sharing Activities:
These suggestions provide learners an opportunity to share their knowledge about topic of interest.
https://www.teachingexpertise.com/classroom-ideas/show-and-tell-activity/
Classroom management of speaking and listening listen and speak
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
21
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
22
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
OHPC Grade Two Language Arts: Reading and Viewing
Essential Learning Outcome Two
Introduction to the Subject
Reading and Viewing are meaning making, problem solving activities that provide opportunities to interact with a wide range of written and visual text
for a variety of purposes. Readers learn to integrate a variety of meaning, structure, vocabulary, and word solving strategies and skills as they develop
thoughtful and critical understanding and insight into written or visual representations of text.
Strand: Reading and Viewing
Essential Learning Outcome 2: Reading and Viewing
The learner will demonstrate a variety of ways to select and engage critically with a range of culturally diverse paper based, visual and digital texts for a
variety of purposes, including pleasure, and personal growth.
Grade Two Expectations
Read for pleasure and personal growth
● Read familiar Early Level texts independently and with confidence.
● Continue to browse books of interest in a wide range of genres.
● Continue to make imaginative and real-life connections to their own experiences.
Use background knowledge
● Use prior knowledge and background experience to construct meaning in a text.
● Notice a favourite author’s writing style.
Interact meaningfully with a wide range of genres and text forms
● Participate in shared reading with a partner, a small group or whole class.
● Develop fluency to foster understanding of what they have read.
● Identify and describe why passages are described as fiction, nonfiction, and poetry.
● Use various reading strategies to monitor their own understanding of texts and repair misunderstandings.
● Make inferences about ideas, events and information presented in texts that they read.
● Draw conclusions about texts they read and those read to them.
● Express a personal response to texts they have read.
● Use charts and diagrams to interpret and clarify meaning of an expository text.
● Participate in small group discussions about text and represent their understanding and critical reflection in a variety of ways.
Develop vocabulary
● continue to develop and apply known vocabulary.
● Begin to connect subject area words in meaningful categories.
Recognise and use language structures
● Understand how word order affects meaning.
● Engage with the work of favourite authors and develop a beginning awareness of author’s craft.
23
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Apply graphophonic elements meaningfully
● Recognize or decode words with common spelling patterns.
● Continue to notice reading errors and use graphophonic elements or different strategies meaningfully and structurally to self-correct.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Suggested Learning Strategies
Use background knowledge and Suggestions for formative assessment strategies ELO 2 Reading Instruction is divided into various
interests to select books that provide information about learning. opportunities to Read and learn about reading
1.0 Continue to make engaging throughout the day.
and ‘just right’ book choices Use the “Reading and Viewing” section of your Observation
for Independent Reading of Student Learning Journal” to create anecdotal notes, The focus of ELO 2 is on Independent Reading
based on: checklists, rubrics, and the results of quizzes etc. (see sample Time, a daily time when learners have an
✓ -interests listed in ELO 1) opportunity to practice what they are learning
✓ various cultures (theirs about reading using texts that provide just the
and others) Gathering information through COP right amount of challenge.
✓ difficulty level
C: Conversation
✓ genre O: Observation Use background knowledge and interests to
P: Products select books
1.1 Reflect on various sources
CONVERSATIONS
of background knowledge to Enjoying and learning from the class library
predict and make (SCO 2.1, 2.2): Provide a variety of paper based
The Concepts About Print Assessment provides Grade
connections before, during and digital books, articles, poems, lyrics and
Kindergarten to Grade Two teachers with useful
and after reading a piece of: images of different topics and genres and levels in
information, gathered through conversation about a
- fiction the class library available for students to choose,
book, about how learners view and learn from text. Visit:
- nonfiction both for shared reading and independent
https://connect.readingandwritingproject.org/file/download
- poetry reading. Schedule time each day for learners to
?google_drive_document_id=0B3yKjAsMtuECVXFvM1NV
choose a text and read and respond with
Z1BJenc
1.2 Increase time (build understanding to the text in oral, visual, or written
stamina) while engaged in format. See Additional Resources section for
Teacher – Learner After Reading interview
Independent Reading suggestions of reading responses.
During Independent Reading time, engage 2-3 learners each
Engage critically with a range day in a conversation about the text they are reading. Using
of texts for pleasure.
24
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Suggested Learning Strategies
1.3 Regard reading/viewing as language familiar to the learner, and relevant to the genre, Choosing a book for
sources of interest, choose a few of these suggestions to guide this conversation: Independent Writing (2.1)
enjoyment, and information. What is the title of this book? Review lessons learned in
Who is the author? Grade One about choosing a
Why did you choose to read this book? book of interest that provides
1.4 Share ideas and opinions Which pictures were special? just the right amount of challenge.
about favourite authors or Tell me about one of those pictures? https://ellkisj.weebly.com/blog/choosing-just-
favourite genres with peers. What was your favorite part of the book? right-books-for-independent-reading\
At the beginning of the school year, provide
1.5 Make meaningful personal, If you could talk to the author of this book, what would you tell (ask) learners with a range of books at various levels of
text and community/world tell him/her? difficulty and encourage learners to use the five
connections that enhance Did this book make you laugh? cry? worry? smile? cheer? Explain. finger rule to choose a book for Independent
comprehension. What connections are there between the book and your life? Explain. Reading Time. See Useful Teacher Content
What did this book make you wonder about? section for more information.
What was the author’s purpose for writing this book?
Select and engage critically with Do any of the characters remind you of friends, family members, or
a range of texts for personal classmates? Explain. Setting the stage for Independent
growth. Show me a few words you know really well. Reading (SCO 2.1, 2.2)
Show me a word that you weren’t sure of. Using a section of an anchor text that represents
1.6 Demonstrate understanding the concept being taught, engage learners in a
and application of reading As learners respond, determine if the book was at, below or “reminder” mini lesson focussed on a reading and
strategies while reading Early beyond the learners reading comprehension level. If beyond, viewing strategy taught in ELO 2,3, or 4.
level texts. revisit lesson about how to choose a just right book for Reminder Mini lessons include topics such as:
Independent Reading. -Comprehension strategies
1.7 Ask critical questions of -Fluency
fiction, nonfiction and poetry OBSERVATIONS -Word work
(Why, what if, is it possible, -etc.
etc.)
1.8 Make connections between
INTEGRATING THE SUBJECTS:
wellbeing and information
Independent Reading Time provides a great
texts on topics such as:
25
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Suggested Learning Strategies
- physical activity The Oral Reading Record (Running Record) provides opportunity for learners to explore and read about
teachers with an topics of interest studied in other subject areas.
- health
- emotions
Let’s Compare: (SCO: 2.2) Provide
opportunities for learners to focus on the images
1.9 Recognize different points of
and words in text. Give students opportunities to
view of the author of print
compare information (similarities and differences)
and/or digital text.
about various cultures from books read and videos
seen.
1.10 Continue to develop an
Engage critically with a range of texts for
understanding and respect for
pleasure
diversity in text and
illustrations.
Let’s share! (SCO 2.4, 2.5)- Plan reading
responses that encourage learners to share the
in-depth overview of a learner’s reading. Each learner should
1.11 Use illustrations and details in pleasures of reading:
participate in a running record at least twice per term;
a text to describe and - group chats
learners who struggle should have the opportunity more
interpret characters, setting, - illustrations or dramatisations of favourite
often. Teachers who are unfamiliar with running records
and events. parts
should request professional development.
- sharing favourite books on the school or
1.12 Reflect on the purpose of class Facebook page
different types of texts e.g., - Read and share, dramatize age appropriate
local newspaper articles, local poems as well as culturally relevant poems.
Additional information is available at:
stories, poems, ads, e-texts,
https://www.readinga-
etc. Dramatising Poetry: (SCO 2.4, 2.5) Visit sites
z.com/newfiles/levels/runrecord/runrec.html
such as Ken Nesbiit’s
Observing Book Club Observe and make notes about https://poetry4kids.com/poems/ and search for
learners in groups of 3, as they engage in a “book club” and Grade Two poems. Share a poem with the class
review their books. Observe for evidence of understanding and choose some learners to assist you in
or misunderstanding as peers listen and share information or dramatising the poem. After learners observe the
ask questions about the text. Use these observations to begin dramatization, create small groups of learners to
choose a poem and then dramatize for the class.
26
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Suggested Learning Strategies
the next lesson on reading comprehension, word work, (SCO:2.5) Kwik Kwak: Listen to and discuss
vocabulary, etc. elements in Caribbean folk tales. Give opinions
about different events in the stories such as the
Observing Word Work: Assessments of graphophonic Anansi tales.
information should always provide learners with https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rTGhTNoP
opportunities to figure out words in the context of a TyU
sentence and not in isolation. This allows learners to use
various sources of information to solve unknown words.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS: Braid listening
Assessments for automaticity of sight words may occur as with reading and viewing with close captioned
the presentation of individual word cards. Rather than YouTube stories.
presenting cards individually, teachers may wish to place a
group of 5-8 words in front of the learner and ask the learner Select and engage critically with a range of
to find and read the words they know. This reduces the time texts for personal growth
stress on the learner and encourages the learner to apply the
strategy of looking for the known first word. Why do I have to learn how to read? (SCO
2.9) Answer this common question by inviting
PRODUCTS
learners to choose books and various forms of text
that will really capture their attention and
Ensure that all learners have opportunities to respond to
demonstrate the value of reading. Suggestions
their reading at various levels of understanding and in
include:
various modalities. For example:
-websites of favourite athletes
-advertisement for favourite activities, toys
Various levels of understanding: Include questions that tap
-‘how to guides’ to play a favourite game, build a
into understanding beyond the literal level; The additional
structure, etc.
resources section below provides example, or visit:
-recipes to make delicious treats out of easily
https://www.saydel.k12.ia.us/cms_files/resources/ela%20re
accessible fruits and vegetables
ading%20hots.pdf
Encourage all learners to share what they have
learned by reading these “unconventional” learn to
Modalities: provide various paper based and digital
read texts.
opportunities to demonstrate learning through illustrations,
drama, model or diorama construction, song, etc. Visit:
27
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Suggested Learning Strategies
https://www.saydel.k12.ia.us/cms_files/resources/ela%20re Look beyond the words (2.14) Display a page of
ading%20hots.pdf fiction, nonfiction or poetry and ensure that all
words are covered. Explain that there is more to
Self assessment before, during and after reading: reading than words and sentences. Provide time
for learners to peruse the images independently
While the KWL is well known, this updated TWHL version and then with a peer(s). Open a discussion about
provides individual and small groups of learners reading the the information provided by the images. Direct the
same text with more opportunities to think about their before, conversation by asking Where? What do you think
during and after reading experiences. Individually, or in is happening and why? etc.
groups of two or three, learners respond to the questions in Make note of learner responses; then uncover the
the TWHL chart below. This may be completed orally or in text and read aloud (or share read) for
written format. confirmation or opportunities to re-examine the
images. Repeat this strategy throughout the year
NOTE: The TWHL is often used as an opportunity to
with various genres of text.
consider comprehension of text, but it may also be applied to
word solving strategies.
Different points of view (SCO 2.15) Select a
range of nonfiction texts and schedule a
T - What do I think I know?
nonfiction Independent Reading time. After
W - What do I want to know?
learners choose and read their selected text,
H - How will I find that information?
provide time for learners to meet with partners to
L - What have I learned?
discuss how and why their chosen text looks the
same or different that the others.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS: Use the texts
chosen by the learners as anchors for ELO 7
lessons focussed on using text features and
illustrations to enhance written work.
28
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Braiding Oral Language and Reading:
Students’ experiences with listening and speaking, help build their vocabulary, language structure, awareness of meaning,
and forms a foundation for reading and writing. Remember to include Teacher Read Alouds every day; the texts read may
serve as anchors for lessons. Occasionally, share a digital read aloud with learners. Visit
https://justbooksreadaloud.com/for examples.
ELO 2 focus on Independent Reading. What is Independent Reading?
Mrs. Judy Araujo
What are the expectations for Reading Level by the end of Grade Two? Every Grade Two classroom has a range of readers. Some learners enter
Grade Two at the Emergent level (Levels A-D) and some at the Early Level (Levels E -K) . During the year and with lots of opportunities to read and
learn about reading, learners move toward the Transitional Level (K – P). Samples of what various levels of books look like are available online. Visit
https://www.hameraypublishing.com/pages/kid-lit-narrative-text-sample
Although this is a commercial site, it provides free viewing samples of the difficulty of each level.
29
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
How do learners choose books for Independent Reading?
Visit https://ellkisj.weebly.com/blog/choosing-just-right-books-for- independent-
reading for more information about the % Finger Rule.
What Do Proficient Readers Do?
https://lordkelvinschool.ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/Strategies-Used- by-Readers.pdf
How does a teacher monitor a learner’s progress in reading?
30
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
The running record provides teachers with information about how a learner approaches text and problem solves while
reading at their instructional reading level. This information provides the teacher with the information needed to plan
the next steps of instruction. Visit https://www.readinga-z.com/helpful-tools/about-running-records/marking-a-
running-record/ for more information and request professional development about running records from your
teaching peers or the school administration.
What is Reading Fluency - Fluency is the ability to read with
accuracy, phrasing, expression, and rate appropriate to the genre and text. Fluent readers identify
words and anticipate phrasing with greater skill and ease, thereby impacting their comprehension
skills positively.
https://www.landmarkoutreach.org/strategies/oral-reading-fluency/
What are some examples of reading comprehension questions? The following examples provide the stems of questions that encourage learners to
think beyond the literal level of text. Source: https://www.saydel.k12.ia.us/cms_files/resources/ela%20reading%20hots.pdf
31
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
What are some examples of Reading Comprehension activities? Source:
https://www.saydel.k12.ia.us/cms_files/resources/ela%20reading%20hots.pdf NOTE: adapt to grade level.
32
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
33
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
What are the expectations of decoding in Grade 2? By the end of Grade 2, students are refining their decoding skills and developing more
automaticity and fluency.
What is Choral reading? - Reading aloud in unison with a whole class or group of students provides an opportunity to practice what they learned
about reading. Be sure to choose texts that are at or just slightly above the learners’ reading level.
What is Readers’ Theatre?
Reader's theater involves children in oral reading activity by reading different parts in a script. The script is not memorised; ensuring the focus is on
reading text and not memorising text. Visit https://youtu.be/P-Suvry_pw8 for a sample Readers’ Theatre session.
What's the difference between fiction and nonfiction texts?
- Fiction or Narratives - tell a story using a familiar story structure that includes a beginning, middle, and end. Some narratives include short stories, folktales,
tall tales, fables, mysteries, and some poetry. Discussing story structure or story grammar can help students understand how narrative text is organized and
sequenced.
- Nonfiction or Informational texts - Share and explain factual information on different topics. They might also tell you how to do something.
Informational texts can include content-area textbooks, newspapers, magazines, brochures, catalogs, and recipe books. Students need lots of opportunities
to read a variety of interesting texts in order to improve their ability to read words quickly and effortlessly and with increasing enjoyment and understanding.
Additional Resources and Materials
Assessment of comprehension:
Exit slip - An exit slip is a formative assessment tool used at the end of a lesson or class to measure students’ understanding and to determine if they
are ready to move on to a new lesson. Students can also use exit slips to process information and express their thoughts. Search for “exits slip samples”
to find a wide range of daily, weekly, or monthly exit slips.
Give pupils an exit slip at the end of the lesson and choose one or two questions for the learner to answer. For example:
What did you read during Independent Reading?
Was it fiction or nonfiction?
What was this book (or story, poem, etc.) about?
Write 2 things you found interesting (or funny, or exciting, etc.)
Would you recommend this book to a friend?
34
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
If you could talk to the author, what would you ask him/her?
Think-pair-share- a collaborative learning strategy where students work together to solve a problem or answer a question about an assigned reading. View site for
more insight on the strategy.
T : (Think) Teachers begin by asking a specific question about the text. Students "think" about what they know or have learned about the topic.
P : (Pair) Each student should be paired with another student or a small group.
S : (Share) Students share their thinking with their partner. Teachers expand the "share" into a whole-class discussion.
Daily 5 | TheDailyCAFE.com The Daily 5 is a literacy framework that guides both pupil and teacher behaviors to create a classroom of engaged and independent
readers and writers.
Tasks of The Daily Five:
Ø Read to Self
Ø Read to/with someone
Ø Listen to Reading
Ø Work on Writing
Ø Word Work
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Oral retelling - opportunities for students to demonstrate understanding by talking about books they have read. Students can use retelling
props such as puppets or retelling cards.
Retelling card for narratives
In the beginning Next
The problem is …. After that …
35
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Then….. Finally
After retelling, students need to be given the opportunity to write about the text or write a text with similar content.
Suggested Responses to Independent Reading
writing journal entries
write a book report, summary
oral retelling
dramatization
draw pictures and write sentences or a paragraph
36
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Elements from Local Culture:
Read aloud Folktales such as Brer Anansi stories
Encourage listening and reading from: Local newspapers, Dominica News Online DNO-Dominica News online ), stories from
local authors, videos from Local Festivals e.g., Creole Day Activities, 4H Clubs.
Reading apps: Read Along by Google
Partner read and partner retelling strategy is great way to develop reading buddies throughout the school. Pair with another
teacher and schedule time for paired readers from different grades to take turns in reading and also to retell/describe settings.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
37
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
OHPC Grade Two Language Arts
Essential Learning Outcome 3 Reading and Viewing
Introduction to the Subject:
Reading and Viewing are meaning making, problem solving activities that provide opportunities to interact with a wide range of written and visual text
for a variety of purposes. Readers learn to integrate a variety of meaning, structure, vocabulary, and word solving strategies and skills as they develop
thoughtful and critical understanding and insight into written or visual representations of text.
Strand: Reading and Viewing
Essential Learning Outcome 3
The learner will demonstrate a variety of ways to use background knowledge and interests to select and engage critically with a range of culturally
diverse paper based, visual, and digital texts for pleasure and personal growth.
Grade Two Expectations
Read for pleasure and personal growth
● Read familiar Early Level texts independently and with confidence.
● Continue to browse books of interest in a wide range of genres.
● Continue to make imaginative and real-life connections to their own experiences.
Use background knowledge
● Use prior knowledge and background experience to construct meaning in a text.
● Notice a favourite author’s writing style.
Interact meaningfully with a wide range of genres and text forms
● Participate in shared reading with a partner, a small group or whole class.
● Develop fluency to foster understanding of what they have read.
● Identify and describe why passages are described as fiction, nonfiction, and poetry.
● Use various reading strategies to monitor their own understanding of texts and repair misunderstandings.
● Make inferences about ideas, events and information presented in texts that they read.
● Draw conclusions about texts they read and those read to them.
● Express a personal response to texts they have read.
● Use charts and diagrams to interpret and clarify meaning of an expository text.
● Participate in small group discussions about text and present their understanding and critical reflection in a variety of ways.
Develop vocabulary
● continue to develop and apply known vocabulary.
● begin to connect subject area words in meaningful categories.
Recognise and use language structures
● Understand how word order affects meaning.
38
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
● Engage with the work of favourite authors and develop a beginning awareness of author’s craft.
Apply graphophonic elements meaningfully
● Recognize or decode words with common spelling patterns.
● Continue to notice reading errors and use graphophonic elements or different strategies meaningfully and structurally to self-correct.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The learner will: Use the Observation of Student Learning Journal to The focus of ELO 3 is learning the various
record brief, dated comments about learner progress thus sources of information (background knowledge,
Interact with understanding and far and to determine next steps for instruction. comprehension, vocabulary, grammar, and word
critical thought to a wide range of solving strategies) that learners use as single or
genres and text forms using CONVERSATIONS multiple avenues to developing their
comprehension strategies, understanding and application of all formats and
During Time to Practice, circulate among learners and ask genres and text. Learning Strategies connect to
1.1 Recognise the purpose and basic them to read a short selection of the text they are reading. times scheduled for Guided Reading and Shared
similarities and differences in As you listen, make notes about: Reading
paper based and digital genres of: - accuracy (if there are many errors, provide the learner Interact with understanding and critical
with an easier text) thought to a wide range of genres and text
- fiction
- fluency (use the fluency rubric provided ELO 2) forms using comprehension strategies,
- nonfiction
- comprehension (use suggested questions from the
- poetry Additional resources section) Reviewing what we know about genre before
- word solving we move on (SCO 3.1)
1.2 Apply a variety of Create a selection of a wide range of texts
comprehension strategies to Make note of learner progress using a rubric or checklist, representing various genres and engage the
create meaning such as the examples in the Teacher Content section below. learners in a genre classification activity. Post
✓ activating background signs that say fiction (make believe), nonfiction
✓ knowledge OBSERVATIONS (true) and ask learners to choose a book, skim
✓ determining importance through it and decide where to place the book.
✓ visualisation Throughout Time to Teach, Time to practice and Time to Once books are placed, have a discussion about
Reflect and Share, observe learner engagement and why books were chosen as fiction or nonfiction.
✓ prediction
participation. When participation or engagement wanes, Co-create a chart about the characteristics of
✓ inferring
chat with the learner about possible questions or fiction and nonfiction text.
✓ synthesising
misunderstandings. If the learner is slow to complete
39
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
✓ analysing assignments, ensure the instructions are understood and At another time, provide a selection of poetry
✓ questions that the learner can read the words included in the texts and repeat the above.
✓ make connections assignment.
To read is to understand (SCO 3.2 ):
PRODUCTS Demonstrate each comprehension strategies
during an interactive read aloud - before, during
1.3 Use illustrations, graphics etc. of
In Language Arts, all conversations, assignments, and and after reading, using a text of interest that
nonfiction text to ask questions, presentations provide opportunities to observe learning and provides a good example of how the
make inferences, and search for
progress over time. While informal, and often in comprehension strategy is applied. Refer to SCO
answers. collaboration with peers, the notes gathered throughout the 3.6 for the list of comprehension strategies and
day provide teachers with lots of information to plan the choose the focus for the lesson. Introduce the
1.4 Use various tools to retell a next steps of instructions. Plan regular opportunities for strategy with an example of what the process
narrative, referring to characters,
learners to demonstrate their learning independently. Refer looks like and then apply the strategy during the
problem (what happened), and to these opportunities as times to “Show What I Know”. interactive read aloud. For example:
solution (ending).
Review each learner’s completed work for evidence of what Activating prior knowledge: Before reading
has been accomplished (the known) and what the learner questions refer to the book cover - title of the
1.5 Read simple mathematics or
needs to know next (moving to the new). book, what you already know about the topic,
science problems to:
illustration on the cover, etc.
✓ search for information
✓ ask questions
- visualisation: after reading a sentence or
✓ find solutions
paragraph, pause and think aloud about
how the words create images in your
1.6 Demonstrate understanding mind AND how that image helps you to
through various responses to understand the text.
text, such as:
✓ artistic representations (visual NOTE: Remember that comprehension
arts, dance) strategies often work together, so learners may
✓ discussions visualise and connect at the same time or
✓ graphic organisers connect and predict simultaneously.
✓ oral and written responses to
questions After the demonstration, provide time to
etc. practice comprehension strategies in small
40
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Examples of rubrics used to keep note of learner progress groups, pairs, individually - during their reading.
1.7 Follow written instructions to throughout the year include: Simple visuals can be displayed to serve as
create an object, find a location, reminders for students e.g., anchor charts,
etc. bookmarks, etc.
Weareteachers.com
1.8 Begin to connect background
knowledge re: community and
Comprehension Questions: Review students’ responses
culture to support
to comprehensions questions and provide feedback on how INTEGRATING THE SUBJECTS:
comprehension of culturally
their answer demonstrates understanding of the Make It Come Alive (SCO 3.10, 3.15) Integrate
relevant text
Reading with the arts and TVET by inviting
learners to use “loose parts” to create puppets to
1.9 Respond critically to texts by
demonstrate comprehension through puppets
asking and formulating responses
plays.
to questions such as:
Use puppets to act out events in stories read.
✓ what if
✓ is it possible that . . .
✓ what else BRAIDING THE STRANDS: Once
✓ what was the author trying to puppets are made opportunities to write scripts
tell us braids with writing.
✓ do I agree/why
1.10 Respond to text focussed on
strategy(ies) reflected in the questions. Examples are
diverse cultures/ways of life with
provided below. NOTE: while comprehension strategies
interest, respectful questions and Develop Vocabulary
are introduced individually, they are rarely used in isolation.
thought.
Assessment of comprehension involves looking for how a
Word detectives (SCO 3.19) Engage students
learner uses and combines strategies.
in a search for new and interesting words
Examples:
Develop Vocabulary throughout all subject areas. The learner posts
Predicting: is the learner’s response plausible and does the
the word on a Word Detective bulletin board.
learner use information from the text to support their
1.11 Continue to develop use of The teacher uses these words for sorting
prediction? Yes, somewhat, not yet
context (meaning, illustrations, activities such as:
41
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
text features, etc.)clues to solve Visualising: does the learner’s description match the Categorising by topic (describing words, people,
unknown vocabulary. information provided in the text? Yes, somewhat, not yet. places, things)
Connecting: does the learner connect information from the
1.12 Self check on the basis of what text as requested (to personal experiences, other text, or - Demonstrate how the Frayer Model
makes sense in the text. actual events). Yes, somewhat, not yet provides a guide to understanding new
Inferring: does the learner base their inference on an vocabulary.
1.13 Refer to personal dictionaries accumulation of information? Yes, somewhat, not yet
and published dictionaries as a Synthesising: does the learner refer to specific facts or The parts of words are meaningful (SCO
reference for new vocabulary. incidences? Yes, somewhat, not yet 3.14, 3.16, 3.19) Create word puzzles of words
with prefixes, suffixes, and root words. Cut the
1.14 Continue to make connections Quizzes can be useful for on-the-spot checks of learning. words along the puzzle lines and learners can
between the language of text Ensure questions are focussed on meaningful application of connect the puzzles meaningfully. Learners then
written with Home Language concepts (synonyms, prefixes, vocabulary, etc.) and not on search for words with similar prefixes, suffixes
vocabulary and Standard English definitions of terms. and roots and create puzzles for their peers to
vocabulary. Example: Read this sentence. connect.
As the year proceeds, learners will begin to
1.15 Apply known oral vocabulary to The joke was funny. notice that prefixes, suffixes, and roots provide
text vocabulary by recognising What is another word for funny? ___________ the foundation to the meaning of the word. At
root words or rimes to solve this point, learners and the teacher begin to co-
unknown words. create root word explosions.
Self and Peer assessment
1.16 Continue to develop Using parts of words to figure out new
Scavenger hunt: Conduct scavenger hunt for text features
automaticity with additional words: ( SCO 3.11, 3.14)
high-frequency words and words in various fiction and non-fiction texts, through the use of Continue to demonstrate and offer opportunities
of personal interest. table/record sheets, students cite the type of text feature, for learners to “chunk” a word to determine
book title, page number as well as tell how the text feature how to read it and to understand it. Present a
1.17 Begin to understand the meaning helped them understand the text. When the learner is sentence with a tricky word digitally or on chart
of Early level prefixes and finished, the results are shared with peers. paper. The teacher pretends to not know the
suffixes. tricky word and uses a Think Aloud and a
marker or digital highlighter to point out
1.18 Create and use a personal word syllables, prefixes, suffixes etc. and how they
bank. work together to make a meaningful word. Once
42
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
the word has been “solved” the sentence is
1.19 Develop an understanding that reread to ensure the word solving was
words may have similar meaningful.
meanings.
Text Where What it How did it
Feature did I find tells me help me
INTEGRATING THE SUBJECTS:
Recognise and use language structures it? understand
Science and Social Studies provide learners with
PAGE the
all sorts of interesting words. Apply the strategy
1.20 Continue to notice and apply information
above to the new vocabulary of each unit of
knowledge of how word order in the text
study.
creates and maintains meaning.
Table
Synonym Dominos (SCO 3.19) Create
1.21 Use punctuation appropriately of contents
synonym domino cards created to match
to: ·
synonyms to their partners. Throughout the
✓ enhance fluency
Illustrations year, as learners’ vocabulary grows, they may
✓ guide intonation
create new synonym, antonym, homonym, and
✓ demonstrate expression
Glossary homophone dominos.
1.22 Further develop fluency by using
knowledge of:
Recognise and use language structures
✓ effective problem solving of Peer/student self assessment: Change a text or part of a
unknown words text from standard English to home language, recreating
✓ predictable language the text to give meaning and flavour according to one’s Drama = fluency=understanding (SCO 3.20,
structures culture. Peers provide options of how to express various 3.21, 3.22, 3.23) Include opportunities for
feelings, emotions, and descriptions.
Readers’ Theatre, poetry reading and singing
1.23 Use fluency to assist: throughout the day. Each of these reading
✓ comprehension opportunities provides authentic opportunities
✓ the mood of the text for learners to experience how important it is to
✓ the intent of the text read and express phrases, sentences, and
punctuation fluently. See Additional resources
for information about Readers’ Theatre.
43
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.24 Become more aware how the
phrases and sentences of text
language may be used to describe BRAIDING THE STRANDS: Connect
in positive or negative ways. Reading with Writing by providing practice in
writing short scripts, dramatic sections of a
1.25 Continue to demonstrate narrative text, etc.
understanding of how word
order in fiction and nonfiction
text impacts meaning.
Examining icons (SCO 3.24) Observe learner
use of digital images; if learners regularly use
1.26 Make connections between
icons to express feelings or communicate, have
common, simple basic digital
discussions about intended and unintended
text vocabulary and meaning.
messages and how to avoid using images to hurt
someone’s feelings.
Interact with and meaningfully
Interact with and meaningfully apply
apply Emergent/Early
Emergent/Early graphophonic cues to a
graphophonic cues to a variety of
variety of genres and text forms
genres and text forms.
Letters work together: SCO 3.29 Continue to
1.27 begin to monitor for errors by
build on learners’ knowledge of how letters and
cross checking phonics,
various groups of letters work together to create
meaning, and structure clues.
a word. Choose words from class discussions,
anchor texts or other subject areas to
1.28 Use picture cues to support
deconstruct for:
/enhance graphophonic word
solving.
✓ initial, final, and medial consonants
✓ Early stage blends
1.29 Continue to develop meaningful
✓ Early stage digraphs
use of graphophonic elements to ✓ Early stage consonant vowel patterns
decode meaningfully such as: ✓ Early Stage affixes and visible root words
✓ -initial, final, and medial
consonants
Activities include:
44
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
✓ -Early-stage blends ✓ using manipulatives to deconstruct and
✓ -Early-stage digraphs build words
✓ -Early-stage consonant vowel ✓ creating word walls of similar letter
patterns patterns
✓ -simple affixes and visible root ✓ establish personal dictionaries
words ✓ connecting word solving in text to
context clues and illustrations
NOTE: Visit the additional resources section
for lesson suggestions.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
The focus of ELO 3 is on the multiple sources of information a reader develops:
45
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
-building on background knowledge
-comprehension
-vocabulary
-language use (grammar)
-word work (graphophonics)
Why is this Strand called Reading and Viewing? Viewing refers to Visual Literacy, which is understanding how people perceive objects/pictures,
interpret, analyze, evaluate, draw conclusions, unlock meaning of what they see and tell what they learn from them. For more information and teaching
suggestions, visit What is Visual Literacy? https://www.highspeedtraining.co.uk/hub/what-is-visual-
literacy/#:~:text=Visual%20literacy%20is%20the%20ability,using%20images%20to%20communicate%20meaning
How can I braid the Language Arts strands? The Language Experience strategy provides authentic opportunities to braid speaking/ listening,
reading/viewing, and writing/representing.
Understanding LEA Approach https://k12teacherstaffdevelopment.com/tlb/understanding-the-language-experience-approach-lea/
What is Readers’ Workshop? A teaching model that allows pupils to engage in authentic reading experiences
Components of the Reader’s Workshop
Mini lesson – teacher focuses on modelling a specific literacy skill/strategy –e.g., word attack skills, fluency, comprehension strategies etc. (10-15 min).
Guided practice – small group - pupils are trying out skill/strategy with the assistance of teacher.
Teacher/student conferencing - teacher works one on one or in small groups - independent work (reading) – application of strategy (20-30 mins)
Pupils are engaged in reading individually or in pairs.
Sharing – Pupils share about the book read, or listened to, the activity completed, or their experience using the strategy.
How do I set up Literacy Centers? A useful Teachers’ guide for new and experienced teachers to setting up effective literacy centers in the
classroom is available at:
Designing Effective Literacy https://www.esc4.net/users/0001/docs2/120-501-1108%20Second%20DELC%20Book.pdf This site contains resources,
tools, and strategies to provide teachers and students with essential reading skills and comprehension strategies for both guided reading sessions and
independent reading tasks.
Reading skills and strategies https://literacyideas.com/reading-overview/
46
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Reading Comprehension Strategies: Comprehension strategies are cognitive processes that good readers use to make
sense of texts. Reading comprehension skills are the daily learning activities that provide practice and application of those
strategies. Teach students these specific text comprehension strategies, then show them how and when to use them in
reading both fiction and non-fiction texts. These sites highlight researched based comprehension strategies for teaching
text comprehension.
https://justcaracarroll.com/reading-comprehension/
Further information about comprehension strategies is available at: Reading Comprehension
https://www.scholastic.com/content/dam/teachers/lesson-plans/migrated-files-in-body/9SixComprehension.pd
Teaching Comprehension https://beverlyhg-h.schools.nsw.gov.au/content/dam/doe/sws/schools/b/beverlyhg-h/localcontent/documents/teacher-
excellence/Teaching-Comprehension-Strategies-DEC.pdf: Provides practice with the Big Five comprehension strategies (scroll to page 5).
What are Graphic organisers? Graphic organisers provide a useful way for learners to demonstrate their understanding. Examples are available at:
https://www.hmhco.com/blog/free-graphic-organizer-templates NOTE: Use a “Think Aloud” to Always provide learners an example of how the
graphic organiser is used.
What are Narrative texts? Narrative texts tell a story. Elements of a story are:
setting – where and when
characters – people, animals, or objects
a plot – events that happen in order. This site explores narrative text structure:
How can parents help their children at home? Visit https://youtu.be/cwGI7eI_xZA for an example of how
parents can use phonics and other strategies to work out tricky words.
How do I teach Vocabulary in Grades K -2
How to teach Vocabulary https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i3OgosvU0pI provides teachers with authentic and relevant ways to teach
vocabulary
What are some questions to ask when learning about narrative text? choose the questions that reflect the developmental level of the learner(s).
47
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Remember Apply Evaluate
Does the story remind you of anything?
Who are the main characters? What do you predict will happen next if the story A place in the story I’d like to be is _____
When did the story take place? continues? because____.
(setting) What is the problem in this story? A place in the story I would not like to be is
Where did the story take place? How is the problem solved in this story? ___ because ___.
(setting) Can you think of other possible solutions to the My favorite part of the story was ___
problem? because ____.
I like this story because _____.
I do not like this story because ____.
Understand Analyze Create
What is the main idea of the story? Why do you think ____ (a character) did ___ (an What if you were _____ (a character, a
What are the major events in the action)? place), what would you do?
story? How did ___ (a character) change/grow during How could you change the story to make it
Sequence the events of the story. the story? more _____?
Retell the story. What caused ___ (a character) to change/grow? Suppose _____, then what would have
Describe the setting. Why do you think ____ (a character) felt ___? happened?
Describe the main character. ____(a character, setting, Create a new setting/problem for the story.
What is the mood of this story? problem) is like ___ (another character, setting, Imagine you are ____ (a character) and plan
Give examples of when _____ (a problem) because ___. a day in her/his life.
character) felt _____.
____ (a character, setting, problem) is different
Additional Resources and Materials
Building background knowledge in students
Building background Knowledge https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DzTFgKLMJZo
Classroom activities to reinforce homophone (words that have different spellings but the same pronunciation)
48
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Student guide for the text feature walk Guiding Students Through Expository Text with Text Feature Walks | Reading Rockets
Text Feature Game (teacher may use Kahoot)
In this timed game, students are to identify various text features on a given page by matching - caption, photograph, heading, bold word label, and/or
diagram to its correct text feature.
https://wordwall.net/resource/7455968/english/text-features
Phonics activities for home and school. Visit https://www.readingrockets.org/literacy-home/reading-101-guide-parents/your-second-
grader/phonics-and-decoding-activities for a selection of activities such as:
Extra, extra! Ask your child to find and cut out all the words in a newspaper or magazine that she can read. Glue or tape them onto a piece of paper
and practice reading them together.
The “H Brothers” Explain to your child that sometimes two letters will stand together to create one new sound. The “H Brothers” join with other
letters to make the sounds: sh, ch, th, wh and ph. Write down some example words and use multisensory props and gestures to help your child
remember the new letter combination. Here’s a fun idea for telling the story of the H Brothers (opens in a new window) to reinforce the concept.
Build-a-word Prefixes are sets of letters that are added to the beginning of a word, and suffixes are added to the end. Give your child a simple action
word, such as heat. Ask your child to think of variations of the word by adding a prefix or suffix. For example: reheat, heated, heater, heating.
Word ladders On a sheet of paper, draw a ladder with two long sides and up to 10 rungs. Write a word at the bottom of the ladder. Challenge your
child to come up with new words by just changing one letter at the beginning, middle, or end of the word. For example, if the bottom word is line, your
word ladder could look like this:
• tape
• cape
• cake
• lake
• like
49
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
• live
• dive
• five
• fine
• line
Cereal box read aloud Your breakfast table can offer some easy practice in sounding out words. Together look at the words on your child’s cereal box,
choose a variety of words from easy to “stretch” words, and see if your child can sound out the letters as you point to each. For longer unfamiliar words,
you can break up the word into easier parts by covering up letters with your finger, and then encouraging your child to blend the parts into a whole
word.
Grocery store literacy Lots of grocery items come in different flavors. Ask your child to help you find a particular flavor by reading the labels. For
example, can she find the low fat milk? The tuna fish packed in water? She’ll be using her reading skills to find the right item. Put your child in charge of
the grocery list. As you put items into the cart, say the word and ask your child to cross it off the list.
Words in the wild Words are everywhere! When you’re out for a walk or shopping together, look at signage and point out some simple words for your
child to sound out. Then try more challenging words like “Hardware Store” or some of the words on a movie poster or a menu in a restaurant window.
look at a movie poster together. Ask your child if they can sound out the words. Keep it fun and brisk as you walk together.
Listen, listen Decoding is hard work! Try setting aside time each day to listen to your child read to you and let him know how much you enjoy hearing
him read and how proud you are. If your first grader has a preschool sibling, encourage him to read to his sister or brother (guaranteed to make you
smile!).
Homophone games https://emile-education.com/fun-homophone-games-and-activities/
50
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Having fun with homonyms (words that are spelled the same but have different meaning) and homonyms Fun with Homonyms
https://brainninjas.ca/fun-with-homonyms/
Suggestions for teaching the Cause and Effect comprehension skill
12 Easy Cause and Effect Activities and Worksheets - Teach Junkie https://www.teachjunkie.com/language-arts/ela-cause-effect-inferevidence/
Games for high frequency words
Visit: High frequency word games https://rhodygirlresources.com/high-frequency-word-games-for-kindergarten/
To develop vocabulary and decoding, visit : Word Ladders https://www.eaieducation.com/pdf/104653.pdf
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Using (ELP) anchor text Goat Goes to Town to show integration.
Interactive Read Aloud Strategy
Before reading
Have discussion and ask questions to capitalize on students’ background knowledge e.g.
● Have you ever seen a farm animal walking around a town or city?
● What might happen if a farm animal walked around there?
● Tell me what you know about goats.
● What would you do if a goat escaped from a farm?
● Connect the story with children’s experiences with animals.
● Highlight sight and high frequency that are unknown.
● Remind children of the strategies they know and can use with unfamiliar words.
● Set a purpose for reading.
During reading- The teacher reads aloud the text whilst students participate
51
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
● Students make predictions, draw conclusions, identify details.
● Students confirm predictions.
● Listen for targeted words.
After reading
● Draw pictures and write sentences.
● Answer more questions.
Cross curricular Activities
Arts
Create a poster to find a lost goat.
Science
Investigate goats – what they eat, where they live, type of animals, etc.
Social studies
Reread page 14 and discuss what it means to be a hero.
Discuss heroes in the community.
Language Arts – Writing
Write a thank you note to the boy who helped the goat.
Visit the site below for more ideas on using the text Goat goes to Town - Teacher's Guide
Using Environmental print Students encounter environmental prints on a daily basis. It is important that students understand the
meaning of these prints, when and where they are used.
52
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Environmental Print | Reading Rockets
Identify the Meaning of Signs: Using Environmental Print
Elements from Local Culture:
Caribbean ABCs By Karllen Lawrence Caribbean Books
Stories based on our cuisine. Each island can choose their cuisine.
Our Visit to the Island
By Irving W. Andre and
Gabriel J. Christian
Local stories and
information
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
53
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SFnMTHhKdkw
54
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
55
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
OHPC Grade Two Language Arts
Essential Learning Outcome Four
Introduction to the Subject
Reading and Viewing are meaning making, problem solving activities that provide opportunities to interact with a wide range of written and visual text
for a variety of purposes. Readers learn to integrate a variety of meaning, structure, vocabulary, and word solving strategies and skills as they develop
thoughtful and critical understanding and insight into written or visual representations of text.
Strand: Reading and Viewing
Essential Learning Outcome 4
Students will develop their understanding of how an author’s purpose and style, genre, text form, text features and choice of vocabulary, and
language influence the meaning of text and define the author’s craft.
Grade Two Expectations
Read for pleasure and personal growth
● Read familiar Early Level texts independently and with confidence.
● Continue to browse books of interest in a wide range of genres.
● Continue to make imaginative and real-life connections to their own experiences.
Use background knowledge
● Use prior knowledge and background experience to construct meaning in a text.
● Notice a favourite author’s writing style.
Interact meaningfully with a wide range of genres and text forms
● Participate in shared reading with a partner, a small group or whole class.
● Develop fluency to foster understanding of what they have read.
● Identify and describe why passages are described as fiction, nonfiction, and poetry.
● Use various reading strategies to monitor their own understanding of texts and repair misunderstandings.
● Make inferences about ideas, events and information presented in texts that they read.
● Draw conclusions about texts they read and those read to them.
● Express a personal response to texts they have read.
● Use charts and diagrams to interpret and clarify meaning of an expository text.
● Participate in small group discussions about text and represent their understanding and critical reflection in a variety of ways.
Develop vocabulary
● Continue to develop and apply known vocabulary.
● Begin to connect subject area words in meaningful categories.
Recognise and use language structures
● Understand how word order affects meaning.
● Engage with the work of favourite authors and develop a beginning awareness of author’s craft.
56
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Apply graphophonic elements meaningfully
● Recognize or decode words with common spelling patterns.
● Continue to notice reading errors and use graphophonic elements or different strategies meaningfully and structurally to self-correct.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The learner will: ELO 4 provides opportunities to observe learner The focus of ELO 4 is to learn about how author’s make
interests and how they respond to certain genres and specific choices genre, words, language use and voice to
Develop understanding of how the craft of authors and illustrators. Add this engage the reader and convey meaning. This ELO
author’s purpose and style influence information to the Student Learning Inventory that is provides an opportunity to “get to know” authors and
meaning provided in ELO 1. their craft. The samples provided below should, whenever
possible, be replaced by local authors and illustrators.
1.1 Become familiar with the style of CONVERSATIONS
favourite authors and illustrators.
Use Why do you think the author. . .? questions to include Develop understanding of how author’s purpose and style
1.2 Use the work of a range of authors to the author in conversations about fiction, nonfiction, influence meaning
compare and contrast purpose and and poetry texts. Use a Think, Pair, Share format for
style: responses. Listen as responses are shared for how well First Glance (SCO 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4) Create an excitement
✓ humorous stories learners’ explanations connect to the text. For example: about reading and a respect for the work of authors and
✓ exciting stories illustrators by introducing an author through the front and
Purpose: Why do you think the author decided to write covers of books and a quick glance through the pages of the
1.3 Work with a peer to begin digital about this? books. For example, the front covers of Robert Munsch
searches to gather information about books provide lots of fun details to provide hints about the
an author. Plot: Why do you think the author decided this should story, the characters and setting. These glances also provide
happen next? the learners with a sense of how authors and illustrators work
Etc. together. As you and the learners peruse the covers, provide
Develop understanding and recognise prompting questions such as:
use of genres and publishing text -What do you notice on this cover?
features to influence meaning OBSERVATIONS -What do you think is happening?
-What do the pictures tell you about the characters?
1.4 Become familiar with the text feature Throughout Guided Reading lessons and Time to Etc.
design choices of the author and Practice, continue to use Running Records (see ELO 2)
publishers to monitor learner progress.
✓ front and back cover illustrations
✓ back blurb information
PRODUCTS
57
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
✓ choice of words to enhance
interest
✓ use of local and international
culture
·
1.5 Engage in the research process with
teacher and peer assistance
✓ generate questions to guide research
✓ locate appropriate information with
assistance (classroom, library, home,
community)
✓ organise information (see ELO 6) scholastic.ca
✓ share information
Calypso Fever (SCO 4.2) : Introduce the concept of
Author’s Purpose by having a discussion of why authors
Develop understanding of how
choose to write. Collect a list of reasons learners provide.
author’s choices of vocabulary and
Listen to local calypso music to identify the purpose, of the
language use, influence the meaning
author’s lyrics whether to persuade, inform or entertain – or a
and mood of the text.
combination – and explain why. Explain how to use P.I.E.
(see below) to make these decisions. Throughout the year, as
learners are reading a variety of books, revisit this activity to
1.6 Express opinions about the work of
Website Review: Schedule time for learners to visit an develop increased understanding of not only the purpose but,
authors and illustrators.
author’s website and a set of questions to answer about how the author uses his style to reflect the purpose.
the website:
1.7 Discuss and respond to the author's
use of interesting words and dialogue
1.What is the first thing you notice about this website?
that evoke emotions, describe, create
humour, etc.
2. What did you learn about the author?
1.8 Continue to develop an
3. What books has this author written?
understanding of how written word
order impacts meaning.
4. Who do you think will enjoy these books?
1.9 Compare texts by different authors
Etc.
for differences in language and mood.
58
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Read a poem or a selection of poems to depict which element
of PIE it identifies with.
We are Book Reviewers (SCO 4.5) Teachers model by
sharing their opinion of books they have read and enjoyed or
even disliked, focussing on how the illustrations and the
author’s words helped or didn’t help in their understanding of
the characters, setting and/or plot.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS Connect ELO 4 with
Speaking and Listening: Teacher and learners make short oral
presentations on books they have read, stating elements of the
story, and sharing their opinions in a fun, exciting and
engaging manner in the hope of persuading others to read the
book/story.
Develop understanding and recognise use of genres,
and publishing text features influence meaning
59
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Getting to know you author study (SCO 4.6)
Select an author with a series of books - for example Eric
Carle, Dr Seuss, look for interesting vocabulary usage and
discuss how it enhances the descriptions of the setting or
character, mood, etc. of the story. Learners search online for
the author’s website or contact information and begin an
author study research project . Questions to guide the
research are based on a BIG question, such as, What do I
want to know about this author?
-Where does the author live?
-What are the titles of his/her books?
-Why did he/she decide to start writing?
- What is his/her favourite book by another author?
- What tips could the author give to an author in Grade two.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS: Research provides an
excellent opportunity to braid reading and viewing with
writing and representing.
Develop understanding of how author’s choices of
vocabulary and language influence the meaning and
mood of the text
Creating movies in my mind (SCO 4.7)
Develop word consciousness in students, emphasize words
from text that ‘show’ not ‘tell’ - have students visualize as text
is read, discussing, and drawing the images created in their
minds. Students could also talk about how they feel,
highlighting the words or phrases from the text that support
their mood/feelings.
60
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
[The author]’s words help me see/feel _________. Words I
add to the word journal/personal thesaurus/class word wall:
Authors have fun with sentences (SCO 4.8): Choose an
interesting selection of language use from a favourite story.
(Braids by Robert Munsch)
Share read the passage with the class and alter the speed and tone
with each reading. Encourage the learners have to have fun with the
shared reading.
BRAIDING THE STRANDS: Connect the lesson
above with a narrative writing project.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
ELO 4 is focused on author’s craft and includes topics such as author’s purpose and style, genre, text form, text features and choice of vocabulary, and
language to influence the purpose and meaning of text and to define the author’s craft.
61
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
What is meant by Author’s Style?
Author's style refers to the unique way a piece of writing is written. It looks at not only what is said but how it is said. Investigating the author’s style
involves analyzing the writer’s distinctive way of communicating ideas. The writer’s goal is to deliberately create or convey a specific mood or
effect. When looking at an author’s style, it is important to look at certain components that set them apart from other authors. These include:
➢ Using sound devices–zoooooooom, SCREECH! quiet
➢ Choice of words
➢ Sentence structure, length, and variation
➢ Using dialogue
➢ Use of local and international culture
➢ Use of sensory details, figurative language, and other literary devices
➢ Tone
➢ Using irony (Not taught in Grade One)
Who are some local authors that Grade Two Learners would be interested? <insert samples of local authors of books, poems, songs, etc.
What is meant by Author's purpose? The author’s reason for writing. Students need to identify authors and explore their purpose for writing, for
example to persuade, inform, describe, or entertain. View the sites to get further insight into authors’ purpose for writing.
What are Text features? Text Features include all the components of a story or article that are not included in the main body of the text. (Reading
Rockets.com) Text features include:
62
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
https://www.readingrockets.org/topics/comprehension/articles/guiding-students-through-expository-text-text-feature-walks
Do Grade Two students do research projects? Yes! Research projects are a wonderful way to integrate the strands of Language Arts. A simple
research outline includes:
Listening and Speaking:
Choose a topic
Decide on information needed and where they can be found
Reading and Viewing:
Read and gather factual information using a range of paper based and digital resources
Writing and Representing:
✓ Collect relevant information in point form
63
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
✓ Organize information
✓ Finalise the project
✓ Present the project (oral or written)
Additional Resources and Materials
Strategies and a video describing how to teach author’s purpose (Brainstorming, P.I.E)are available at:
https://luckylittlelearners.com/teaching-authors-purpose-in-2nd-grade/
Useful strategies to teach genre (genre searches, bookmarks, bingo, etc.) are available at: https://www.stellarteacher.com/blog/5-tips-for-teaching-
reading-genres/
Resources to engage learners in exploring various text forms include: environmental print (posters, signs, etc.) song lyrics, instructions. Digital texts for
use are available at:
64
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Global Digital Library https://digitallibrary.io/ This site includes hundreds of books levelled to the learner’s instructional
level. Here’s a small example of the free texts offered at Level 2
OECS iLearn https://ctu.int/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/OECS-Digital-Learning-Ecosystem-
Jan-25.pdf (scroll down to resources)
Bloom Library https://bloomlibrary.org/
Books are presented in many languages, which include books for hearing impaired and visually
impaired children. Some books are well levelled for the early Primary grades and contain authentic
language structures rather than phonetically controlled text.
Let’s Read Asia Foundation https://www.letsreadasia.org/
Another example of a free digital library that provides engaging texts from a variety of genres with
an option for read aloud.
Storyline Online https://storylineonline.net/
A great addition to a listening center; this site also offers a Teacher’s Guide and multi subject integrated lesson plans for
many stories.
Common Sense Media https://www.commonsense.org/education
Provides well curated, researched based resources such as stories, music, videos, games, loose parts learning, etc. Some resources are free, some are free
samples, and some are by subscription.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Suggestions for subject integration are embedded with the ILS column.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
65
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
66
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
OHPC Grade Two Language Arts
Essential Learning Outcome 5
Introduction to the Subject: Writing and Representing strategies and skills provide opportunities for learners to communicate with their peers and
other meaningful audiences within and beyond their community using paper and digital formats. The process of writing includes planning, organizing,
revising, refining, and sharing feedback. Throughout this process, ongoing problem solving and critical thinking strategies, applicable to subject areas
and to life develop.
Strand: Writing and Representing
Essential Learning Outcomes 5
The learner will generate, gather, and organize thoughts to explore, clarify and reflect on ideas, feelings, and experiences as they create a written or
representative draft, independently and collaboratively, for a range of audiences and purposes.
Grade Two Expectations:
Write for pleasure and personal growth
● Participate in author’s corner.
● Share and receive feedback with peers.
Engage in the writing process
● Use process strategies in pre-writing, drafting, revising, and editing their writing.
● Develop organizational strategies, such as story grammar, to participate in individual and small group writing experiences.
● Use background knowledge, interests, and the modelling of favourite authors to identify a topic and format that suits a chosen audience.
● A variety of meaningful text types intended for quick communication e.g., personal communication, lists, narratives, simple advertisements.
● Write a friendly letter, expository paragraph etc.
● Write legibly.
● Becomes aware of a variety of presentation style elements including print, script, fonts, graphics, and layout.
Explore language structures
● Experiment with different ways of writing sentences.
● Continue to use combination of Home Languages and Standard English to develop an understanding of purpose, meaning and tone.
Explore word solving
● Spell and use a range of high frequency content and function words.
● Continue to develop strategies for spelling or attempting unfamiliar words.
67
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Generate and gather thoughts to Throughout the writing process, use the Observation of ELO 5 focuses on gathering ideas for writing,
explore, ideas, feelings, and Learning Journal to record notes of learner progress. Use organising the ideas, and creating a draft during
experiences these notes to inform the next steps of instruction and the Writing Process.
differentiation when required. NOTE: Many of the Inclusive Learning
1.1 Engage in writing and Strategies in ELO 5, 6, and 7 can be applied to
representing activities every Informal Assessment Strategies for ELO 5 (brainstorming and all genres of writing in Grade Two:
day and sustain engagement drafting). ✓ narrative writing
in writing. ✓ expository writing
CONVERSATIONS ✓ descriptive writing
1.2 Continue to engage in ✓ persuasive writing
conversations about: Observe learners as they participate in brainstorming activities. Visit the Additional Teacher content and
✓ why we write or draw Use a single point rubric to make notes about: additional resources sections for more
✓ how we write or draw information about these genres.
✓ how authors use words Name: Writing and representing for the love of it
and sentences to share Brainstorming (SCO 5.1, 5.2):
their ideas Some evidence Focus Got It Begin each writing lesson with a two-three
✓ how illustrators provide Participation minute free write. Choose from a range of entry
additional information to points such as:
the writing relevance of ideas - Write the first word that comes to your
✓ how authors use choices to the topic mind. Now add two words. Share with
about when to use your friend. Can you turn your words
Home Language and elaboration of into a sentence?
when to use Standard ideas - Look at the picture (share an interesting
English image on a topic of interest). Talk to
willingness to ask your friend about the picture. Write
1.3 Develop comfort in questions down your thoughts about the picture.
experimenting within Some of you will share your thoughts
different forms of formal and interest in with the class.
informal writing, such as: exploring ideas of - Do you agree with this statement: “All
others sneakers should be the same colour”?
68
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
✓ simple handwritten or
digital notes Use checklist and guided questions to ensure that the ideas
✓ thank you notes generated are focused on the specific topic.
✓ invitations to school or
class OBSERVATIONS
✓ letters to peers or Use a rubric to assess students writing progress during the
community members drafting stage of the writing process. Rubrics such as the one
provided below are useful to share expectations with learnings
1.4 Engage in conversations on how to focus on organization, sentence fluency word
about an anchor text chosen choice and voice. Having this information, learners can self
to model the genre for the
Talk to your friend. Write down your
writing project.
ideas and some of you will share with
1.5 Participate in large group and
the class.
- Take 3 minutes to write about whatever
small group opportunities to
you want.
brainstorm ideas about a
- Take 3 minutes to write about
topic or a writing prompt.
something that makes you happy.
1.6 Use simple graphic
- Etc.
organizers, such as pictures,
the five-finger plan, web, list,
BRAIDING THE STRANDS: Topics for
five Ws, etc. to organize
the free writes described above may be chosen
ideas into a draft.
from the Student Interest Inventory, or from
the classroom discussions occurring during
Use organisational strategies to assess as they write. (Conventions are the focus of the editing
Speaking and Listening.
arrange thoughts and to explore, stage in ELO 7)
clarify and reflect on ideas,
How do I become an author? (SCO
feelings, and experiences
5.1,5.1,5.3) Review the writing process at the
1.7 Organise brainstormed ideas • Create and use checklist to ensure that essays have a
beginning of the year and throughout the year.
This will ensure that learners become familiar
through increasingly beginning, middle and end.
with the process of writing, starting with an idea
independent use of:
69
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
✓ a print, visual or digital PRODUCTS and moving through the process , with lessons
graphic organizer from the teacher to completion. At the
✓ group conversation Portfolios: Prepare a Writing portfolio for each learner. beginning of the year, as each step of the writing
✓ story boards Maintain a dated copy of brainstorms and drafts as they process is reintroduced, engage the class in co-
✓ role play provide evidence of progress throughout the year. Share these constructing a chart about what happens
✓ text based models portfolios with parents as evidence of progress and areas throughout the process. The sample below
requiring extra support. provides some guidance:
Daily journal:
1.8 Organize writing to match
Students complete journal entries on topics/genres of interest www.raisethebarreading.com
the genre being studied:
during Independent Writing time. These journals are excellent
✓ narrative writing
records of increasing growth in writing for pleasure.
✓ expository writing
✓ descriptive writing
Bulletin Boards: Use bulletin boards and appropriate digital INTEGRATING THE SUBJECTS:
✓ persuasive writing
resources to organise work. Writing completed throughout the subjects is a
https://www.commonsense.org/education/lists/elementary- component of Writing and Representing in
1.9 Make decisions about when
school-writing-apps-and-websites Language Arts. As learners participate in
illustrations, charts, and
research projects, integrate the development of
alternate language use will
Feedback: Schedule regular opportunities to engage a learner the project with ELO 5,6,7.
enhance the writing.
in 1-1 feedback sessions. During this session, ask the learner
about their topic and writing and ask questions to deepen What genre are we writing? (SCO 5.3, 5.4)
thinking and spark ideas. Then, provide a comment about Divide learners into small groups and provide
Create a written or representative
what the learner has accomplished, followed by a focus for each group with different forms of print such as
draft
future writing. The learner maintains a record of these story, advertisement, signs, or informational
conversations in their writing portfolio for reference as they text. Ask learners to sort the writing according
1.10 Understand that writing a work through the writing process. Begin each feedback to purpose - to advertise, to inform, to tell a
draft is connected to the conference by reviewing the notes in the portfolio and looking story, to give directions. Learners can also sort
prewriting/brainstorming for evidence of progress. writing according to audience.
and organising process.
1.11 Approach draft writing from Self Assessment and Peer Assessment: Prewriting (brainstorming) strategies (SCO
a positive perspective of 5.3, 5.4, ):
taking risks by:
70
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
✓ using temporary spelling Throughout the writing process, provide opportunities for Use Table Talk to engage learners in the
✓ exploring various languages learners to share brainstorms, drafts, and revisions with peers. conversations about the topic and the genre of
✓ writing freely with a Ensure peers understand their role is to support and not the writing assignment.
✓ focus on getting ideas on criticize. -Follow up the table talk with an opportunity to
✓ paper or device Post a peer assessment chart that includes questions such as: illustrate or create an object representing their
- Please tell me about what you’re writing. ideas.
1.12 Refer to anchor texts as - Would you like to read it to me? -Plan a Think-Pair-
examples of the genre of the - I like the way you . . . Share demonstration
writing project. - Would you like a suggestion? lesson with a small
- May I share my writing with you? group of learners.
1.13 Continue to work with a -Present the lesson to
partner, small group or the class and engage the
independently, to begin the learners in a discussion
process of drafting and about the writing topic
organising sentences. and how to gather ideas
that match the genre being studied. For
1.14 Further develop the structure example, a topic such as “The Storm” will
of the genre throughout the generate different ideas if the learners are
draft process of: writing a story or if they are writing for a science
✓ narrative writing unit.
✓ expository writing
✓ descriptive writing
-Apply the ABC strategy
✓ persuasive writing
as a brainstorming strategy
to stimulate conversations
1.15 Continue to develop
about the writing topic.
understanding of the social
This strategy not only creates ideas, it’s a great
aspect of writing by engaging
vocabulary builder.
with peers and the teacher
for ideas, suggestions, and
ongoing feedback.
71
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Use organisational strategies to arrange
thoughts and to explore, clarify and reflect
on ideas, feelings, and experiences
Organizing ideas and words (SCO 5.5, 5.6,
5.7)
Use a Think Aloud to demonstrate the purpose
and use of Graphic Organisers designed to
create images of how words and ideas are
related. Provide time to practice. Encourage
learners to create their own graphic organisers.
Visit the Additional resources section below for
ideas.
Learning while we are sharing our writing:
(SCO 5.8, 5.14)
Schedule a group writing lesson and invite
individual learners to “share the pen” as you
demonstrate how a brainstorm evolves into a
draft as you Model writing and use writing
circle.
Create a written or representative draft
Use an author’s writing as an anchor (SCO
5.1, 5.11): Introduce each writing lesson with an
anchor text that provides a sample of the genre,
or the writing topic being studied. Lessons in
ELO 5 focus on the following Traits of Writing:
- Ideas
- Organization
- Sentence Fluency
- Word choice
72
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
See Useful Content for Teachers and Additional
Resources sections for more information about
the Traits of Writing
Watching the How Tos of writing as draft
(SCO5.9, 5.10,5.11, 5.13 ):
NOTE: Regardless of the genre being studied,
organising ideas is an important component of
the writing process. While graphic organisers
may vary from genre to genre. Teachers use a
sample of a brainstorm, or other graphic
organiser such as a storyboard, etc. to
demonstrate how to move toward writing a
draft. Provide lessons on the following as they
apply to the genre being studied. (See Additional
Resources section for sample lessons of the
following):
✓ Leads (first sentences),
✓ choosing ideas that follow the Lead
sentence logically,
✓ how to write a sentence (review basic
components of subject, verb, etc.
✓ how to organize the sentences in a
paragraph,
✓ if and when illustrations, tables, charts,
etc. will be inserted,
✓ how to approach the above process with
a focus on creating a draft and not a
finished product.
Uninterrupted Time to Practice (SCO 5.13,
5.14, 5.15)
73
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Ensure that learners have access to enough time
to think about, share ideas and focus on their
writing. During individual writing time, establish
a classroom mood for thinking and writing. Co-
create a classroom chart that reminds students
to keep noise levels down by:
- Holding up a coloured card if they have
a question,
- Referring to the notes about writing in
their writing portfolio,
- Pause and think quietly before chatting
with a peer, etc.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
ELO 5 is the first ELO of the Writing and Representing Strand. ELO 5 is focussed on the Brainstorming and Draft stages of the Writing Process.
What is meant by the Writing Process? The writing process is a series of steps one follows in order to complete a piece of
writing in any genre. The steps include: https://www.desertcart.in/products/13102347-creative-teaching-press-the-writing-
process-chart-grade-2-5-4175
74
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
What is Writers’ Workshop? Writers’ Workshop is an organizational framework for
teaching Writing. The framework consists of three components: the mini-lesson, work
time, and share time.
https://k12.thoughtfullearning.com/blogpost/7-steps-great-writing-workshop
What are the Traits of Writing?
75
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
https://k12.thoughtfullearning.com/teachersguide/all-write-assessment/traits-effective-writing
A list of sites providing background knowledge about the writing process:
● Teacher Resource: The Writing Process Notebook https://www.ttms.org/PDFs/04%20Writing%20Process%20v001%20(Full).pdf
What are Anchor/Mentor texts? Mentor texts are written pieces that serve as examples of good writing for students. The texts are read aloud to
students or provided as texts during Independent Reading for the purpose of studying the author’s craft, or the way the author uses words and structure
in the writing.
76
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
What do I teach during Writers’ Workshop? The SCOs provided in the ELO 5 provide the focus points for instruction and the ILS (Inclusive
Learning Strategies) columns provides sample lessons.
To see Writers’ Workshop in action, visit https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7B4X2LkJwnE&t=136s. NOTE: When viewing videos that are
professionally developed, remember that most classrooms do not have as many resources (nor do things run as smoothly!), so view the video to get
some ideas about how you will begin using the Writing Workshop format and build from there.
Additional Resources and Materials
Learner Choice: While focussing on teaching a specific genre or set of writing strategies and skills, learners will be more engage if
you provide them with choices of topics on which they write.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qULPIk4H9Fw
Suggestion for teaching the purpose for writing
Writers write to persuade, entertain and to inform. Students need to be able to identify different types of texts and the author's
purpose for writing them. This site gives guidance to teachers as they assist students in understanding the purpose for their writing.
Author's Purpose Lesson
https://www.lakeshorelearning.com/assets/media/images/free_resources/teachers_corner/lesson_plans/1_2/lessonAuthorsPurposePIEFull.pdf
Thoughtful Learning https://k12.thoughtfullearning.com/blogpost/7-steps-great-writing-workshop provides links to
engage learners in writing various genres. Scroll to the bottom of the page and look for:
Brainstorming:
1) Jamboard is a Google Extension you can use to help develop and plan out writing ideas. It is perfect for prewriting because you can brainstorm
and organize ideas.
2) Writing frames
77
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Writing frames for ideas that lead to drafts: A writing frame is a resource that teachers use in order to show children how to set out their writing and
also to prompt them to include certain features.
Concept maps are visual organizers to build writing skills- A concept map is a way of representing information, knowledge, or facts in a graphical
form. It consists of concepts and relationships between them. The link below provides more information on concept mapping.
Concept Maps | Classroom Strategies | Reading Rockets https://www.readingrockets.org/classroom/classroom-strategies/concept-maps
Drafting:
How to make a paragraph come alive:
How to write various types of paragraphs
Opinion paragraph: The SOAR acronym provides concise overview of the opinion writing process. Engage learners in a shared sample lesson before
assigning.
S – State opinion
O – Offer reasons
A – Add examples
R – Restate opinion
Narrative paragraph: After brainstorming and recording ideas, allow students to talk about their story ideas to the class or peers before writing. Then
share a retelling card for narrative.
78
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
In the beginning Next
The problem is …. After that …
Then….. Finally,
Writing an expository paragraph
https://free-printable-paper.com/main-idea-and-details-graphic-organizer/
Writing informational paragraph
https://www.teachthis.com.au/products/paragraph-structure-informative-text-paragraph
Writing an Opinion paragraph: students state a point of view, then provide reasons to support that viewpoint.
Opinion Writing https://storiesbystorie.com/opinion-writing-for-2nd-graders/
79
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Using a mentor text to teach writing
ELP books - such as Surprise Moon, Goat Goes to Town, The Angry Sun, In the Mountains
● students read the text to become familiar with it,
● identify the skill or skills being taught,
● choose the right mentor text ,
● identify and describe how the skills are used in the text.
Descriptive writing
A planning Strategy for Descriptive writing
5 Senses Graphic Organiser https://www.youtubee.com/watch?v=4vMbbKMx1m4&list=PL27994045AD84DCBD&index=11
Writing poems Visit The Primary Pond for an introduction to poetry writing in Grade Two. https://learningattheprimarypond.com/blog/poetry-for-
second-graders-teaching-poem-writing/
80
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
● Write a dramatic play or skit that can be acted out about - plant life cycle for example (Plant Life Cycle Stages).
● Have students draw to increase their note taking skills - building art skills (picture stories).
● Create a booklet with facts about an animal (Science) or national symbols (Social Science) and summarize ideas about them.
● Create eBooks using google docs or writing tools like Story Jumper.
How to integrate using the text Angry Sun (ELP resource)
The sun comes out one morning to find that his friend the sea, is polluted with garbage. He becomes angry. He calls on
the Sea, and the Wind to join him in teaching the humans a lesson.
Link the text (Angry Sun) with:
Science - recycle, reuse, waste disposal, environment, pollution
Social studies - family fun, social gathering e.g., beach picnic,
Health and family life - clean environment, disease, emotions, feelings
Arts and craft - create poster, signs, scrapbook,
Language Arts - writing letters to humans.
Elements from Local Culture:
● Create picture plus word dictionaries e.g., depicting local animals, local sites, or national heroes.
● Write calypsos and creole/cadence/calypso songs.
● Write poetry about local events/culture e.g., Independence Celebration, local foods, local sites, heroes etc.
81
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational
research):
OHPC Grade Two Language Arts
Essential Learning Outcome 6
Introduction to the Subject:
Writing and Representing strategies and skills provide opportunities for learners to communicate with their peers and other meaningful audiences within
and beyond their community using paper and digital formats. The process of writing includes planning, organizing, revising, refining, and sharing
feedback. Throughout, this process is ongoing.
Strand: Writing and Representing
Essential Learning Outcome 6
The learner will revise the organization, and language use (vocabulary and grammar) drafted writing or representation, collaboratively and
independently, for a variety of purposes and audiences.
Grade Level Expectations
Write for pleasure and personal growth
● Participate in the author’s corner.
● Share and receive feedback with peers.
Engage in the writing process
● Use process strategies in pre-writing, drafting, and revising their writing.
● Develop organizational strategies, such as story grammar, to participate in individual and small group writing experiences.
● Use background knowledge, interests, and the modelling of favourite authors to identify a topic and format that suits a chosen audience.
82
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
● A variety of meaningful text types intended for quick communication e.g., personal communication, lists, narratives, simple advertisements.
● Write a friendly letter, expository paragraph etc.
● Write legibly.
● Becomes aware of a variety of presentation style elements including print, script, fonts, graphics, and layout.
Explore language structures
● Experiment with different ways of writing sentences.
● Continue to use a combination of Home Languages and Standard English to develop an understanding of purpose, meaning and tone.
Explore word solving
● Spell and use a range of high frequency content and function words.
● Continue to develop strategies for spelling or attempting unfamiliar words.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will Use the Observation of Student Learning Journal to NOTE: The focus of ELO 6 is the revising
Revise organization styles of record brief, dated comments about learner progress thus process. Lessons taught during the drafting stage re
drafted writing and far and to determine next steps for instruction. ideas, organisation, sentence fluency, word choice
representation and voice are revisited as learners learn how to
CONVERSATIONS enhance, remove, and generally improve their draft.
1.1 Identify different forms of
print and digital writing that Writing conferences Revise organization styles of drafted writing
are appropriate to specific As learners are engaged in writing and revising, choose 2-5 and representation
purposes and audiences. learners each session to conference with. During the
conference, ask the learner to read their writing to you and Exploring Writing (SCO 6.1) Before beginning the
1.2 Review the draft and monitor then discuss: revising process, remind learners about what they’ve
writing for form and - what the learner feels is the best part of the writing, learned about the genre being studied. Expose
organisation using revision - the learner’s thoughts re: sections needing revision, learners to different forms of print and digital
tools such as: - the learner’s ideas for these revisions, writing within the classroom. These include
✓ inserting a word by using a - your suggestions (just one or two – focussed on storybooks, newspaper articles, advertisements,
caret, revision of sentence fluency, grammar, vocabulary, informational texts, lists, among others. Provide
✓ crossing out a word and voice, but not spelling, punctuation or tidiness, opportunities for learners to discuss these texts
✓ adding /removing details using guided questions:
83
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
✓ -using arrows to indicate which are the focus of the editing process in ELO ✓ What type of text is this?
how ideas can be better 7). ✓ How do you know this is a (list, story, poem,
organised comic, etc.)
✓ What is the intended purpose for this text?
1.3 Add details or labels to a Author’s Chair: Schedule time throughout the revising ✓ Who is the intended audience for the text?
picture with thought and process for learners to present what they have written to ✓ Search for another example of this type of
purpose. small groups or the entire class and answer questions about text.
it.
The tools of revision (SCO 6.2)
1.4 Focus revisions on creating
As learners revise their writing by:
print, visual and digital texts OBSERVATIONS ✓ removing
with a beginning, middle, and
✓ replacing
end The Observation of Student Learning Journal is used
✓ elaborating
1.5 Experiment with organisation for all strands of Language Arts and should be used to
circulate and provide feedback.
with various real-world genres: inform instruction going forward.
At the end of the session, provide an opportunity
✓ wish list, how to list,
for some learners to describe changes made to
grocery list, etc.)
writing. Teacher also shares some examples of
Use suitable grade-level rubrics to assess students’ writing
changes observed during the feedback sessions.
Revise language use after revision has been completed. See additional materials
(vocabulary) and resources for links to rubrics that can be used at grade
Help a Friend SCO (6.1)
level. Adjust rubrics as necessary to fit the level of your
1.6 Continue to notice and make learners.
choices about the use of
Standard English or Home Visit: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u1gd8bticFA
Language vocabulary to for Grade Two rubrics that provide references for various
enhance word choice. genres of writing.
1.7 Become aware of how to make
decisions about word specific
choice to enhance clarity:
✓ use concrete nouns,
84
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
✓ use accurate verbs, Pair up learners with a partner so that they can help
✓ use a variety of meaningful revise or edit each other’s writing. Assign a special
descriptive words. corner in the classroom for pairs to go to. Provide
checklists, mini anchor charts and sentence starters
to guide the pairs as they work. This process must
1.8 Continue to develop and be modeled for learners until they are able to do so
refine the intentional and on their own.
meaningful use of Home
Language and Standard
English vocabulary:
✓ transition words, such as
first, next, then, after,
finally, etc.
✓ attribute words—colour,
size, shape, texture multi-
sensory words—hearing,
PRODUCTS
smell
✓ comparison words of size, Best Word Choice
As a regular check in, display and read aloud a short
shape, texture
paragraph. Learners find and highlight concrete nouns,
circle verbs and underline adjectives. Then display and read
1.9 Use the word wall to check for
aloud a short paragraph that omits nouns, verbs, and
alternates for overused words
Revising Strategies (SCO 6.3, 6.4,6.5 ) Upon
adjectives. Ask learners to use suitable words in these
completion of their first draft, learners should be
spaces that can make the writing meaningful (or humorous,
explicitly instructed on strategies to revise their
scary, etc.)
Revise language use when
writing. When a learner revises his or her writing
revising written drafts NOTE: for learners who have difficulty reading, read the
(independently or with a peer), they make changes
paragraph aloud to them.
(grammar and sentence
such as adding or deleting parts or ideas. Examples
fluency). https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/grammar/grade-
include:
2-fill-in-sentences-a.pdf
I Do, We Do, You Do Model how to revise using
1.10 Develop and understanding Word Wall Mastery Checklist
the model (Gradual Release of Responsibility).
of how to write complete
85
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
sentences on a specific Assessing words from the word wall should not be done by Teacher shares one of their own writings using a
topic. rote memorization but by genuine understanding of their Think Aloud to demonstrate the process to revising
meaning. Use an observational checklist to assess mastery it. Throughout the Think Aloud, learners respond to
1.11 Use some variety in of word wall words. open ended questions to assist in the revising
sentence beginnings. process.
Applies word wall vocabulary in class and
peer discussions
1.12 Experiment with lead A.R.M.S. and D.A.R.E are mnemonics that can
sentences that will engage assist learners with remembering the steps to
Demonstrates use of words in a variety
the audience. revising their writing. Explain and model how to use
of contexts, during independent work
DARE- and ARMS to revise. Ask learners to work
1.13 Begin to embed structures Demonstrates understanding of when to
for plurals and simple past use vocabulary or phrasing from the
tense in sentence.. word walls of Home Language(s) and
Standard English
Revise language use (voice) Glances to the word wall during class
1.14 Use expressive Home Refers to personal thesaurus
Language and or Standard
English phrases and
SELF-ASSESSMENT
vocabulary, as appropriate
to the topic, to enhance together to use the strategy, then work
Monitoring Progress :
message.
independently.
The dotted line between the IAS column and the ILS
column indicates that learning and assessment are
1.15 Experiment with how an
intertwined. Guide learners to use checklists while working
author uses bold print,
on their writing. Model how checklists can be used then
visual words, and fonts to Revise language use (vocabulary)
provide blank copies for learners. For example:
enhance author’s voice. A bit more is needed (SCO 6.5, 6.6, 6.7,6.8):
Develop language use when
revising written drafts
86
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
(grammar and sentence
fluency)
BRAIDING THE STRANDS: Writing and
1.16 Develop an understanding Representing provides many opportunities to braid
of how to write complete Writing and Representing with the Speaking and
sentences on a specific Listening Strand.
topic. Refer to classroom
conversations to think
1.17 Use some variety in about how writing is
sentence beginnings. really about “writing
down the words that
1.18 Begin to experiment with come out of our
Provide students with magazines, newspapers, or printouts
and use revising strategies to mouths”. For
of articles or stories. Ask them to search for examples of
develop sentence fluency of: example, if learners
bold print, visual words, or different fonts used by
✓ Statements, are writing about a
different authors. Instruct them to cut out those examples
✓ Questions, favourite game and
and create a collage that showcases how authors use these
✓ Exclamations, write, “It was fun!”,
elements to enhance their voice. Encourage students to
✓ Short sentences, ask them to think about how they would tell a friend
discuss and reflect on the different effects created by each
✓ Longer sentences. about the game. Chances are, lots of details will
author's choices. As learners share their choices re: the
emerge. Encourage the learners to add those details
collage, use a simple checklist to assess the collage.
1.19 Experiment with lead to their writing words and to note how much more
sentences that will engage interesting their writing is.
the audience. NOTE: Learners may be hesitant to write words
Areas Some Yes Wow!
they find difficult to spell. Assure them that during
1.20 Begin to embed structures the revising stage, we improve the writing – they will
for plurals and simple past Creative and learn more about spelling and punctuation during
tense in sentences. Original the editing stage (ELO7)
Images match The “Art” of writing (SCO 6.6, 6.7) As learners
Develop language use when task create their own artwork, post the pictures or
revising written drafts (voice) drawings on the wall, and have students engage in a
gallery walk. Each learner has the opportunity to
87
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.21 Use expressive Home describe their artwork to peers, using descriptive
Organization
Language and Standard and, when possible, action oriented language. to
English words and phrases their peers. As descriptive words are used, create a
Neatness
to enhance the message. chart for use during revisions.
Effort &
1.22 Experiment with how an How words work together (SCO 6.9, 6.10, 6.11,
Engagement
author uses bold print, 6.12, 6.13) Learners are taught and provided
visual words, and fonts to opportunities to apply skills and strategies to
enhance the author’s voice. Thumbs Up, Thumbs Down develop grammar and fluency in their writing. For
example:
As a group check-in, write a singular noun on the board
-Find the Best Word
and then write its plural form incorrectly, such as
Learners are paired up or placed into groups and are
tooth/tooths. Ask students to indicate if the plural form is
given a sentence. Learners are tasked with finding
correct by showing a thumbs up or a thumbs down. Make
words hidden around the classroom that can be used
a note of how many in the class indicated understanding.
to enhance the piece of writing.
Try the activity using different singular or plural words.
-Use a Thesaurus
Use this same strategy in ELO 7 (Conventions) to check
Introduce learners to the use of dictionaries and
spelling.
thesauruses suitable for grade level. Model how to
use and guide learners to use with a partner or
individually. Once learners understand the benefits
of using the thesaurus or dictionary, they will be
more eager to use when revising their various
writing.
Highlight 5
In writing conference, guide learners to highlight
five (5) overused, replaceable words on their paper.
Assist them with using a thesaurus to find better
choices for the words they have highlighted. They
can also use the word wall or ask a peer for
suggestions.
88
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Writing about life in our community (SCO 6.5,
6.7)
Share illustrations, photos or videos that depict a
certain community scenario. Ask learners to write
sentences about what they see, making use of
descriptive words of Home Language and/or
Standard English. Discuss the value of each word
choice in enhancing the genre and topic.
Step by step
transition words (SCO
6.6 ,6.7)
In groups or individually,
have learners put the
correct transition words
to revise a piece of
writing.
-Challenge students by
giving them a short list of
transition words. See if
they can use all the words in one story that makes
sense. Discuss whether there is such a thing as "too
many" transition words in one piece!
www.readingrockets.org/strategies/transition_words
Fresh Beginnings: Choosing an engaging lead
(SCO 6.12) Expose learners to various opening
sentences for each genre of writing. Simply search
for “Opening Sentence (Lead) for Grade two
<insert genre> writing and lots of examples will be
available. Examples include:
89
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
A question: What do you think would happen if . . .
?
A sound: SMASH!
A fact: The earth is a planet in our solar system.
A quotation: “Why did you do that?” my
grandfather asked.
Etc.
Provide learners with a wide range of paper based
and digital fiction and nonfiction texts and time to
“collect” a range of Leads that may provide
inspiration to revise the first sentence of their
writing.
language use (grammar and sentence fluency)
What is a sentence? (SCO 6.9,6.10.6.11, 6.12):
Refresh understanding about the purpose and
construction of sentences (See Useful Content for
Teachers).
Choose a few sentences from a Teacher Read Aloud,
separate the subjects and predicates and review the
process of:
- choose a subject from a list to make a meaningful
match with a predicate,
- practice completing a subject by adding a
meaningful predicate and vice versa.
From Mixed up to meaningful (SCO 6.9, 6.11)
Write a complete sentence related to the chosen
topic on sentence strips and cut the sentence up
word by word. Provide each group of learners with a
90
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
set of scrambled words and ask them to arrange the
words in the correct order to form a complete
sentence. Ask students to read the sentence orally
and then silently to ensure it is meaningful.
Develop language use when revising written
drafts (voice)
Provide learners with skills to highlight their
voice when revising written drafts. (SCO 6.14,
6.15)
Schedule time for learners to view a range of
children’s books and search for how fonts, text size
and images provide information about how the
author would read this book aloud. Follow up this
exploration with an opportunity to create handmade
or digital posters using expressive text choices such
as bold print, visual words, and different fonts to
enhance the author's voice. Encourage them to use
colors, illustrations, and other design elements to
make their posters visually appealing and engaging.
91
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Colour Your Writing (SCO 6.14, 6.15)
Use anchor charts in
the classroom the
promote the use of
colourful words in
learners’ writing. Model
using ‘think aloud’ how
they can go about
enhancing their
sentences using
adjectives. For example,
write the sentence ‘The
dog eats the bone.’ Say,
hmm, I wonder how I can
make this sentence even more interesting? Maybe I can say,
‘The hungry dog eats the juicy bone.’ Give learners an
opportunity to enhance boring sentences. They can
work individually, in pairs or in small groups.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
The focus of ELO 6 is on expanding the Grade Two learners’ revising strategies to improve the organisation, sentence fluency, vocabulary, and voice of
their draft. Revision involves looking at the content of a document to ensure that it meets its intended purpose. During revision, the writer may add or
remove some information to make the document more effective. NOTE: ELO 7 focuses on editing spelling, punctuation, tidiness, and presentation.
Grammar content
Grammar should not be taught in isolation; it is most effective when integrated with writing instruction. Begin with an anchor text that provides an
example and discuss. Provide opportunities for learners to search for other examples and then apply what they have discovered to their own writing.
Sample Grade two English grammar text: While the use of worksheets should be limited the examples in this resource may provide teachers with
the support to teach some of the components of grammar. https://ummassadhomeschool.files.wordpress.com/2015/10/grammar_pb-grade-2
Home Language and Standard English can work hand in hand. Both contribute to a learner’s success in all strands of Language Arts.
92
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Strategies to Reinforce the Value of Bilingualism
• Support families as they learn to view their home language as a gift to pass down to their child.
• Encourage families to honor the strength of their home language and use it to support their relationships.
• Make it clear to families that their child benefits most from words, stories, songs, and conversations provided in the language they are most
comfortable speaking. This helps their child learn in both their home language and in English.
• Use hand gestures, body movements, or other visual aids to demonstrate ideas when working with a family who speaks a language you don’t
understand. Show video clips of responsive practices and bring key messages that have been translated for the family.
• Build the families’ confidence as they use their home language as the best way to communicate and nurture their child to strengthen parent-
child relationships.
• Provide some socialization activities in the family’s home language and some in English to achieve a level of balance that supports strong
bilingual skills.
• Share ways families can help their child learn English, so they are ready for school. Assure them that their child will learn English during
socialization activities and interactions in the community. For children birth to age 3, there should be a focus on home language
development with exposure to English; for children ages 4 and 5, the focus includes English acquisition along with home language.
• Work with families to understand what English and home language supports their child might receive in their local school district as they
prepare their child to start school. If the family is interested in supporting English language learning at home, they may want to introduce
some stories and songs in English, but this can be just a small part of each day or week.
https://eclkc.ohs.acf.hhs.gov/publication/dual-language-learners-considerations-strategies-home-
visitors#:~:text=The%20early%20literacy%20skills%20families,skills%20in%20English%20as%20well.
Check out this video that summarises revising (ELO 6) and editing (ELO7) and provides suggestions for sample mini
lessons.
https://www.themeasuredmom.com/how-to-teach-revising-and-editing-in-k-2/
:
Simple, on the spot Writing Rubrics: Visit this site for information on how to use a Simple Single Point Writing Checklist https://dataworks-
ed.com/wp-content/uploads/2nd_Writing_Checklist.
93
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
What is a Quick write pair-share? This Strategy is used to create and establish a writing environment where students feel motivated and confident to
write and to share their ideas. Quick Write -https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Me3I-ro9\]]]]]ABw
Summary of focus points for revising writing:
Ideas Organization
· Choose a topic, · Write a strong beginning,
· Add strong details to make writing interesting, · Put your ideas in order,
· Stick to the topic. · Write a strong ending.
Sentence fluency Voice
· Write sentences that are fun to read, · Show you are interested in your topic,
· Write different length of sentences, · Put some feelings into your writing.
Begin sentences with different words.
Word choice
· Choose words carefully,
· Use words that paint a picture in the reader’s mind e.g., sensory words.
94
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Additional Resources for the Teacher
Graphic Organizer for Narrative Writing: Being able to identify the beginning, middle and
end of a story can help learners with revising their own writing. Use a graphic organizer such
as a story map to help learners with identifying those elements of a story.
https://strategiesforspecialinterventions.weebly.com/story-map.html
Using Transition words to assist with
organization: Transition words phrases act as bridges between ideas,
sentences, and paragraphs, helping readers follow the writer's train
of thought and understand the relationships between different parts
of the text.
There are several types of transition words, including
http://www.teacherstakeout.com/2013/01/transition-words.html
Sentence activities to explore while revising:
● Expanding,
● Combining,
● writing sentences in sequence,
● removing.
Make grammar, sentence fluency, and vocabulary instruction meaningful.
95
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Descriptive language instruction (adjectives, adverbs, etc. ) and vocabulary building instruction (synonyms, antonyms, etc.) is embedded in meaningful
text. Braid Interactive Read Aloud with Writing by pausing to point out and reflect on the author’s various choices, sentence structures, word choice,
etc. Discuss with the learners and make note of the conversation during the next Writers’ Workshop.
NOTE: Do not expect Grade Two learners to define the Parts of Speech. Using the parts of speech and talking
about parts of speech first; definitions come later.
Anchor charts: As topics are introduced, take time to co-construct anchor charts that highlight the most important
components of the lesson. Ensure anchor charts are located in places visible to the students and are written with age
appropriate vocabulary.
https://lalalifeblog.com/student-created-anchor-charts/
Elements from Local Culture:
Develop vocabulary by creating personal dictionaries in local dialects
Create a word wall with local terms
Create local songs
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
96
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
OHPC Grade Two Language Arts
Essential Learning Outcome 7
Introduction to the Subject
Writing and Representing strategies and skills provide opportunities for learners to communicate with their peers and other meaningful audiences within
and beyond their community using paper and digital formats. The process of writing includes planning, organizing, revising, refining, and sharing
feedback.
Strand: Writing and Representing
Essential Learning Outcome 7
The learner will use their knowledge of spoken language, written language and writing conventions to refine the precision and enhance the
meaning and clarity of their written work.
Grade Level Expectations:
Write for pleasure and personal growth
● Participate in author’s corner.
● Share and receive feedback with peers.
Engage in the writing process
● Use process strategies in pre-writing, drafting, and revising their writing.
● Develop organizational strategies, such as story grammar, to participate in individual and small group writing experiences.
● Use background knowledge, interests, and the modelling of favourite authors to identify a topic and format that suits a chosen audience.
● A variety of meaningful text types intended for quick communication e.g., personal communication, lists, narratives, simple advertisements.
● Write a friendly letter, expository paragraph etc.
● Write legibly.
● Becomes aware of a variety of presentation style elements including print, script, fonts, graphics, and layout
Explore language structures
● Experiment with different ways of writing sentences.
● Continue to use combination of Home Languages and Standard English to develop an understanding of purpose, meaning and tone.
Explore word solving
● Spell and use a range of high frequency content and function words.
● Continue to develop strategies for spelling or attempting unfamiliar words.
97
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will: Use the Observation of Student Learning Journal to record ELO 7 focuses on the Conventions of
brief, dated comments about learner progress thus far and to writing: spelling, punctuation, and
determine next steps for instruction. presentation The most effective way to teach
Use knowledge of writing these concepts is when lessons are embedded
conventions to enhance the Suggestions for formative assessment strategies to observe learning within authentic, engaging text.
meaning and clarity of their and plan for next steps instruction, ELO 7: Observing the
written work. development of the use of Conventions (spelling, punctuation, and NOTE: ELO 7 provides many
presentation) in Writing and Representing
1.1 Continue to develop
independent strategies to The Northwest K-2 Writing Rubric provides teachers with a year opportunities for BRAIDING THE
monitor and edit spelling and by year resource to gather information about learner progress in STRANDS and
make corrections with writing.
increasing independence. Visit:
INTEGRATING THE SUBJECTS
1.2 Use an increasing number of Regardless of the subject, pause and use
accurately spelled words. teachable moments to examine a word’s
spelling, an interesting use of punctuation and
1.3 Use word walls, personal a text’s interesting presentation style.
dictionaries, environmental
print to check and/or confirm
commonly used words. https://educationnorthwest.org/sites/default/files/resources/trait Use knowledge of writing conventions to
s-rubrics-k-2.pdf
enhance the meaning and clarity of their
1.4 Generate spelling of written work.
unfamiliar words based on:
✓ the beginning, middle, and CONVERSATIONS
ending sounds in words, As learners proceed through the writing and editing process, have
✓ continue to develop regular conferences that include:
accuracy with a short vowel - making note of the spelling, punctuation and presentation
in each syllable of a word, that has been completed well,
✓ blending sounds and - ask if there are words that have been troublesome for the
syllables to make a word, learner,
98
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
✓ use an increasing number - ask learner what they know about the word (beginning, Thinking about spelling together (SCO
of letters to represent middle, end, a rhyme, etc.), 7.1 – 7.8) Teach conventions in the context,
sound. - provide learner with a prompt about how to word solve using Interactive Writing and Teacher Think
and set an expectation for future writing accuracy, Aloud Writing
1.5 Demonstrate increasing - keep a record of the conversations and prompts as a diary to create
knowledge of more complex of progress. stories, charts,
spelling patterns, including lists, etc.
long vowel patterns (ai, ay, oa, Regularly review notes of all learners to make decisions about throughout
ou, ee, ea). which elements of Conventions on which to focus instruction. the day.
Ensure there
1.6 Continue to develop is always a focus to the lesson -
understanding of how to OBSERVATIONS Choose a specific curriculum outcome(s)
sequence letters when spelling -Throughout the day, observe learner’s independent use of from the list on the left side of this table as
unfamiliar words. conventions in all subject areas. Use an agreed upon list of Grade the highlight of the lesson and provide
Two spelling words to keep track of progress and plan explicit lessons within a meaningful and
1.7 Demonstrate the knowledge developmentally responsive lessons. interactive context. Visit:
of an increasing number of https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lf8nUq
accurately spelt words. -Encourage learners to write on a digital device with spell check 169jQ
enabled. This automatic response to a spelling error provides an for more information. NOTE: While this
1.8 Apply a wider range of opportunity for the learner to see an error and the responsibility to video is of a grade one class, the same
spelling strategies resulting in fix the error. This may aid in the learner’s development of self procedures apply at Grade Two.
more conventional or close to monitoring.
conventional spelling. Give it a go! (SCO 7.1 – 7.8) Develop a
learner mindset for problem solving by
1.9 Continue to develop the use encourage risk taking with temporary spelling
of digital features such as spell and then talk to a peer or the teacher about
check. what seems correct and what isn’t. Establish
an expectation that learners use these
opportunities to take increasing responsibility
Develop punctuation for conventional spelling.
conventions to enhance the
99
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
meaning and clarity of their The sample below provides teachers with an opportunity to view a Personal dictionaries: (SCO 7.1 – 7.8)
written work. learner’s writing from the perspective of what has been Include a personal dictionary in the learner’s
accomplished and what’s next. See Useful Teacher Content for a writing portfolio. As newly learned words are
1.10 Continue to refine the use of larger display. entered in the dictionary, learners are
grade-level punctuation expected to check their dictionary before
conventions: asking for help from the teacher or peer.
✓ full stops,
✓ question marks, Languages are the same and different:
✓ exclamation marks, (SCO 7.1 – 7.8) Provide opportunities for
✓ capitals on names, I, dates, learners to create lists of words from Home
and beginning of a Languages to read and spell. As words are
sentence, shared aloud, examine the pronunciation of
✓ use lower-case letters sounds, and discuss if they are the same, sort
within words, of the same, or different than Standard
✓ begin to use commas in a English. Including words from Home
series. Language and Standard English on the class
alphabet chart provides learners with relevant
examples.
1.11 Demonstrate a beginning
awareness of when to use
https://www.princeedwardisland.ca/sites/default/files/publication
Is this correct? Why? (SCOs 7.1-7.8) Use
quotation marks.
s/eelc_languagearts_1-3.pdf
the Morning Message as a shared opportunity
to search out correct and incorrect spelling.
PRODUCTS
Develop presentation formats to As the message is shared, pause and ask if
The most effective spelling assessment is the learner’s daily writing
enhance the meaning and they think a specific word is spelled correctly
which should provide evidence of progress over time.
clarity of their written work. and why. If a misspelling detected, the learner
suggests a correction and explains why.
-Schedule regular dictations of short passages that embed samples
1.12 Make final corrections of Examples of why include:
of the words/concepts learned during word solving lessons.
revised draft. -demonstrating sounding out letters,
Practicing spelling and punctuation in continuous text is more
-finding small words or syllables within
effective than studying spelling lists.
1.13 Self-select final pieces of words,
writing to publish that -using known parts of words,
Peer/Self Assessment
-using rhymes,
100
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
demonstrate grade-level traits -using prefixes and suffixes,
and conventions. Provide learners with an editing self assessment checklist. After -just knowing a well-known word by sight.
they review their work, they share their checklist and writing with a As learners share their why make decisions
1.14 Use conventional spacing peer. Together, they note what has been accomplished and what about next steps lessons that would build on
between words. needs attention. The sample below provides a good overview of existing understanding.
what to look for; adapt the wording to match reading level as
1.15 Continue to refine letter demonstrated below. Develop punctuation conventions to
formation to increase enhance the meaning and clarity of their
readability by various written work.
audiences.
Applying what we learned in other
1.16 Develop hand-created or Language Arts lessons (7.9, 7.10) Remind
digital presentation styles: learners of sections of text used during
✓ illustrations reading lessons and how the author used
✓ titles punctuation to enhance meaning. Refer to
✓ charts speaking and listening lessons to remind
✓ emoticons learners of the dramatic value of punctuation.
✓ simple maps
I think punctuation is used because . . .
✓ etc.
(7.9, 7.10) Focus on the use of conventions
in books used for Independent Reading texts
1.17 Share writing and other
(e.g., finding capital letters) and encourage
representations with others
learners to develop their own rules for using
and seek response.
https://www.readwritethink.org/sites/default/files/Editing%20C
capitals, full stops, question marks, etc.
hecklist.pdf
Learners share their thoughts, and the class
1.18 With assistance, experiment
co-writes a class chart of punctuation rules.
with technology in writing and
other forms of representing:
Punctuation personalities (7.9, 7.10) Have
✓ using a tape recorder to
fun with punctuation by dramatizing/role
record,
playing how a “punctuation person (or
✓ choral readings,
animal)” acts. For example, an ! could be very
✓ dramatizations,
loud, bossy, or loves to listen to loud music.
101
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
✓ retellings of finished pieces A ? could be an animal wondering about
of writing. where to find water, food, friends, etc. and a
full stop could be the animal answering the
1.19 Create illustrations/ drawings questions.
with a computer I need to be punctuated! (SCO 7.9, 7.10)
graphics/drawing program. Create a short passage without any capitals
and/or punctuation. Observe learners as
1.20 Compose simple text (and they read the passage aloud to determine
begin to revise and edit) with where the punctuation should be placed and
a word processing program. why.
Develop presentation formats to enhance
the meaning and clarity of their written
work.
Respecting the reader of my writing (7.11
– 7.14) Invite learners to talk about how
important it is to present the best work we
can do. Although not everyone is the very
best printer or illustrator, it’s important for
learners to know that if they do their best,
those who read their writing will know that
each of us is learning and we’re getting better
every day.
Checking the work of experts (SCOs 7.15 -
7.19) Create a selection of books, magazines,
websites, posters, signs, etc. and engage
learners in a conversation throughout the year
about how illustrations, tables, charts, fonts,
text size, text colour, etc. add to the impact of
presenting one’s written work. Co-create a
102
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://myboardmaker.com/Activity/22782505 chart of presentation hints and add to it
throughout the year.
FINAL WRITING CHECKLIST:
Decision to Publish First ask yourself, Exploring the digital world of writing
Will this story interest my readers?” If the answer is yes, then (7.11-7.14) Teach word processing strategies
proceed. such as using the backspace key to erase
a) Read your story to yourself and answer these questions. mistakes, using the enter key, space bar, and
1. Does my story make sense all the way through? saving work. Provide regular opportunities to
2. Are my ideas in the right order? practice.
3. Did I stay on topic?
5. Did I say what I wanted to say? Exploring the digital world of
6. Do I have a strong beginning? presentation (SCOs 7.13-7.19) Provide
7. Is there a better word to use or can I change a part to make explicit instruction in and opportunities to
my story clearer? choose and use simple:
8. Do I need to leave out a part? -clip art and images,
9. Do I need to add anything? -fonts and font size,
10. Do I have a good ending? -tables and charts,
11. Is the spelling the very best I can do? to enhance fiction and nonfiction writing.
12. Are the capitals, periods, question marks and quotation marks
Limit searches for images and clipart to
in the right place? Ministry or OECS developed sites.
13. Is it interesting to look at?
Time to Share! (SCOs 7.16 – 7.19) Ensure
learners are prepared to share their work by
b) Make any changes you think you should make.
c) Read the story to someone else. Ask your partner to: using the Final Writing Checklist provided in
1. Tell what s/he remembers about your story, the Inclusive Assessment column to the right
2. Ask about any part that was not clear, of this column. Then, based on the learner’s
3. Ask any other questions about your story that s/he would like level of comfort in sharing, provide
to know, opportunities to:
4. Make any suggestions s/he has, -submit the writing to the teacher in the
writing portfolio,
d. Read the story to yourself again and make any further changes -read aloud during an Author’s Chair,
you think will improve it. -post on the class or school website,
103
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
-post on the classroom Author’s Wall.
BE PROUD OF WHAT YOU’VE ACCOMPLISHED and think
about what you’ve learned. Final submissions may be in a wide range of
Source (with some adaptations) text based or digital formats that match the
https://www.princeedwardisland.ca/sites/default/files/publication genre being studied:
s/eelc_languagearts_1-3.pdf - booklet,
- poster,
- PPT
-storyboard
-etc.
Option for presentation styles is available in
the additional resources section below.
Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher about the Outcome:
Spelling instruction is changing. Weekly word lists followed by weekly spelling tests do not provide evidence of long
term learning. For information about how spelling instruction is evolving, take some professional reading time to check out:
https://www.literacyworldwide.org/docs/default-source/where-we-stand/ila-teaching-and-assessing-spelling.pdf Here’s a
snippet: The majority of spelling programs in schools focus on developing phonological knowledge, particularly in the first
years of school. However, as phonology alone cannot explain English spelling, students who have only this skill are destined
to become poor spellers. It has been estimated that by fifth grade, students encounter more than 27 new words each day
that cannot be spelled, or read, through phonological strategies alone. An analysis of spelling errors of students in the upper
elementary grades demonstrates errors are made primarily through an overreliance on phonological processing. So,
although phonics work is necessary in teaching students to spell, it is not sufficient. Neither is it a prerequisite to the
development of the other threads in the spelling tapestry. Morphological Knowledge Morphological knowledge is
understanding the morphemes in words.
Intrigued? Visit the remainder of the article to learn about the importance of morphology, orthography,
entomology, and visual and semantic influences on learning to spell. The article then provides hints about pedagogy and assessment.
Information about Sharing Writing with Author’s Chair: https://www.learnalberta.ca/content/ieptlibrary/documents/en/is/author%27s_chair.pdf
104
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Providing Feedback as learners are working and sharing is an essential component of every lesson. Visit:
https://www.learnalberta.ca/content/ieptlibrary/documents/en/is/author%27s_chair.pdf
What does Grade Two Writing look like?
In every grade two class, there is a wide range of writers, ranging from the emergent stage to the transitional stage. The samples below demonstrate
this range and illustrate the need for learner responsive instruction.
EMERGENT Writing samples EARLY Writing Samples TRANSITIONAL Writing samples
105
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
106
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
107
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Writing samples are from https://www.princeedwardisland.ca/sites/default/files/publications/eelc_languagearts_1-3.pdf
Additional Resources and Materials
How to make a book: Visit sites such as https://www.artistshelpingchildren.org/bookmaking-crafts-make-books.html for ideas about book making.
Make punctuation come alive with videos:
! - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AHSKFbdYq1U
? - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AC3WqM-0TpI
The stoppers (full stop, comma, etc.) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=75R_EcxLVHg
Word wall - A word wall is an effective tool to support writing. Create a word wall with high frequency words, interesting words, irregular spelled
words, and words students have difficulty spelling. Remember that word walls should not be easily visible by all learners in the classroom,
uncluttered and updated regularly. Visit https://ellstrategiesandmisconceptions3.weebly.com/strategy-10---word-walls.html for more information.
Create and use Personal dictionaries in class to aid in writing.
Create and use Posters or charts identifying proofreading and editing criteria.
108
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Writing in all subject areas: Carry out observation, conduct experiments or simple research and record and publish findings e.g., science (growth of
a seed), maths - tally information, arts – draw and write about pictures, research an animal, and write fact cards or create booklets.
Write articles for a classroom or school newspaper/website that focus on the topics studied in other subject areas. Include digital images,
charts, tables, etc. to practice using the text features learned in Reading and Viewing.
Create a PPT or video that shares a “how to” mathematics, a topic in history or the environment, or an example of an intriguing science
experiment.
Teachers and learners co-write a play or a poem to represent learning in another subject area.
Share the writing listed above with other grades, parents, and community members.
Elements from Local Culture:
Create Creole language/ Standard English Thesaurus
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
109
Grade 2 Language Arts Curriculum
110
