March 2024
OHCP GRADE 3 SCIENCE
Grade 3 Science
Science Grade 3
Introduction
Growth Area No Implementation Beginning Implementation Moderate Strong Implementation
Implementation
Constructivist Teacher-centered Evidence of hands-on activities Evidence of teacher-scaffolded Active lessons that begin with questions about the
Pedagogy delivery of lessons investigations that involve teacher- world (and inherent discussions) that are socially
student & student-student relevant & invoke cultural perspectives.
discussions. Minds-on learning.
Building Lessons that rely Students are involved in The processes of science & 21st Evidence that the lesson, within active authentic
Process Skills solely on the recall of experiments century skills are highlighted in learning contexts (real world questions) involves
knowledge student-centered activities. (e.g., tracking & evaluating student growth in the
observing, inferring, hypothesizing, processes of science & 21st century skills.
measuring, graphing etc. &
researching, critical thinking,
communicating)
Integrating Attention to subject Reading about science topics & Emphasizing literacy (Reading anchor Science Investigations that begin with socially
Subjects focused topics rather collecting/tabulating data. texts, researching, listening, writing relevant questions that require numerical analysis
than student & communicating). Emphasizing &, in communication of results, invoke quality
outcomes science studies that invoke social discussions that develop literacy skills.
concern & discussion. Emphasizing
the collection, interpretation &
communication of numbers as an
account of science investigation
Empowering No technology tools Use of simple technologies to Use of technologies to access Use of digital pictures, video, simulations & probes
learning with evident. Teacher-led motivate learners. These may enhanced types of learning that place to pose authentic real world questions as a basis for
Instructional instruction accessing or may not activate new ways the student at the center of discussions & developing process skills.
Technology traditional resources; of learning. constructing knowledge. (e.g.
primarily textbook- student-led simulation activities, use
based instruction of computer probes to collect data,
logic exercises with coding)
Integrating No evidence of Simple activities that challenge Activities that emphasize design Lessons that invoke problem solving to design
Technology as problem solving in any students to think about the challenges that rely on careful solutions in response to community problems.
“a way of context problem solving that has led to planning, prototyping & testing.
adapting” human adaptation in the world.
This necessarily involves
developing an awareness of
technology around us
Grade 3 Science
Progression of Students’ Knowledge Skills & Values P-6
**Skills and Attitudes Captured Verbatim from the OECS Performance Standards for Grade 3
Grade 3 Science
Grade 3 Science
Science Grade 3
Introduction to the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes, and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude
of caring not only for themselves but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision-making will be enhanced by a systematic
study of the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from
leveraging and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it
Strand (Topic): Forces and Interactions
Force and motion are important parts of everyday life. As students study this unit, they will learn how these physical factors impact their lives and
work. The lessons and activities will help students become aware of factors like friction, gravity, and magnetic force.
Essential Learning Outcomes: ELO-1
Plan and conduct an investigation to provide evidence of the effects of balanced and unbalanced forces on the motion of an object.
[Clarification Statement: Examples could include an unbalanced force on one side of a ball can make it start moving; and, balanced forces pushing on
a box from both sides will not produce any motion at all.] [Assessment Boundary: Assessment is limited to one variable at a time: number, size, or
direction of forces. Assessment does not include quantitative force size, only qualitative and relative. Assessment is limited to gravity being addressed
as a force that pulls objects down.]
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Literacy Development Understanding Force as a Push or Pull
Teachers may use a Frayer Four Square to
Knowledge monitor students' understanding of key
• Define the terms: terminology developed in the lesson.
o pull
o push
o force
o speed
o velocity
o frictional force
o mass
o balanced force
o unbalanced force Source: Retrieved from
o gravity force WR2871509
o magnetic force
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Identify forces as pushes or pulls. Practicing Terminology- Jeopardy
• Identify forces used to create
Students will engage in a game of jeopardy
movement or change in given
to assess students' knowledge on defining
situations.
the terms.
• Give examples of balanced and
unbalanced forces. Students can work individually or in groups.
• Describe the effects of balanced Write a list of the words in an area where all
and unbalanced forces acting on a can view. (pull, push, force, friction, mass,
variety of everyday objects. balanced force, unbalanced force, gravity).
• Identify force as a push or pull by
On an empty wall, create a grid with 16
one body on another.
papers (letter size) (4x4). Each grid will have
• Identify, demonstrate and give points ranging from 100 to 400. Under each Source Retrieved From:
examples of push and pulls (ST 1 grid will be 8 definitions and 8 scenarios. father-with-daughter-on-playground-swing-
PS FMS 1). gm1311824561-400811887
• Describe and demonstrate the
Under the paper the teacher will write the
forces of push and pull. (ST 3 PS Look at these two pictures. What do they show? (Girls on
definitions as written below.
FMS 1). swings with their dads)
• Identify, with examples, forces at Meanings:
Have you ever been on a swing? (Yes/No) Do you like
work in everyday situations in the 1. Push: the act of moving an object
being on a swing? (Yes/No) How does the swing work?
home and community. (ST 3 PS away from oneself.
FMS 2). 2. Pull: the act of moving an object
What is being pushed? (The swing./ The person on the swing.)
• Describe the visible effects of push towards oneself.
What happens when the swing is pushed? (The girl moves
and pull on a variety of everyday 3. Force: is any push or pull on an
forward)
objects. (ST 4 PS FMS 4). object.
4. Friction is a force that acts between
What is being pulled?(The swing./ The person on the swing)
Skills two objects that are in contact with
What happens when the swing is pulled? (The girl goes
• Compare balanced and unbalanced one another.
backward)
5. Mass is the measurement of how
forces using a Venn Diagram.
much matter is contained in an
• Demonstrate ways in which
object.
unbalanced forces can cause
6. Balanced Force is the acting on an
change in motion (start movement,
object which does not change the
increase speed, reduce speed,
state of rest or uniform motion of it.
change direction).
7. Unbalanced Force is when the force
applied in one direction is greater
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Demonstrate the effect of than the force applied in the
balanced forces on objects. opposite direction.
8. Gravity: the force that attracts a
• Conduct an Investigation on the
body towards the centre of the
ways in which different forces (e.g.
earth, or towards any other physical
magnetism, static electricity,
body having mass.
muscular force, gravitational force)
can change the speed and direction
Scenarios:
of a moving object. 1. I am turning up the volume on my
cell phone. Which word describes
Source: Retrieved from: https://www.alamy.com/stock-
Attitudes/Values the force that I used? (what is
photo/children-on-swings.html?sortBy=relevant
• Appreciation of the visible effects push?)
of push and pull on a variety of 2. I am trying to take my book from
In this picture, who was pushed? Who was pulled? How
everyday objects. my teacher. What word best
did you know?(pushed: boy in white shirt, orange shirt - forward
describes the force that is used?
movement pulled: girl in blue, boys in red - backward movement)
• Appreciate that forces are all (what is pull?)
around us and they can sometimes 3. I placed my pencil on the table but In order to play on a swing, forces must be used. Have
help us do work and also can cause it rolled off. (what is an unbalanced you ever heard the word force? What is a force? (Write
us problems. force?) down the students suggestions)
4. I throw my ball up towards the
• Appreciate that humans are great ceiling but it always seems to fall A force is any push or pull on an object. A force that
problem solvers who have tried back down. What word best changes the direction of an object towards you, would be
diligently to overcome forces of describes the force that pulls the ball a pull. On the other hand, if it moves away, it is a push.
friction and gravity to make life down? (What is gravity) Just like we observed with the girl on the swing. When a
easier. 5. I placed my apple on my stack of pushing force was applied, she moved forward and when
textbooks and it's not moving. What a pulling force was applied, she moved backward.
word best describes this force?
• Work collaboratively in groups to
(what is a balanced force?) Formative Assessment: Imagine you were sitting in a
complete assigned tasks that
6. I am pushing my dresser across my chair with your eyes closed and someone pushed it.
require the use of balanced and
bedroom. What am I creating Explain in your own words, what you would feel as you
unbalanced forces.
between the floor and the dresser? moved? How would that feeling be different if they
(what is friction) pulled the chair. Can you use the word force in a
• When conducting practical and
7. I can choose to push or pull my sentence that helps you describe that feeling?
group work, display sensitivity and
grocery cart. What do I use to move
offer assistance to peers who may
the cart? (what is force)
have physical or learning
8. I can be heavy or light (what is
challenges.
mass)
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Let us listen and watch the video carefully to learn more
• Participate actively in classroom about forces. As you watch, think about answering these
discussions. questions:
1) What does it mean to put something in motion?
(get it moving)
2) What is needed to create motion? (apply a force)
3) How is a push different from a pull? (push – the
object is away from you/ your body; pull – the object is
towards you/your body)
The teacher will decide on the arrangement
Click on the link: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-
on the grid with the top row being 100
lOyW3pEUl0 (2.50 mins)
points, 2nd row being 200 points, third row
being 300 points, and bottom row being
Review on board
400 points.
A push force is the force that is responsible for an object
When the student is ready to play they will
moving from the state of rest away from the person or
select the points they want added to their
thing applying the force.
total score. If they get the answer or
respond correctly the points will be added
Some examples of push forces are:
to their total. If they did not respond
correctly the teacher will give the next ● Pushing the trolley.
student or team a chance to respond and if ● Pushing the car when it breaks down.
they get it correct, they get the score. Now ● Pushing the table from one place to another.
if no one gets it, then the teacher will reveal
the answer and the sheet is placed on the Can you think of other examples of push forces? (students
side. share their experiences with push forces. Add good examples to the
list of push forces)
Let us discuss pull forces.
A pull force is the force that is responsible for an object
moving from the state of rest but towards the person or
thing applying the force.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Push Pull Worksheet
Some examples of pull forces are:
● Pulling the curtain.
● Dragging the box.
● Opening of the door. Can you think of other
examples of pull forces? (students share their
experiences with pull forces. Add good examples to the list
of pull forces)
Look at the exercise below. Complete it using the
knowledge acquired from the above information. Look at
each picture carefully, place a tick next to the correct
answer. Have Fun!!
Retrieved from:
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/sci
ence/1726952
Teacher will access the document and print
copies for her students. Or students can
complete the worksheet on devices if
possible. Students will say what they see in
each picture and the teacher will clarify if
necessary.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Answer Sheet
Students will complete the following
worksheets
Retrieved from:
Retrieved from:
https://www.kidsacademy.mobi/printables/push-or-
https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/s
pull-1/
cience/grade-3-balanced-forces-d.pdf
Look at each diagram. Write balanced
forces or unbalanced forces.
Look at the pictures below. They are all examples of
activities we engage in using either a push or a pull.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Teacher will make copies of the first Can you think of other activities, games or scenarios
worksheet and distribute them to her where we can either push or pull for it to function?
Share them with the class.
students. Or Students can use devices to
complete the activity
Forces and Motion
You have probably heard the word "force" before in
conversations. Here are a few examples: "the rocket had a
lot of force to blast off" or "the force of the storm blew
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
the roof off the building." What is force? Force is
defined as a push or pull on an object.
Retrieved from: https://dribbble.com/shots/3822584-
Going-for-a Ride/attachments/10039979?mode=media
When you ride a bike, your foot pushes against the pedal.
The push makes the wheels of the bike move.
Forces affect how objects move. They may cause motion;
they may also slow, stop, or change the direction of
motion of an object that is already moving. Since force
causes changes in the speed or direction of an object, we
can say that forces cause changes in velocity.
Avoid Confusing Speed and Velocity
Students, sometimes people confuse speed and velocity.
They are not the same. Speed is simply how fast you are
going. Velocity is not only how fast you are going but, in
what direction that you are traveling.
Example: Sarah was traveling 10 kms per hour on the
street in front of her house. Philp was riding his scooter
15 kms per hour west ward on the same street.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Worksheet on balanced and unbalanced We say that Sarah was travelling with a speed of 10 kms
forces: per hour whereas Philip was traveling at a velocity of 15
Retrieved from: kms per hour west.
https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/s Impacts of Force
cience/grade-3-balanced-forces-b.pdf Today we will work in pairs. I want each pair to get a ball
and show ways you can:
(a) start the ball moving or set it in motion
(b) change its direction
(c) slow down or speed it up (increase speed)
(d) stop it from moving.
Now let us discuss the various ways forces can cause
change in motion.
Now with your partner you are going to choose another
object example toy car, pencil.
I also want you to complete the table below while doing
this activity.
We chose to use a: __________
Change in motion What we did
start moving
make it move faster
make it move slower
make it change direction
make it stop
Table and activity retrieved from: Caribbean Primary Science Level
2
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Therefore, it can be interpreted that a push or pull force
can do the following actions itself:
● A push or pull force may make an object move
from rest.
● A push or pull force may change the speed of a
moving object.
● A push or pull force may change the direction of
a moving object.
● A push or pull force on an object or body may
change the shape of an object.
Examples of everyday activities which require either a
push or a pull. With it, life would surely be difficult.
Assessment: Worksheets on Forces and
1. Thumb Pins
Motion:
2. Opening and Closing a Door
3. Pushing a Car
Retrieved from:
4. Pulling a Cart
https://www.k5learning.com/science- 5. Inserting and Removing a Plug
worksheets/third-grade-3/forces-motion 6. Water Dispensers
7. Pulling Curtains and Blinds
In this worksheet, Students will conduct an 8. Pushing Furniture
investigation and record what they see. 9. Typing
10. Walking
Investigation #1: Put a pencil on a table.
11. Playing Football
12. Dragging a Suitcase
Questions: Does the pencil move? Explain
why you think this happened.
Let us now create a toy truck. Can you guess which force
can be used to move it?
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X-h9YS-mAI0 Link to
video - How to make RC Tipper Truck from cardboard // very
simple// the crafts crew.
Balanced and Unbalanced Forces
You will be given the following block shapes:
Investigation #2: Gently push the pencil off
the edge of the table.
Questions: What happens? Explain why
Place one square block on the left side of your semicircle
you think this happened. (moon shaped) block.
What did you observe happen to the blocks when the
square was placed on one side of the semicircle? (the half
Retrieved from: moon tipped t one side)
https://www.k5learning.com/science- Why do you think this happened? (Heavier side)
worksheets/third-grade-3/electricity-
magnetism Now place both blocks on either side of the semicircle,
what do we observe? (the half moon block levels out)
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
What do you observe when both square blocks are placed
on either side of your moon shaped block?
Why do you think this is so?
Picture from video: https://youtu.be/-
Rjid6hQuww?si=55uV0vxDtZEij5w9
What game are these two boys playing? (tug of war)
The teacher will encourage students to bring
a pair of magnets to school and engage.
Have you ever played this game before? (yes/no)
They will complete each as demonstrated on
Who wins in a tug of war game? (team/person that is pulled
the worksheet and on the line they will towards the other or falls over)
record their answer
Does the tug of war require a push or a pull force in
Retrieved from: order to play? (pull)
Who is winning the game in the picture? (no one) Why?
https://www.k5learning.com/workshee
(Both boys are the same distances from the blue box and are both
ts/science/grade-2-forces-motion-a.pdf
standing upright.)
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
How force affect motion Who applied more force in playing the game? (same
amount of force was applied by both boys)
Students will read each scenario then draw a
The forces applied by these two boys are balanced.
line to match.
Balanced force is when two forces are pulling in the
opposite direction are equal just like the picture of the
two boys playing tug of war. There is no movement when
forces are balanced.
Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=-
Rjid6hQuww
Retrieved from:
In groups now you will demonstrate the effect of a
https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/science/g
balanced force by engaging in another activity where you
rade-2-forces-motion-b.pdf
and your partner will push a desk or box from the
opposite side. Each person on the opposite side.
Why didn't the desk move? (with an equal amount of force,
then neither of the team will move and it will be a tie)
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
What type of force prevented the desk from moving -
Draw and write to show how you can use
balanced or unbalanced? (Unbalanced)
force to affect motion in each way
What causes forces to remain balanced?
1. Make something start moving
2. Make something stop moving
3. Make something slow down
4. Make something speed up
5. Make something change direction
6. Make something change shape.
Worksheet on Magnetism
Retrieved from:
https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/science/g
Retrieved from:
rade-3-magnetism-d.pdf
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=-
Rjid6hQuww
Worksheet on Friction
To conclude this activity we now will listen and view the
Retrieved from:
grade-3-gravity-friction-d.pdf book entitled : Balancing Act by Ellen Walsh
I want you to listen carefully so you can answer the
following questions:
1) What is a teeter totter? (a board over a center that can move
up & down)
2) How did the mice balance the teeter totter? (one mouse
on each side)
3) If they stand in exactly the same place on each side,
what do we know must be true for the teeter totter to
balance? (each mouse must weigh the same)
4) Will the tetter totter balance if the mice are at different
distances from the center of the teeter totter? (no, the closer
one will push upward)
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5) Why does the addition of a salamander on one side
cause an unbalanced tetter totter? (more weight on one side
pushes down)
Video reading here:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H22Gv85lS_Q (4:32 min)
Let us now play our own tug of war game. There will be
two teams. I will need eight students to assist, three
students on team A and five students on Team B.
(Materials: rope, chalk, ruler). [Mathematics: measurement link in
preparing for the tug of war activity]
There is an ‘X” and two lines on the floor/ground. Each
team stands behind a line. The team that wins the game
pulls the other team over the ‘X’ that is on the ground.
Retrieved from
https://ssimphal.nic.in/images/3012.jpg
Who won our tug of war game? (Team A/B)
Why did this team win? (They pulled harder) Did they apply
the same amount of force? (The team that won applied more
force).
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
In our tug of war game both teams applied forces in
opposite directions but the same amount of force was
not applied. This is an example of unbalanced forces.
Unbalanced forces means that the force applied in one
direction is greater than the force applied in the opposite
direction. When unbalanced forces are acting on an
object, there is a change in speed and/or direction.
Let’s see if we can spot at least two everyday examples
of balanced and unbalanced forces in the video that you
are about to watch.
(tug of war and arm wrestling)
Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_-yzCNniwuw
(5:53 mins)
Comparing the Balanced and Unbalanced Forces
As a review, the teacher can explain the following Venn
diagram comparison.
Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_-yzCNniwuw
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Describing Forces Activity
[Students will be placed in 5/6 groups for this activity] In
your groups you have been given a card. Each card has a
picture that shows the actions of a force on an object.
Using the questions provided on the worksheet attached,
discuss within your group what is happening in your
picture with regard to forces. You will then present
your findings to the rest of the class
(The group will select a representative who will write the
information and draw pictures where necessary, on a
Bristol board sheet. All members will brainstorm what is
happening in the picture. The selected representative will
read out the information to the class)
Group 1 – Picture of a mango hanging from a tree
branch / a book lying on a desk.
Retrieved from:
https://encrypted-
tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcQo6dky73fTXb
0lmzjbOG8TIqeht0GuSFA92w&usqp=CAU
Retrieved from:
https://encrypted-
tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcSWRB1BvOY1
qgDa5-Z0ocTdQGLQD18XrXk0IQ&usqp=CAU
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Group 2 – Two boys arm wrestling.
Retrieved from:
https://media.istockphoto.com/id/155279846/photo/sc
holarly-
competition.jpg?s=612x612&w=0&k=20&c=eaC-
Bhey3f1SeIBiJezvcW9UD8bUkRqP54gen-Rh6Ps=
Group 3 - A boat on the water
Retrieved from:
https://images.fineartamerica.com/images-medium-
large-5/boat-in-clear-water-david-van-hulst.jpg
Group 4 – Tug of war
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
www.ravenox.com/cdn/shop/articles/tugofwar.jpg?v=1
654138980
Group 5 – Jacking up a car to change the tire
Retrieved from:
https://carorbis.com/wp-
content/uploads/2023/04/02Carorbis-Blog_How-to-
Jack-Up-a-Car-step-by-step.png
Group 6 – Pushing a door open/A rocking chair
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://image1.masterfile.com/getImage/NjQ5LTA4NT
YzMzMzZW4uMDAwMDAwMDA=AFmnor/649-
08563333en_Masterfile.jpg
Retrieved from:
https://maryannscloset.org/cdn/shop/products/Mother
_Baby_Rocking_Chair_530x@2x.jpeg?v=1549225582
Each group will be probed about their picture:
1. What is happening in the picture?
2. Is the object stationary or in motion?
3. Was the direction of the object changed?
4. What type of force is acting on the object?
Balance or Unbalanced? Why?
5. Use arrows to show the direction of the forces
acting in your picture.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Let us remember the following things about forces:
● Forces act in pairs.
● Forces act in a particular direction.
● Forces usually cannot be seen, but their effects
can.
Things can move when more force is applied in one
direction than another. Movement is caused by unbalanced
forces. Forces can make objects move in different ways.
We want to answer the question: How do forces
change motion?
An Example from Cricket
Let us consider three friends playing with a ball and a
cricket bat.
Picture retrieved from:
https://depositphotos.com/photos/sport-of-cricket.html
and modified.
Joshua thinks that forces act on the cricket ball you see on
the ground only when Collin hits the ball. Jada thinks that
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
there are forces acting on the ball as it lays still on the
ground as well as when Collin hits it with the cricket bat.
Who do you think has the best idea about the forces acting
on the ball? (Joshua/Jada)
Explain why you think this person has the best idea?
Students write down their predictions in complete
sentences. Share your ideas with your classmates on your
table/in your group. Who does your group think has the
best idea and why? Let us share with the entire class.
When Collin hits the ball with a bat, he is applying a force,
a hard push against the ball, the ball may move along the
ground, or it can fly upwards.
Let us try hitting a ball with a bat to see if we can get the
ball to change its motion. We will hit the ball first on the
pavement/concrete and then on the grass/ carpet. We will
record what we did in our groups and how the ball moved.
(Materials: balls, bat, grass/carpet, recording table or chart).
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://www.freepik.com/premium-
vector/bat-ball_9033832.htm
You must place an X on the pavement/concrete and
grass/carpet with chalk so that the ball rests in the same
place every time you use the bat. Also place a ‘Y’ so that
you hit the ball from the same distance every time.
Assign students different roles in performing this investigation. Be
caring towards those with physical and other learning challenges so
they are included and given a role.
[The students will realize that the harder you hit the ball, the further
it may go and depending on where you hit the ball, it may go across
the ground or go up in the sky. The rougher the surface, the harder
the ball moves.]
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
[The activity can be used and modified with any sport that
has a bat]
How did force affect the movement of our ball? When you
hit the ball with the bat, how did it move? How did the
way you hit the ball affect its movement (The ball moved
faster, it also changed direction)
Forces cause objects to change speed and direction. The
harder you hit the ball, the more force applied, the faster it
moves.
There were some other forces working on the ball too.
When the bat hits the ball, it squashes inward a little bit as
it is made from light material. The force from hitting the
ball causes it to change shape slightly. Because the ball is
made from a stretchy material, it rapidly expands again,
returning to its original shape and it flies into the air. This
is also a force. When the ball hits the ground, it squashes
slightly again then returns to its original shape. Forces can
cause changes in shape!
Other Types of Forces That Change Shapes
When a force acts on an object, the object may change
shape by bending, stretching, or compressing - or a
combination of all three shape changes. Squeezing your
juice or water bottle changes its shape, pulling on a rubber
band or even when you flatten a piece of playdough.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
You are also exerting muscular force when you use your
arms to move the bat to hit the ball. Muscular force is the
force exerted by the muscles of the body.
When you lift a book, you are exerting muscular force.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
When you walk you exert muscular force onto the ground.
[Muscular force is the force used by the muscles, which
involves legs as well as arms. It is the type of force that
occurs due to the body muscles’ action and makes them
contact the surfaces. Some examples of muscular force are
pulling a toy truck, playing tug of war, jumping, or
weightlifting. Bouncing a fall is another example of
muscular force.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
It is the type of force, which is exerted when something is
touched, and then force is applied to it. In other words,
muscular force is related to the movement within the
body.]
Retrieved from:
https://www.openacessjournal.com/blog/what-is-
muscular-force-and-example/
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
What other forces acted on our balls? Let’s find out!
When the ball is at rest on the road or pavement, its
weight is a force pushing downward, there is also the
force of the pavement pushing upwards. Gravity is also
acting on the ball keeping it on the ground. Gravity is a
force that is always pulling objects down.
The upward and downward forces are the same, so the ball
does not move. There is balanced force as the same
amount of force is acting in opposite directions, that is, no
net force.
Do you think gravity acts on the ball when you hit it and it
moves upwards into the air? (Yes, because it came back down
to the ground).
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Let’s learn more about gravity from a video:
As you watch this video, think about answers to these
questions:
a. Which scientist discovered Gravity? (Sir
Issac Newton)
b. Where was he and what happened to him
that caused him to have an Aha! Moment?
(Sitting under a tree when an apple fell and hit
him on his head)
c. Does gravity affect only light objects? (No
heavy and light objects all fall to the ground due to
gravity).
Retrieved from:
https://youtu.be/ljRlB6TuMOU?si=c0fRfXilEtpxzvQx
(3:11 mins)
No matter where you hit or throw a ball gravity gets it back
to the ground.
Gravity is a force that can affect an object from a
distance (without touching it).
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Frictional Forces
How is the speed of the ball affected by the change from
pavement/road to grass/carpet? (Slows down) Why do you
think the ball slowed down? (Grass/carpet is rougher)
Does the type of surface affect the speed or motion of an
object?
As the ball rolls across the surface, it scrapes against the
grass or concrete and gradually stops. This is because of
the force of friction. Friction is the force which opposes
motion of one object over another. It is a contact force.
Friction steals the energy of the ball because the ball is in
contact with the pavement/grass bringing it to rest.
(Materials: meter rule, chalk, carpet, grass, timer, recording
sheets/chat)
(This activity can be used to integrate Mathematics standards on
time and measurement)
Let us pull a chair across the classroom 3 meters. Now let
us pull the same chair across the carpet/grass 3 meters as
well. We will time how long it takes us to pull the chair
from one point to the next on each surface? (Time can be
measurement using a timer or counting out loud)
Alternatively – put thirty seconds on the timer and have
the same student move the chair across the tiles/
pavement and then carpet/ grass, then measure how much
distance was covered using a string and a ruler or a meter
stick).
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
First, you will write down your prediction. Next, we take
careful measurements. Each team/group will take each
measurement twice. We record our measurements in the
table/chart. (Bar charts can be created to display the data –
Mathematics link)
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Let us discuss our results!
Which surface took the longest for the chair to move from
one point to another? (Grass/carpet)
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Why?
(The amount of friction generated depends on the surface. A rougher
surface will cause more friction than something smooth.)
Extend the discussion on friction.
Dry friction (sometimes called surface resistance) occurs
when two solid objects touch each other. If they are
motionless, it's called static friction. If there is motion, it's
known as kinetic or sliding friction.
Put your hands together so the two palms touch each
other. This is an example of dry/surface friction.
Is friction always good? How do we solve problems
of friction?
Rub your hands together. Let’s keep doing it for
about a minute.
How do your palms feel now? Touch your neighbour’s
palms, how do they feel? (Hot)
When friction occurs, it causes an object to slow down and
lose its energy. But energy doesn't just disappear, instead,
it changes. The moving energy (or kinetic energy) changes
into heat energy. This is why your palms were warm!
[In lots of different sports, we don't want friction. This is
because it slows us down. Like a cyclist in a race, the
friction we know as air resistance between the cyclist and
the air can affect their speed. But there are ways to reduce
this, like crouching low on the bike and wearing special
streamlined clothing. More about what that means down
below.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Let us complete the following worksheet and talk about
some surfaces that increase or reduce friction. grade-3-
gravity-friction-c.pdf
Circle one:
• You will slide faster if there is more / less friction
on a playground slide.
• Which material would make more friction if you
rubbed your hand on it? tile / carpet
• To slow down a speeding bike, brakes create
a little / a lot of friction against the tires.
• If you tried to walk on ice you might slip
because there is too much / too little friction.
• It is easier to pedal a bike on a dirt trail /
a smooth road because there is more / less friction.
Friction is also unhelpful on a bike if the chain has not
been oiled because this creates friction between the
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
moving parts of the bike. This makes pedaling more
difficult.
The reason why putting oil on the chain of the bike reduces
friction is because it creates a much smoother surface
between the chain and the other moving parts, and that
means less friction.] https://www.twinkl.co.uk/teaching-
wiki/friction
Let us learn more about friction:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IkmAnLmXENo
(3:58 minutes)
[In machines and engines, friction is usually quite
unhelpful. The constant rubbing of one part against the
other wears out even very hard and durable metals like
stainless steel. That's why engineers use lubrication: by
squirting liquids and gels between moving parts, we can
help them slide past one another with less friction,
reducing wear-and-tear, cutting maintenance costs, and
reducing energy losses.]
https://www.explainthatstuff.com/motion.html (For the
advanced student)
Magnetic Forces
Retrieved from: https://www.amazon.com.au/Magnetic-
Refrigerator-Whiteboard-Fridge-
Magnets/dp/B07GV8F2DT?th=1
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Do you see the notes that have been placed on the
fridge? Have your parents ever placed notes on the fridge
door for the family to see? (Yes/no) What other things are
placed on the fridge door at home? (pictures, report card etc.)
What do you use to stick a note on the fridge door?
(magnet)
Why does the note or picture you stick on the fridge not
fall? (A Magnet is attracted to the fridge door, there is a force
exerted between the magnet and the fridge that is able to hold up the
note or picture).
Let us view a video that explains what magnets are and
how they work.
Video link:
https://youtu.be/7HHs98PBgk0?si=k3jgBO1bhiMeICH
v (5:44 mins) Stop at 1:05 seconds.
What are magnets? (Magnets are pieces of metal or rock with
an invisible force to attract special kinds of metal.) This force is
called magnetism. A magnetic field is the area around a
magnet that has magnetic force. All magnets have a
magnetic field, no matter how big they are. Things that
are attracted to magnets are called magnetic objects.
Let us see if we can find items around the school that are
attracted to magnets. We are going to go on a scavenger
hunt.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://www.nypl.org/events/programs/2023/09/09/sc
avenger-hunt
[Give out a magnet to each of your students/ group of
students and have them wander around the school (both
inside and outside) to see how many magnetic objects
they can locate. Let them write down all the objects that
they found that attracted their magnet. You’ll be
surprised about how many things are magnetic: doors,
door frames, metal poles, doorknobs, fences…].
After the students return to their seats in the classroom,
discuss the scavenger hunt and what they found. Ask
each group to tell the class the various items they found
that were attracted to the magnets by asking: What
objects were attracted to your magnet? Use a table on the
chalkboard/whiteboard to create a class list of items that
were attracted to the magnet and those that were not
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
What type of items were attracted to the magnets? What
material are they made from? (metals) How did you know
the object was attracted to the metal? (felt the pull of the
magnet to the object)
Which items were not attracted to the metal? What
materials were they made from? (Plastic, glass, wood)
Do all metals attract magnets?
Provide students with samples of aluminium, silver,
copper, iron filings, steel, nickel and allow them to test
these pieces of metal with a magnet.
Were all the metals attracted to the magnets? (No)
Which metals were not attracted to the magnet?
(Aluminium, silver, copper)
Which metals were attracted to the magnet? (iron, steel,
nickel)
All magnetic objects are made of metal, but not all metals
are magnetic.
Provide the students with two magnets to play with. They
will notice that some ends of the two magnets attract
each other and the other two repel.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://www.britannica.com/science/magnetic-pole
How many ends does a magnet have? (A magnet has two
ends.)
One end is called the north pole and the other end is
called the south pole.)
What happens when the north and south poles of a
magnet are close to each other? (attract)
There is a magnetic field around each pole.
A magnet is a material that has a magnetic field. A
magnetic field is an invisible force that draws objects to
a magnet. Magnets pull things made of steel or iron
toward them. A magnet has two ends. One end is called
the north pole and the other end is called the south pole.
There is a magnetic field around each pole.
Let us use our magnet on the iron filings to see our
magnetic field. We can also observe how the magnetic
force moves our iron filings. Instructions found on this
video:
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://youtu.be/j8XNHlV6Qxg?si=emobNOyqTa6ZQ
G5y
Is magnetic force acting on the iron filings balanced or
unbalanced force? Why? (Unbalanced, iron filings moved
around)
Let us make our own magnetic slime and then test to see
if it attracts other objects.
Materials: magnets/magnetic slime, record/observation
sheet
Magnetic slime recipe
https://www.survivingateacherssalary.com/how-to-
make-magnetic-slime-recipe-stem-activity/
Grade 3 Science
Additional Resources and Materials
https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/science/grade-3-force-motion-a.pdf
(Additional material and resources that are not included in the Inclusive Learning and/or Inclusive Assessment Strategies that may be useful for lesson planning )
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=-Rjid6hQuww (5:17 mins)
Caribbean Primary Science Level 2 pages 116-118
Friction Simulations: https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/forces-and-motion-basics/latest/forces-and-motion-basics_en.html
Videos on Friction – extend the discussion on friction and its importance in everyday life.
● https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n2gQs1mcZHA (2:16 mins)
● https://youtu.be/V2P6CuHVWvI?si=KTPLzQpUM8HGGhoa (2:26 mins)
Simulations on Forces and Motion
● https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/forces-and-motion-basics/latest/forces-and-motion-basics_en.html
● https://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulations/forces-and-motion-basics
Simulation on balanced and unbalanced forces: https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/forces-and-motion-basics/latest/forces-and-motion-basics_en.html
Video with more everyday examples of balanced and unbalanced forces explained: https://youtu.be/-Rjid6hQuww?si=_0oZuIlIj--fNuxn (5:17 mins)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher such as reading material at a lower or
higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
Pushing and pulling are forces that move objects/things.
This movement is called motion.
Pushes and pulls are forces.
A push force usually moves an object away from you.
A pull force moves an object towards you.
Grade 3 Science
Push and pull forces can be used to cause objects/things to move, stop moving, slow down, increase speed, change direction, change shape.
A push usually moves an object away from the body, while a pull moves an object towards the body. (N.B. the human body is used as the reference point.)
You cannot see forces but you can see the effect they have on objects.
Forces:
● can start an object in motion.
● can also stop an object.
● can also bring about a change in shape
Forces may be balanced or unbalanced. Balanced forces act on an object but do not cause it to change in motion. The forces are equal and act in opposite
directions.
Unbalanced forces cause objects to change in motion.
All objects pull on other objects around them with a force called gravity. Very large objects like the earth have very strong gravity and their pull affects the motion
of other objects.
All objects on Earth experience the earth’s gravity which pulls them vertically towards the centre of the Earth.
Gravity, like magnetism, is a force that can affect an object from a distance (without touching it).
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the curriculum)
Math Integration - Measurement
Using objects to determine balanced and unbalanced
Using hangers, strings and two cups, students will use this method as a creative way to create unbalance
and balance using weight in Math.
Have them bring the items to school and build their ‘scale’ in class or you may choose to have them do
so at home.
Once this has been done, have them use things around the classroom such as cubes, paper clips,
crayons, sharpeners, pebbles and drop them in each cup.
They will notice that one side will become lower than the other. Why is the hanger now leaning on one
side? (because that side is heavy)
Would you say the hanger is balanced or unbalanced? (unbalanced)
Grade 3 Science
Language Arts: Reading and Comprehension: using passages about various topics and comprehension questions: Example:
https://www.k12reader.com/worksheet/push-and-pull/view/
Writing short paragraph about various scenarios
- Life without Gravity
- How gravity works
- Benefits of gravity on life
Writing to explain the difference between a pulling force and a pushing force
Art and Craft:
Creating posters to depict examples of push and pull forces/ balanced and unbalanced forces.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Note: This section is intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the
curriculum guides.
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have:: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning outcome
and associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies Students will appreciate the importance of forces in their everyday lives.
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication In planning, designing and conducting investigations students will need to be critical
thinkers to best utilise the resources available to them. They will also need to work
Competencies
cooperatively in groups to complete assigned tasks.
Developed Well-being Competencies Students' knowledge of forces will help them understand forces and will help them
solve problems in their everyday lives.
Grade 3 Science
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies Students can have a tug of war competition and sell refreshments to raise funds. A
board game can be designed for the Jeopardy game which can be marketed and sold to
schools.
Elements that are integrated across subjects: developed critical thinking and ethical communication: students through investigations are able to draw
conclusions about forces and their interactions with objects through collaborative learning. They have to communicate with their peers and show concern for
persons with challenges so that they can accomplish the tasks assigned.
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
• Playing popular sports such as cricket, tug of war or playing on the swing in their playgrounds
• Toys and games from the regions such as sliding on a cart, sling shots, pop guns
• Popular Religious Song "The Holy Ghost Power".
Lyrics
The Holy Ghost power is moving just like a magnet (x2) Moving here, moving there, Moving just like the day of Pentecost
The Holy Ghost power is moving just like a magnet.
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research): Conducting research to find the best surfaces that can
reduce friction.
Grade 3 Science
Science Grade 3
Introduction to the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude
of caring not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic
study of the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from
leveraging and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it.
Strand (Topic): Forces and Interactions
Force and motion are important parts of everyday life. As students study this unit, they will learn how these physical factors impact their lives and
work. The lessons and activities will help students become aware of factors like friction, gravity, and magnetic force.
Essential Learning Outcomes: ELO-2 Make observations and/or measurements of an object’s motion to provide evidence that a pattern
can be used to predict future motion. [Clarification Statement: Examples of motion with a predictable pattern could include a child swinging in a
swing, a ball rolling back and forth in a bowl, and two children on a seesaw.] [Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include technical terms
such as period and frequency.]
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: After discussing pictures in class Introduction
students will engage in the assessment
below. Students, I want you to think about a swing on the
playground or in a local park or someone’s’ backyard.
Knowledge
Imagine you give one big push to the friend. Describe in
● Define the terms: your own words what you expect to happen. (the person
Straight Line Motion
o Arc will move forward until they lose energy and then return , almost to
o Motion
Assessment One the starting point). Draw a line that shows the path of the
o Force
person on the swing. Its not a straight line is it? We call
o Force of gravity
Students will brainstorm examples of objects that line an arc which is something we will talk more
o Magnetic force
that move in a straight motion. Examples about in mathematics. We would call that arc path their
o Pattern
o Predict can include: An athlete running on a track, a motion and it resulted from you applying a force. Forces
are pushes and pulls. For the swing we both push and
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
bead moving on a fixed rod, a train moving pull on the swing to make our friend go higher! What
● Identify the different types of
on a straight track, a car travelling on a other forces cause things to move? What about the force
motion (ways objects move).
straight road, a bowling ball, an object falling of gravity; it pulls objects to the earth’s surface. We have
● Describe patterns in the
straight down, someone pushing an object seen that magnets can also pull some metal objects along.
environment (natural and human).
Did you know we can put magnets in a motor and make
like a box.
● Describe the movement of various it turn when we apply electricity? That is an amazing
objects. I would like you to draw one example of an invention that relies on the pull of the magnet force.
● Demonstrate they understand that object or an activity that shows an object
Back to our swing example…we apply a force and we
objects can move in various ways. moving in a straight line.
start the motion of the swing. How did you know the
● Compare the different ways
person will return to the starting point? (I have used swings
Assessment Two
objects can move (straight line, zig
many times and they always go out so far and then return) What
zag, back and forth, circular).
● Worksheet One
does their path depend on? (the length of the rope holding the
● Explain the various ways objects swing). The path of the swing “forward and back” is
can move in the environment.
Put an X on the pictures where the objects predictable from our experience; we would say there is a
● Identify the conditions needed for move in a straight line. definite pattern to that motion. You probably know the
objects to move in a given distance you walk to the store in your neighborhood. It is
situation. (ST 2 PS EN 1) very likely that it takes almost the same amount of
walking time each visit you make to the store. Because
● Identify with examples forces at
work in everyday situations in the you probably walk the same speed most times, we would
home and community. (ST 3 PS say there is a pattern and we can predict how long it will
FMS 2) take you to get there.
Today we are going to look at patterns in motion all
around us everyday. You have already shown me that you
are clever students. You can predict patterns!
Retrieved from:
Let us review then:
https://www.prolinebowstrings.com/blog/a
rchery-equipment/archery-for-beginners/ What is motion?
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Skills Definition
● Observe objects in motion. Motion is the process of an object moving or being
moved. Motion that repeats is said to occur in a pattern.
● Infer that patterns can be repeated We can observe patterns of motion to make predictions
by engaging in scientific about how things will move in the future. The force that
investigations. slows down moving objects is called friction.
What is a pattern?
● Classify the motion of objects.
Definition
Retrieved from
● Communicate ideas on patterns
https://www.sportsplayinc.com/choose_me A pattern is something that happens or appears in a
and motions with their peers.
rrygorounds.php regular and repeated way. Patterns exist in various forms.
They can be found in mathematics, the arts, science,
● Predict what should come next in language, and social science.
patterns.
A pattern can appear as a visible design, such as a spiral
or set of stripes. Patterns can also appear as repeated
● Construct a pendulum and a spiral events, such as in the weather or in the behaviors of
marble track to observe motion.
living things.
Describe patterns in the environment (natural and
Retrieved from
● Illustrate or draw the various ways
human).
objects can move in the https://thetoyinsider.com/alex-toys-active-
environment. play-super-go-pogo-stick-review/
Patterns help children make predictions because they
begin to understand what comes next. They also help
● Distinguish between a motion and
children learn how to make logical connections and use
a pattern.
reasoning skills. Patterns can be found everywhere in our
daily lives and should be pointed out to small children.
● Demonstrate ways in which
motion can be changed. (ST 2 PS ❖ The sun came up and went down and then the
FMS 1).
moon came up and went down.
❖ The frog hopped up and down - sunrise and
sunset.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Describe and demonstrate the Retrieved from ❖ The water cycle – rain falls down to earth as
forces of push and pull (ST 3 PS https://www.science.org/content/article/p precipitation and goes back up in the sky to form
FMS 1).
hysicists-unlock-secret-childs-swing clouds - evaporation and condensation.
❖ The way a caterpillar moves.
● Classify different kinds of motion
❖ A jackhammer.
according to what causes the
motion (e.g. gravity, magnets) (ST ❖ A seesaw.
4 PS FMS 2).
Predict what should come next in patterns.
● Describe the visible effects of In math, a pattern is defined as a sequence of repeating
push and pull on a variety of
objects, shapes or numbers. We can relate a pattern to
everyday objects. (ST 4 PS FMS 4).
any type of event or object. A pattern has a rule that tells
Retrieved from
us which objects belong to the pattern and which objects
● Infer that the position of the sun https://studiousguy.com/linear-motion-
do not belong to the pattern. Let’s look at some
changes at different times of the examples/
examples of patterns:
day. (ST 2 ESS SS 3).
● Worksheet Two
● Outline the relationship between
earth, moon and sun, especially
Students will check all the pictures that show
how the relationship affects
straight line motion.
humans. (ST 3 ESS SS 1).
Attitudes/Values
• Develop an appreciation for the
Retrieved from: https://www.splashlearn.com/math-
various ways objects move in their
vocabulary/wp-content/uploads/2022/08/pattern-
environment.
image-1.png
• Display interest and curiosity in
carrying out investigations. In the above image, the rule that is followed is that the
circle is in the odd places and the rectangle is in the even
• Inquiry.
places. So, the next figure in the pattern will be:
• Show respect for scientific
evidence by using their
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
observations to make predictions
or to complete a task.
• Work safely when participating in
various activities.
• When conducting practical and
group work, display sensitivity and
offer assistance to peers who may
have physical or learning
challenges.
Retrieved from: https://www.splashlearn.com/math-
• Participate actively in classroom
vocabulary/wp-content/uploads/2022/08/pasted-
discussions.
image-0-8-1.png
• Work collaboratively in groups.
Create an AB pattern
A pattern is a sequence. A repeated arrangement of
numbers, letters, shapes, colors etc. AB patterns are
patterns that involve two varieties of objects or colors or
numbers. AB pattern worksheets provide a sense of
order in understanding and identifying recurring patterns
and help develop critical thinking in kids.
Retrieved from:
https://www.kidsacademy.mobi/printables/ Types of Motion
grade-2/science/physical-science/grade-2-
The types of motion are straight line, zigzag, up and
position-and-motion-worksheet.pdf
down and back and forth.
Zig Zag Motion Assessment
Read the following statements. Predict
which object will move in a zigzag pattern.
Write the letter Z in front of the statement
that you believe will show zigzag motion.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: http://pt.slideshare.net/safa-
medaney/what-is-motion-and-its-types
Circular Motion Assessment
Straight Line Motion
Students can engage in the following
Moving things follow different paths. Some things move
activities in pairs or in groups. The teacher
in a straight line. Other things move in circles. Straight
can use a rubric to assess students.
line motion is a change in position from one point to
another in a straight line (in one dimension).
Build a paper plate spiral marble track.
A pattern of motion is the repeated process of an object
Materials needed:
moving. Patterns of motion can be used to make
paper plates, clear tape, and hot glue, toilet predictions.
paper roll.
Today we will engage in activities and discuss one way
Cut a circle in the center of each plate.
that objects move.
Activity One:
In this activity you will choose a ball. You will roll the
ball at varying distances. Now you will describe the
motion or how the ball moved.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Cut a straight line to the center of the plate Example of guided questions for class discussion
Connect each plate to each other by the cut
1. Did the ball move fast or slow?
made earlier with tape and also to the paper
roll with glue gun.
2. In what pattern did the ball move? (The ball moves in a
straight line).
3. Did the pattern change at any time? (No the ball always
rolled in a straight line).
You will now roll the ball to different targets, for
example a wall, a desk at varying distances (short,
medium, long). How did you get the ball to roll to the
various targets? (More force or a harder push makes the ball roll
faster and further in a straight line).
Now we will engage in a competition. The person who
throws or rolls the ball the furthest (distance) will be
declared the winner.
Students can be encouraged to use the spiral
Activity Two
track to race cars (hotwheels).
Let us look at some pictures that show some objects in
Ask them to describe the motion.
our everyday lives that travel in a straight line.
Assessment
(Teacher will then provide various pictures of objects
Back and Forth Worksheet that move in a straight line for discussion).
Teacher will question students about the activity in each
picture. Example:
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
How will the arrow travel when the girl lets it go?
(When she lets go, the arrow goes in a straight line and then when
it loses energy, it begins to make an arc until it falls to the ground).
Retrieved from:
https://www.acaedu.net/cms/lib3/TX01001550/Centri
city/Domain/441/Stemscopepediamovement.pdf
Will the bowling ball continue travelling in a straight
line?
Retrieved from:
https://www.kidsacademy.mobi/printables/
grade-3/science/physical-science/grade-3-
pendulum-experiment-worksheet-for-3rd-
grade.pdf
Overall Assessment:
A rolling ball is one of the prime examples of linear
motion in everyday life. When a muscular force is applied
to a bowling ball, it rolls along the lane in a straight line.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Project Retrieved from: https://studiousguy.com/linear-
motion-examples/
Ask students to bring in pictures of things in
the environment that move, and say the kind Do fruits fall in a zig zag or straight line from a tree?
of motion they exhibit.
Fieldtrip
Identifying and naming objects in their
environment that are examples of the
different forms of motion. Creating a
scrapbook with the information gathered.
(Teacher will decide on the number of
objects to be included in scrapbook)
Teacher will award marks for correctly
identifying and naming the objects.
A coconut falling from a tree will be an example of
Rubric:
straight-line motion because it will fall vertically
downwards in the gravity following a straight line.
Organization of scrapbook 3 pts
Retrieved from:
Quality of pictures 3 pts
https://nikobens.wordpress.com/2014/05/14/coco
Correctness of motion labels 4 pts nut-tree/
Important Patterns of Motion Zig Zag Motion
Students: Another way objects can move is in a zigzag motion.
The sun rises each morning and tracks Activity One
across the sky and then sets before darkness
(absence of light) arrives. If the weather is Use your pencil to draw a line and connect the dots on
your worksheet. Follow the number sequence. What
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
clear, we can see it moving in a very pattern did you make by connecting the numbers in
predictable pattern. sequence? (a zig zag pattern)
1) Describe the pattern as the sun
seems to rise and set each day. What
does it look like?
2) Do some research and investigate
how the following people may find
the pattern useful:
a. A fisher
b. A traveller or explorer on the
ocean
c. A hiker in the rainforest
Teacher can assign one of these to each
group to research and report back to the
class.
Retrieved from:
https://www.meted.ucar.edu/ams/wim_201
4/3b.html
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
To move in zigzag motion is to move in a line, frequently
making sharp turns to one side and then to the other
side, just as you did when connecting the numbers in
sequence. Zigzag motion and patterns can be fun. Can
you think of examples of Zigzag patterns around us?
Activity Two
Let’s look at the following pictures.
1. Which of the pictures show something
moving in a zig zag like pattern? (the athlete running
the obstacle course, the snake, the traffic sign)
2. Which ones do not? (the car, the swing and the
dog chasing its tail)
3. Give an explanation for your answer to each
picture.
Retrieved from: https://www.verywellfit.com/build-
sports-endurance-with-shuttle-runs-3120584
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://www.freepik.com/premium-
vector/line-art-vector-contour-illustration-yellow-cute-
snake-funny-reptile-minimalistic-simple-style-linear-
zigzag-serpent-cub-isolated-white-
background_25349321.htm
Retrieved from: https://byjus.com/question-answer/a-
car-moving-straight-on-a-straight-road-is-an-example-of/
Retrieved from:
https://www.istockphoto.com/vector/cute-boy-playing-
on-swing-gm615489960-106769299
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: pinking-shears-for-sewing-tailoring-
and-quilting-blades-can-be-re-positioned-
167100572.html
Retrieved from:
https://www.istockphoto.com/vector/dog-chasing-its-
tail-gm182026993-27569592
Retrieved from:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zigzag#/media/File:NO
_road_sign_102.1.svg
Activity Three
We will now play a game called ‘Stay on the Path.’
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://www.twinkl.com/resource/my-
community-maps-resource-za-ss-79
Instructions for game: You have in front of you a map
of Dan’s Neighbourhood. Today Dan decides to do
something different and take a zig zag path to get to the
park. If Dan starts at his house, we can trace the route
that Dan would have to take in order to get to the park?
Use your pencil to map out Dan’s journey.
(Make a left onto Bishop Lane, then right onto Cooper street, left
onto Lark Avenue then right onto Rose Street.)
Circular Motion
Circular motion is described as a movement of an object
while rotating along a circular path.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
We will now be looking at another way objects
move.
Students will now look at objects that move in a
circular motion.
Activity One:
Show students a variety of pictures and then name
them together.
a ceiling fan a standing fan
a car wheel wheel on the fridge
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
ferris wheel merry go round
After observing the pictures, ask students:
Have you ever seen or used one of these items?
(yes/no)
Are they in motion in the pictures? (no)
If they were in motion, how would the pattern
move? (in a circle/circular)
Have them brainstorm other things that move in a
circular motion. (fan on planes, propellers on boats, planets
moving around the sun, an analog clock)
Option: students can be taken on a field trip or nature
walk as they search for things around them that move in
a circular motion.
Activity Two:
We will conduct a simple experiment in this lesson.
I would like you to collect these materials from the table
at the front of the classroom. (They will be given one
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
uncut plate and a marble as well as a triangle cut plate
and marble.)
Gently push the marble along the rim of the plate and
carefully observe the force making the marble go in a
circle is the normal force of the plate rim on the marble.
Questions:
What was the force that caused the marble to move? (a
push)
After pushing the marble on the plate, what motion did it
move? (circular-then spiral)
What allowed the marble to move in a circular motion?
(the rim of the plate)
They will repeat the experiment with the triangular cut
plate. When the marble reaches that section it no longer
travels in a circle but goes off in a straight line.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Before beginning the experiment,
What is different with this plate compared to the first?
(we cut a triangle from the plate)
Do you think the marble will move in a circular motion
like the first plate? (no)
Explain why? (this is because the plate is missing a piece that will
be needed to guide it around)
What do you think will happen to the marble when we
push it? (it will not go in a circle)
After:
What happened to the marble when it got to the cut out?
(It left the plate in a straight line)
What if we eliminate the force, what would happen? (The
marble would not move unless it is unbalanced)
Side to Side Motion
We can say that motion is the change of position of an
object with respect to time. A book falling off a table,
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
water flowing from the tap, rattling windows, etc., all
exhibit motion. Our daily activities, like walking, running,
closing the door, etc. involve motion. There is a change of
position of the object involved in these activities. Even the
air that we breathe exhibits motion!
Forces cause all motions. Every time the motion of an
object changes, it’s because a force has been applied to it.
Force can cause a stationary object to start moving or a
moving object to change its speed or direction or both.
Today we will be observing the motion of some everyday
objects. Are there patterns in the way things move? Let’s
find out using marbles!
Activity One
Experimenting with marbles
Materials: large, deep glass bowl and a marble (Can be done in
groups or as a demonstration)
In this experiment we are going to try to predict the
motion of a marble. When we predict, we are sharing what
we think is going to happen.
If we were to place the marble in the center of the bowl,
what do you think would happen? Write down your
prediction.
If you were to place the marble on the left side of the bowl
near the top, what do you think would happen? Write
down your prediction.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Let us try this out.
[Student will drop the marble into the bowl. Studnets
will observe the marble as it moves slightly further
and further away from the center, and up the sides.
Students observe its motion and record.]
Retrieved from: https://profmattstrassler.com/articles-
and-posts/particle-physics-basics/tunneling-a-quantum-
process/
What happened to the marble that was placed in the
bottom of the bowl at the center? (Moves slightly and
eventually is at rest)
What happened when the marble was placed on the side
of the bowl? (It swings from side to side and eventually it stops)
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Did it continue swinging from the same distance every
time? (Swinging movement got shorter and shorter)
When you placed the marble closer higher up the side of
the bowl, did it affect the motion of the marble? (Yes)
How? (Moved faster from swinging from side to side/ same pattern
of motion but faster)
We can see that the motion pattern is repetitive.
If I were to place the marble closer to the edge of the bowl,
can you predict its pattern of motion? A pattern of motion
is the repeated process of an object moving.
Let’s observe! [Students observe the marble being
dropped from a greater height, very close to the edge of
the bowl.] (Same side-to-side movement but at a faster speed.)
Why is the marble moving faster? (Greater height, larger force
is exerted increasing the speed)
Why is the speed of the marble reduced and the height of
the swing gets shorter as time goes by? (Friction, the motion
of the marble against the wall of the bowl slows it down, reducing its
energy)
Activity Two
Pendulum
Making a simple pendulum with everyday materials:
https://youtu.be/aPOmduWJlAg?si=OoRhdiyoaAarum
wo (1:25 mins)
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
***Can also be done in Arts and Craft.
How to make a pendulum
Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aPOmduWJlAg
Retrieved from: https://ithink-
oli.medium.com/pendulum-experiment-50e2116f55d4
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
We have created a pendulum. Play with it for a minute.
Observe its motion!
How would you describe the motion of the pendulum?
(Swings back and forth/side to side)
Is this motion repeated? (yes). The pendulum moves in a
pattern.
Have you ever seen a pendulum before? (Yes/No) Have
you seen any object at home or at play that has a pendulum
as part of it? (Student share: pendulum clock, amusement park
rides, wrecking ball, metronome)
Let’s investigate how a pendulum works!
How can you make the ball of our pendulum move faster?
Write down your suggestions in your activity sheet.
Let us test our ideas using our pendulum. We will test our
ideas in an orderly way by writing down the position that
we drop our ball and what happens when we do so.
Description of release Description of observed
position behaviour
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
When a pendulum is set in motion, gravity causes a
restoring force that will accelerate it toward the center
point, resulting in a back and forth swinging motion. The
path of the pendulum is an arc.
How will changing the length of the rope affect the
movement of the ball?
What happens if I use a heavier ball instead?
Additional Resources and Materials
Retrieved from: https://i.pinimg.com/474x/94/9f/5c/949f5c3ec4d6eb2d30416a50f2951442.jpg
How Things Move https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=MMPSwId4CBY (7:34 mins)
Patterns of Movement https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C1wvXhXyVmk (8:54 mins)
Grade 3 Science
Patterns of Motion https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N9cTYkOyf9A (3:00 mins)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Patterns of Movement https://www.acaedu.net/cms/lib3/TX01001550/Centricity/Domain/441/Stemscopepediamovement.pdf
Retrieved from: https://www.k12reader.com/worksheet/how-things-move/
Grade 3 Science
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts:
• The game “Stay on the Path” can be integrated into the language lesson to provide practice in telling directions and using the words, left,
right, opposite, next to etc.
• Writing a short paragraph on how objects move.
• Engaging in class discussions about various scenarios for example what would happen if objects only moved in one direction?
Mathematics - Finding or completing various AB patterns
Music: Rhythmic patterns, melodic patterns
Art and Craft - Drawing different patterns to show the various motions, drawing pictures depicting various ways objects move. Putting pictures or
drawings together to form posters for the classroom.
Physical Education - engaging in activities that show ways objects move, for example rolling a ball in a straight line, walking or running back and
forth, jumping up and down etc.
Social Studies: use legends to find information from maps and present information on maps (activity three - stay the path)
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning
outcome and associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies Working collaboratively in groups and respecting each other's opinions during
class discussions.
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication Students will engage in various experiments which will develop their critical
thinking skills. Providing explanations why things move in various ways. They
Competencies
will also learn to work with their peers in order to accomplish various tasks.
Developed Well-being Competencies Expressing themselves fluently when reporting various tasks, example
experiments.
Grade 3 Science
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies Using the knowledge gained, students can design various gadgets such as tops,
cars, bows and arrows using materials in their environment (local materials)
which other people can purchase. These materials can be used as teaching aids/
materials to demonstrate the various ways objects can move.
Elements that are integrated across subjects: developed critical thinking and ethical communication:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
• Using local materials to make gadgets, example trucks, cars to be used to teach concepts. Plait the pole/maypole, greasy pole, making clay
pots - local activity that demonstrates motions.
• The motions that create patterns when hair braiding or twisting, weaving grass mats or coconut straw hats, etc.
• The movement of waves, river flow, ripples in a pond.
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Passage about
Teaching tips: The use of hands-on resources inquiry based so students can make inferences. Avoid just providing definitions on the types of motion.
Use as many examples as possible to deepen understanding. Use the things in your environment to demonstrate patterns and motion. Encourage
students to play with the objects so as to investigate, draw conclusions and develop deeper understanding about motion.
Quote by Isaac Newton: An object that is at rest will tend to remain at rest. An object that is in motion will tend to remain in motion unless acted
upon by an outside force.https://cdn.graciousquotes.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/An-object-that-is-at-rest-will-tend-to-remain-at-rest.-An-
object-that-is-in-motion-will-tend-to-remain-in-motion-unless-acted-upon-by-an-outside-force..jpg
Quote by Clay P. Bedford, President of Kaiser Aerospace & Electronics and More:
“You can teach a student a lesson for a day, but if you teach him to learn by creating curiosity, he will continue the learning process as long as he
lives.” 33-quotes-about-education-play-and-stem-for-kids
Grade 3 Science
Science Grade 3
Introduction to the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude
of caring not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic
study of the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from
leveraging and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it.
Strand (Topic): Forces and Interactions
Force and motion are important parts of everyday life. As students study this unit, they will learn how these physical factors impact their lives and
work. The lessons and activities will help students become aware of factors like friction, gravity, and magnetic force.
Essential Learning Outcomes: (ELO-3) Ask questions to determine cause and effect relationships of electric or magnetic interactions between
two objects not in contact with each other. [Clarification Statement: Examples of an electric force could include the force on hair from an electrically
charged balloon and the electrical forces between a charged rod and pieces of paper; examples of a magnetic force could include the force between
two permanent magnets, the force between an electromagnet and steel paper clips, and the force exerted by one magnet versus the force exerted by
two magnets. Examples of cause-and-effect relationships could include how the distance between objects affects the strength of the force and how
the orientation of magnets affects the direction of the magnetic force.] [Assessment Boundary: Assessment is limited to forces produced by objects
that can be manipulated by students, and electrical interactions are limited to static electricity.]
Grade Level Expectations:
Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Learners are expected to: Pre-instruction assessment Students, I want to show you an amazing
invisible force. Look at the special apparatus I
All magnets have the ability to attract other magnets
have made.
or magnetic objects (such as iron, nickel and cobalt
Knowledge
and their alloys). Try this activity to learn more
● Define the terms: about magnetic force.
o Magnet
o Invisible force
o Lines of force Materials needed:
o poles
paper clip
o static electricity
o magnetic interactions eraser
o electrical forces
o attract scissors
o repel
two or more different magnets
o permanent magnets Retrieved from personal pictures (G.
o temporary magnets 1. Tie a length of thread to a metal paper clip MacKinnon)
o electromagnets so that thread hanging is 10 cm long.
Why do you think the paperclip is suspended
● Identify objects attracted by a magnet. 2. Place a magnet on the table
3. Hold the paper clip approximately 5 cm
in the air like this? (I think there is a magnet in the
● Understand that magnets have two
above the magnet top that is attracting the paperclip.)
poles.
4. Gradually and gently lower the paper clip.
If I take a piece of paper and add iron filings
● Identify different types of magnets
to it (iron is what nails are made of) and place
and understand that magnets have two
“What did you observe? What did you feel? What a bar magnet underneath it will produce a
poles, north and south. (When two
did you see?” (As the paperclip is lowered, the special pattern where the magnet is attracting
like poles (N-N or S-S) come in
contact, they will repel. When two paper clip is attracted to the magnet and moves the iron filings.
unlike poles (N-S) come in contact, towards to the magnet)
they will attract.)
5. Repeat with the eraser and then the scissors
● Demonstrate the effect of static
electricity on objects.
● Compare the force exerted by one
magnet compared to the force exerted https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/science/9
by two magnets. 53382
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Explain the use of magnets in the Retrieved from:
home and the community https://www.exploratorium.edu/snacks/magnetic-
lines-of-force
● Distinguish between magnetic and
non-magnetic materials.
● Match simple gadgets (magnetic) to The patterns you see are called lines of force.
the use to which they are put. (ST 2
TE TM 2)
● Observe and demonstrate the effects Let us go back to our initial demonstration.
of magnets on the motion of different Watch as I use a pair of scissors and cut the
materials (e.g. iron filings, non- lines of force. The paperclip falls! Did I really
metallic materials).(ST 3 PS FMS 3) cut those lines? (no teacher, the scissors got in the
way of the invisible force)
● Describe and demonstrate the forces
push and pull. (ST 3 PS FMS 1)
● Identify, with examples, forces at
work in everyday situations in the
home and community. (ST 3 PS FMS
2)
● Match with relevant examples,
properties of materials which make
Below is a worksheet. Each student or group will
them useful for certain specific
purposes. (ST 3 PS MM 4) receive two sheets. One will be used to make
predictions as to whether the items are magnetic or
● Investigate the ways in which different
non-magnetic. For the second worksheet, students
forces can change the speed and
will be given a magnet to test the items and indicate
direction of a moving object. (e.g.
whether their predictions were accurate. This will be
magnetism, static electricity) (ST 4 PS
a class discussion.
FMS 1)
● Account for how the concept of static
electricity can explain simple balloon
experiments.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
● Differentiate true north and magnetic What else could we put between a magnet and
north as it relates to the use of a the paperclip. Let us try a piece of paper, a
compass for navigation. ruler, a cloth, cookie sheet). What do you
notice? (things that are metal seem to break the force
lines but nonmetal objects don’t.)
Skills
● Observe how magnets attract or repel
each other and attract some materials
and not others
● Compare and group together a variety
of everyday materials on the basis of
whether they are attracted to a magnet
● Investigate how the orientation, size
and distance of magnets affects the
strength and the direction of the
magnetic force.
Attitudes/Values
Today we are going to investigate invisible
● Appreciation for magnets in everyday
forces even more.
life
● When conducting practical and group
work, display sensitivity and offer
Review: What are magnets and how do
assistance to peers who may have
they work?
physical or learning challenges. Adapted from:
● Participate actively in classroom Materials: 2 closed boxes, box A and Box B -
https://www.teacherspayteachers.com/Product/M
discussions. one with iron nails and the other with
agnetic-items-and-Non-magnetic-Items-
toothpicks, bits of paper and glass marbles).
● Identify and appreciate that the 3997653?st=cf4ec1ceff693b17c18e345231a80dd5
gadgets, tools and structures used in
their homes and community are made
by humans. (ST 3 TE UT 1)
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Answer to worksheet
Retrieved from:
https://www.amazon.com/PACKHOME-
Rectangular-14x9-5x4-5-Bridesmaid-
Collapsible/dp/B07S5KVDRL?th=1 and modified
The two boxes will be passed around the
classroom so students can shake the two
boxes and feel the mass of each box.
Alternative: provide boxes to students in small
groups.
Question: What type of materials do you think
these objects in box A and box B are made
from? Why do you think so? (Write down
student’s suggestions)
Possible responses: box A has metal objects. The
objects make a clang/ringing sound. Box B has
nonmetal/wooden/plastic objects. They make a much
softer sound.
Students will then be shown two identical
magnets.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
What are these objects called? (Magnets)
What are magnets? How do they work?
Students share what they remember about
magnets.
Let’s watch a video that explains how magnets
work.
https://youtu.be/7HHs98PBgk0?si=0wdGSq
Sn5HCvuGpg (up until 2:06 of 5:04 mins)
Give students 2 magnets to observe and test.
Magnets in the World What did you notice about the magnets when
you try putting them together? (They come
Have students do research and find at least ten
together on one side but push away when I try the
examples of how magnets are used to solve
other side)
problems in the real world. They should come to
class prepared to report. Why do you think they do different things on
each side? (They have two sides, They are not the
same)
The Earth is a Magnet with Invisible Lines of
Force A magnet has two sides that are called poles.
A north pole and a south pole. No matter
The earth has a North and South Pole similar to a
how hard you try to force two of the same
magnet. It also has invisible magnetic field lines
poles together, they will push away, for
much like a bar magnet.
example: north pole to north pole. We say
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
that they repel when they push away.
However, if you flip one of the magnets
around so that opposite poles now face each
other, the two magnets will attract each other
and come right together.
Magnetic and Nonmagnetic Materials
What do you think will happen when we place
the magnets at the bottom of box A and box
Retrieved from:
B? (The objects in box A will be attracted because
https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/geoclone/chapter
they are metal objects. The objects in box B will not be
/3-4-earths-magnetic-field-2/
attracted to the magnet.)
The earth’s magnetic field allows us to use a
compass for navigating because the compass needle The teacher will allow the students to observe
always points to the north. Have students do what happens when a magnet is placed under
research to find out what the term “true north “ box A and box B.
means with regard to the earth’s magnetic field.
Why were the objects in box A attracted to
See explanation here: the magnet? (Metal objects). These objects are
https://www.rmg.co.uk/stories/topics/true-north- made from magnetic materials.
magnetic-north-whats-difference
Why were the objects in box B not attracted
Static Electricity in the World
to the magnetic? (Nonmetal objects)
Have students do research and find at least five
Let us now look to see what objects are inside
examples of where you would see static electricity in
our two boxes. What materials are these
the real world. They should come to class prepared
objects made from/ (Wood, plastic, glass) These
to report.
are nonmagnetic materials.
Mary has a problem
Mary likes to wear dresses to her workplace. One Magnetic materials are those which are
day she walked into her carpeted office and sat attracted to a magnet e.g. some metals such
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
down in her office chair, only to find her skirt as iron. Non-magnetic materials are those
sticking to the back of her legs. which are not attracted by magnets e.g. wood,
paper, plastic.
How irritating! Describe why and how you think
Mary might have a problem with static electricity.
(she collects charge by walking across her carpet and her legs What would happen if we mix our objects in
must be neutral like the wall; therefore they are attracted) box B and Box A? How would we be able to
separate the magnetic materials from the non-
Distinguishing Invisible Forces
magnetic materials?
Let us now complete a short activity. Read each
short scenario and tick whether its caused by static
Allow students to mix the objects and then
electricity or a magnet.
attempt to separate them. (students may hover
magnet over the box; students may move the magnet
below the box; students may place the magnet into the
box)
How did you separate the objects? (Only the
iron nails were attracted to the magnet, so we were able
to remove them)
Materials can either be magnetic or non-
magnetic
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Retrieved from:
https://www.kidsacademy.mobi/printables/grade-
3/science/physical-science/grade-3-static-or-
magnetic-printable-worksheet.pdf
Extended Activities for Student Research
Did You Know?
1) That a photocopier uses a charged drum to
attract the powdered toner ink for making
copies! Retrieved from:
See:
https://www.slideshare.net/mahahussain/ma
https://www.bu.edu/simulation/classes/505classn
gnetic-and-non-magnetic-48784163
otes/PhotoCopier.pdf
What types of objects attract magnets? (Metals)
2) That a very large magnet is used for getting
images of our bodies when we aren’t feeling
Do all metals attract magnets?
well? (magnetic resonance imaging.) See:
https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/t
Provide students with samples of aluminium,
reatment-tests-and-therapies/magnetic-
silver, copper, iron filings, steel, nickel and
resonance-imaging-mri
allow them to test these pieces of metal with a
3) That magnets are used to make high speed
trains by levitating the train above the rail magnet. The students will use the following
(repulsion) thereby reducing friction? See: table to record their observations.
Maglev trains at:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maglev Objects that can be used: iron nails,
aluminium foil, sterling silver jewelry,
galvanized nails with zinc coating, copper
wire, 25 cents piece - has over 60% copper,
steel wool.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Were all the metals attracted to the magnets?
(No)
Which metals were not attracted to the
magnet? (Aluminium, silver, copper) Which
metals were attracted to the magnet? (iron, steel,
nickel)
All magnetic objects are made of metal, but
not all metals are magnetic.
Let’s now classify objects as magnetic and non
magnetic.
Types of Magnets
Materials needed: paper clips/staples,
permanent magnet, nail, dry cell, wire.
Guiding question: How can you make a
nail into a magnet?
The students will be given some paper clips
(5) or staples, a magnet and a nail.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Use the paper clips/ to demonstrate when
your nail has become magnetised.
Allow students to explore and be creative with
the objects provided.
How did you make your nail magnetised?
(stroke the nail in one direction and lift the magnetic
off the nail after each stroke)
The students will demonstrate to the class
when their nail is magnetised.
Students view this video on How to
Magnetise a Nail
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=deskt
op&v=ok9GkzRiymM (1:27 mins)
Guiding question: How can we increase
the strength of our magnetised nail?
Let us see which group can pick up the most
paper clips/staples. Count how many times
you rub the nail to the magnet.
How many strokes did it take before the nail
picked up one, then several paper
clips/staples?
You created a temporary magnet. This
allowed you to use the nail to lift the paper
clips/staples.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
What is a temporary magnet?
Temporary magnets are objects that have
magnetic properties for a limited time period
under certain conditions. They are only able to
create their own weak magnetic field while in
the presence of a stronger magnet. Temporary
magnets are objects made from iron and iron
alloys (mixture of metals). However, when the
field is removed, the object gradually loses its
magnetism
Retrieved from:
https://www.thesciencehive.co.uk/magnetism
-gcse
We have just learnt about temporary magnets.
Magnetics can also be permanent.
What are permanent magnets?
Permanent magnets are made from metals
like iron or nickel that are naturally
magnetised and have their own magnetic
fields. Once they are magnetised, they do not
easily lose their magnetism.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Some of the magnets you have been using are
permanent magnets.
Can you identify the permanent magnets?
Have these permanent magnets lost their
strength over the time we have been using
them? (No).
This is because they are permanent magnets.
Let us watch a video on the types of magnets.
How many types of magnets are there? Can
you identify any other type of magnets?
Students will watch the second part of the
video
https://youtu.be/7HHs98PBgk0?si=s3vT
HaoLEVdefAsv (2:05 - 2:28 mins)
Did you learn about another type of magnet?
what is it called? (Electromagnets)
There are three types of magnets: temporary
magnets, permanent magnets and
electromagnets.
What are electromagnets? (see:
(https://kids.kiddle.co/Electromagnet)
An electromagnet can be created when
electricity flows through a metal. They are
magnets that are only magnetic when there is
a coil of wire that has electricity flowing
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
through it. The magnetic force starts when
electricity flows and stops when the electricity
is no longer flowing.
Let us see if we can make our own
electromagnet.
Students will be given a wire, battery and a
nail to create their electromagnet. They will
test their electromagnets to pick up paper
clips using their electromagnet.
Retrieved from: https://www.shalom-
education.com/wp-
content/uploads/2021/04/image-74.png
How can we make our electromagnet
stronger?
Students will be given more batteries, longer
wires and bigger nails, galvanized nails and
iron nails to try to create a stronger
electromagnet.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Electromagnets can be made stronger by
adding more coils to the copper wire, or
adding an iron core through the coils (for
example a nail). The current can also be
increased to make the magnetism stronger.
(Taken from https://kids.kiddle.co/Electromagnet)
Computers, TVs, and electric motors use
electromagnets as well as burglar alarms,
electric relays and fire bells.
Use of Magnets
Magnets are used very much in the world
arounds us.
Students, can you identify the uses of
magnets?
Teacher can access uses here:
https://youtu.be/7HHs98PBgk0?si=s3vTHa
oLEVdefAsv (2:28 - 4:01 mins)
Forces of Magnets
Today we are going to observe and compare
the force exerted by one magnet compared to
the force exerted by two magnets. We are
going to engage in a simple experiment.
Magnet Experiment: Are Two Magnets
Twice as Strong as One? In this experiment
we will determine whether the strength of the
magnetic field created by two magnets is twice
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
the strength of the magnetic field created by
one magnet. For this experiment you will
gather the following materials to work in your
groups.
● 2 identical magnets
● metal paper clips
● Stack of index cards, sticky notes, or
paper
● Stack of felt or cloth squares
● Ruler
Instructions
1. Take one of the magnets and place an index
card in between the magnet and the paper
clip. Does the magnetic force of the magnet
hold up the paper clip through the card?
Record the data and your observations in a
chart like the one below.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
2. Add another card between the magnet and
the paper clip and record your observations.
3. Keep adding cards one at a time until the
magnet cannot hold the paper clip.
4. Count how many cards are between the
magnet and paperclip.
5. Repeat the experiment using squares of felt
or cloth.
6. Repeat both parts of the experiment using 2
magnets stuck together. When you combine
magnets, you will need to use a magnet that
does not have any casing so that they will stick
together.
7. Graph your results. Try making a bar graph
with “Number of Magnets” on the x-axis and
“Number of Index Cards” or other material
on the y-axis. This will help you determine if
two magnets are twice as strong.
Discussion questions based on the results.
Does the material between the magnet and the
paperclip matter? Why? Is the magnetic force
greater when there is more than one magnet?
Conclusion of the experiment: two magnets
together are stronger than one magnet, but two magnets
will not be twice as strong as one.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Experiment retrieved from:
https://www.education.com/science-
fair/article/two-magnets-twice-
strong/#:~:text=Two%20magnets%20togeth
er%20will%20be,add%20the%20magnetic%2
0fields%20together
Magnet Experiments: The Effect of
Orientation, Size and Distance
Experiment 1
I want you to think about a fridge magnet.
What happens when you bring it close the
refrigerator door?
(It begins to pull towards the door) When is the pull
the greatest, when you are close or far away?
(When we are close) We would say that the
magnetic force gets greater when the distance
is smaller.
The amount of magnetic force depends on
distance.
Closer magnets are, the stronger the force.
On a magnet, the force is the strongest at
both poles (North and South)
As objects move closer together, the magnetic
forces between them increases.
Like poles repel, opposite poles attract.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Experiment 2
For this experiment you will need: Magnets,
iron filings and pieces of paper.
Instructions
Put two magnets underneath a piece of paper
with 1 inch apart.
1. Carefully and slowly shake some iron filings
onto the piece of paper above the magnets.
2. If the iron filings are too far from the
magnets, gently tap or shake the paper to
move them closer to above the magnets.
3.Observe how the filings move and distribute
on the paper.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
4.Next, remove the iron filings or carefully
pour them back into the bottle.
5. Flip one of the magnets upside down.
6. Repeat steps 1-4 to see what iron filing
pattern is formed this time.
Retrieved from
https://www.rookieparenting.com/magnetic-
field-science-experiment/
Another Invisible Force: Static Electricity
Did you ever walk across a carpet and then
watch as a spark jumped from your finger to a
nearby friend or piece of furniture? That spark
was electric charge moving from the carpet
through you to another object!
That type of charge is different from
electricity in the wall where electric charge is
moving all the time. We call this spark that
you experience static electricity.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Let’s now find out what it is.
Static electricity is the buildup of the
electrical charge in an object when it is rubbed
against another object.
Teacher background: Electric charge gets
transferred from objects that are electron
donating to those that are electron receiving.
To judge which objects are likely to donate
electric charge, one must refer to the
triboelectric series.
Retrieved from:
https://www.sciencelearn.org.nz/images/387
9-triboelectric-series
From this chart you can see that rabbit fur
would readily give electrons to a plastic rod.
Or human hair would donate to a rubber
ballon. (a popular, readily available
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
combination is to rub a rolled-up plastic
transparency in hair or fur)
Static electricity causes objects to stick
together when they have opposite charges and
repel when they have the same charge.
Demonstration 1
Based on our table above, if we rub a balloon
in our hair, it picks up electric charge. If we
begin to pull the balloon away from our head,
it pulls some hair towards it because the hair
has given away the charge and the ballon has
received it. They are opposite in charge, so
they attract- our hair seems to pull away!
Retrieved from:
https://st.depositphotos.com/1763191/5571
4/v/450/depositphotos_557141770-stock-
illustration-science-experiment-static-
electricity-illustration.jpg
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Demonstration 2
If we charge up two balloons separately by
rubbing them in our hair, they will have the
same charge and the balloons will repel each
other!
Retrieved from:
https://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulations/ba
lloons-and-static-electricity/about
Demonstration 3
A wall is overall neutral in charge. It does not
have an excess of electric charge. If we rub a
balloon in our hair, the balloon will have
electric charge and be attracted to the wall
because of the positivity in the wall.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies:
Retrieved from:
https://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulations/ba
lloons-and-static-electricity/about
Static Electricity Simulation
If the teacher has access to a computer, they
may do a demonstration or set up a learning
center for their students using a computer
simulation of static electricity. See:
https://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulations/ba
lloons-and-static-electricity/about
Grade 3 Science
Additional Resources and Materials
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=-aNpmCSZHbk (3:46 mins)
https://www.slideshare.net/mahahussain/magnetic-and-non-magnetic-48784163
https://www.worksheetplace.com/mf_pdf/What-are-magnets.pdf
Students will listen to a story about magnetic force https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n5ChBJo4k3w (8:32 mins)
Grade 3 Science
Grade 3 Science
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher such as reading
material at a lower or higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
Objects in contact exert forces on each other. (ST 3-PS2-1)
Electric, and magnetic forces between a pair of objects do not require that the objects be in contact.
Grade 3 Science
The sizes of the forces in each situation depend on the properties of the objects and their distances apart and, for forces between two magnets, on
their orientation relative to each other. (ST 3-PS2-3),(ST 3-PS2-4)
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the
curriculum)
Art and Craft- 1. Drawing magnetic fields using magnets and iron filings, 2. Poster depicting magnetic and nonmagnetic materials. 3. Drawing the different kinds of magnets,
for example bar magnet, horse shoe magnet.
Reading and Comprehension - 1. Reading passages and answering questions based on passages. 2. Writing a short paragraph on how magnets are important to us.
Mathematics- 1. Drawing pictographs showing data collected from surveys of magnetic and nonmagnetic materials (at home, in the classroom).
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Note: This section is intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework It will be used to guide the writing but will not
appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning
outcome and associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies Developing an appreciation of the importance of magnets in our everyday lives.
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication Competencies Predicting the outcome of various experiments conducted.
Developed Well-being Competencies Working cooperatively in groups.
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies Developing gadgets using magnets.
Grade 3 Science
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Technology is about solving problems- applications of magnetism and static electricity are good examples of technological development.
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
These activities are great for child centred learning or teacher demonstrations depending on the resource base.
Grade 3 Science
Science Grade 3
Introduction to the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude
of caring not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic
study of the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from
leveraging and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it.
Strand (Topic): Forces and Interactions
Force and motion are important parts of everyday life. As students study this unit, they will learn how these physical factors impact their lives and
work. The lessons and activities will help students become aware of factors like friction, gravity, and magnetic force.
Essential Learning Outcomes: (ELO-4) Define a simple design problem that can be solved by applying scientific ideas about magnets.
[Clarification Statement: Examples of problems could include constructing a latch to keep a door shut and creating a device to keep two moving
objects from touching each other.]
Grade Level Expectations:
Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Activities illustrating the Use of Magnets Review of Magnetism
In today's session, we will do a quick
review on magnets.
Knowledge Students will work collaboratively in groups to
design a chart illustrating the uses of magnets.
• Define the terms:
o Magnet Roles will be assigned to students to ensure full
o Attract participation by all students, example: Materials
o Repel Manager is responsible for collecting the necessary
o Electromagnet materials.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Match simple gadgets to the use to
which they are put. (ST 2 TE TM 2)
● Describe the use of magnets in the
home and community, suggesting
other novel ways in which magnets
can be used. (ST 3 PS MM 3)
● Formulate problems and do research
in the development of technological
devices.(e.g. construct models and
gadgets).(ST TE.TM.1)
● Match, with relevant examples,
properties of materials which make Today we will learn about the uses of
them useful for certain specific magnets. I will distribute a worksheet (K-W-
Retrieved from:
purposes L chart) where you will:
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/3761913750992505
69/ 1. Write the topic: Uses of Magnets
2. Write in the first column what you
Skills
know about the uses of magnets.
● Suggest novel and innovative ways of 3. In the second column, what you want
using a magnet in the home. (ST 4 PS to know about the uses of magnet.
FMS 5) 4. Click on the video below and enjoy!!
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
● Design and construct a simple object
yXCeuSiTOug (3:16 mins)
using chosen materials. (ST 2 PS MM
4) 5. Click on the link below to learn
more uses of magnets.
● Given problems, be able to design and
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
construct simple gadgets. (ST 2 TE
TM 1) zg_vlW97S5A (2:19 mins)
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Attitudes/Values or PowerPoint on the uses of
magnets
● Appreciation of how magnets make
life easier https://slideplayer.com/slide/108823
26/
● Realize the critical importance of
safety in handling tools and making
or a poster depicting the uses of
gadgets. (ST 2 TE NT 3) (Safety)
magnets
● When conducting practical and group
work, display sensitivity and offer
assistance to peers who may have
physical or learning challenges.
● Participate actively in classroom
discussions.
● Share information with peers in a
collaborative manner on the nature of
technology. (ST 2 TE NT 2)
Retrieved from:
https://www.primaryresources.co.uk
6. Now fill in the last column of the K-
W-L chart and write down what you
learnt about magnets.
Retrieved from:
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/science/14
75514
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Project: Magnets can be very useful in making our
daily lives more comfortable and manageable.
Students will design a magnetic toy or game in
There are many awesome ways we can use
groups or individually.
them. Please note that magnets are hazardous
The following will be used by their peers to assess if swallowed. Do not put magnets in your
their magnetic toy or game. They will present their mouths.
toy or game to their peers and also display examples
Click on the link below to learn a few
at a school science fair or science corner in the class.
awesome ideas.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o-
Student’s Checklist for Activity Three lPZtCffpk (3:25 mins)
Magnetic screwdriver holds screw.
Magnets hold chip bag closed.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Teacher’s Checklist for Activity Three
sourced and amended from:
https://grade2explorers.weebly.com/student-
learning.html
Magnetize a pin to make a compass
ACTIVITY 1:
At times there are little errands we have to
complete but quickly forget. The fridge is a
place most people enjoy going to.
We can create awesome devices to help us
with that.
Get coloured paper, design them with
markers or crayons, staple them together or
Activity Two Assessment hold with a paperclip and attach a flat piece
of magnet to the back.
This notepad can be stuck on the fridge and
The teacher will engage students in a Spelling quiz
important notes, grocery list, home - work
and the students will record their responses on
reminders, etc., can be written on them.
paper.
The class can also engage in a Spelling competition.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/3650731
13520374893/
Design Challenge #1:
You have a pencil box which refuses to stay
shut. Devise a way to keep it closed using a
magnet. This can be done in pairs or in
groups. Students need to show an
appreciation for each other's ideas and
contribution.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://niceringvs.life/product_details/4
6872100.html
Teacher Scaffolding Suggestion 1:
Teacher places one bar magnet each inside
two match boxes. Teacher will ask students
what they think will happen if both boxes are
brought close to each other.
Teacher will then ask one student to
bring one box closely to another box.
Possible answers:
Scaffolding Suggestion 2: Show students
the magnets in everyday items that they
use: e.g.
a) Have students play with toy cars
which move. Teacher may show
students the magnets inside a motor.
b) The magnet in a large speaker.
ACTIVITY 2:
Teacher will explain that games can also use
magnets as well.
Teacher will ask students to create or make a
game that will require magnet forces to play.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Design Challenge #2
You have a friend in your class who is having
trouble remembering his/her sight words.
Devise a way to help by creating a game using
magnets. This can be done individually or in
groups.
Retrieved from:
https://funlearningforkids.com/editable-
sight-word-games/
Suggested game:
Fishing for sight words
Fish-shaped flash cards are printed on
cardstock paper with a metal staple or metal
paper clip as the eye.
Make a fishing rod using a stick, string and
magnet.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Place fish shaped flash cards in a container
and use the fishing rod to attract the fish. Pull
it up and read the word.
ACTIVITY 3
Now that you have engaged in activities
where magnets are used to create gadgets, it is
now your turn to create your own.
Your classmate and yourself will be provided
with a checklist while you are creating your
gadget. BE CREATIVE!
The teacher will also use a checklist to access
your gadget.
Here are some possibilities for students
to choose from:
• How could we use magnets to keep a
cupboard door closed?
• How could we use magnets to
prevent two toy cars from colliding?
• How could we use magnets to stick a
shower curtain to the bathtub and
prevent leaking?
• How could we use magnets to make a
a calendar or folder that would stick
to a school locker?
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Extended Design Challenge:
Electromagnets
Have you ever seen a crane that lifts metal in
a junkyard? Look at the picture here:
Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=deskt
op&v=lSmuqLtmuwg
This metal disc is called an electromagnet.
It uses electricity to create a magnet.
Something we will learn more about later.
Teacher demonstration
As you have seen before, we can make a
simple electromagnet with a nail and a
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
battery. This type of magnet is useful for
making lots of useful gadgets and tools.
Retrieved from:
https://greatbasinobservatory.org/lesson-
plans/build-electromagnet
Could you make your own crane using an
electromagnet? (see:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o918_y
f5lXo&t=9s 5:14 mins)
Grade 3 Science
Additional Resources and Materials
Powerpoint magnets including the uses of magnets
https://www.slideshare.net/pm18aug/uses-of-magnets
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Activities on the uses of magnets
https://www.whatdowedoallday.com/magnet-activities-for-kids/
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts: 1. Students can describe the steps they followed to make their gadgets.
2. Writing a short paragraph on how magnets make our lives better.
Art and Craft: 1. Students can design posters depicting the uses of magnets.
2. Students can design various games to use in the various subject areas for example, fishing for sight words.
3. Designing various gadgets to be used, example magnetic bookmarks.
Health and Family Life: Research on the uses of magnets in improving our health, example removing bits of iron in the eye, ventilators. MRI machines, Insulin pumps.
Presenting research information to classmates.
Mathematics: 1. Measuring various materials to construct different gadgets or devices.
2. Students can design magnetic games or toys depicting various mathematical concepts, for example Snakes and Ladders, Fishing game - matching numbers to
number names etc.
Social Studies: Compare how magnets were used in the past vs. how they are used today.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
Grade 3 Science
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning outcome
and associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies 1. Work cooperatively in groups discussing various problems and ideas
communicating ideas effectively, for example describing gadgets and their uses
(providing a rationale for their gadgets).
2. When conducting practical and group work, display sensitivity and offer
assistance to peers especially those who may have physical or learning
challenges.
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication Competencies Engaging in critical thinking activities to encourage students to think critically to
solve various problems
Developed Well-being Competencies Participate actively in group discussions.
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies Build/construct useful gadgets with magnets to be used in the home and in the
classroom
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Technology - Students can do research in development of technological devices, for example in the medical field MRI, insulin pumps. Research on
the various ways these gadgets or devices make people’s lives better.
TVET - Students can create devices or gadgets using magnets, example motors, pulley systems and electrical devices.
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research): design and create inspirational fridge
magnets, badge magnets
Grade 3 Science
Retrieved from https://www.pinterest.com/pin/355643701828101394/
Grade 3 Science
Grade 3 Science
Introduction to the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of
caring not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic study of
the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from leveraging
and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it
Strand (Topic): Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems
All living things grow, survive, and reproduce because they exist with other living and non-things that help provide the food and other resources that
sustain them. These are interdependent relationships. No living thing can exist without these interdependent relationships, hence the necessity to study
these complex interactions.
Essential Learning Outcomes: ELO-1: Construct an argument that some animals form groups that help members survive.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Activity 1: Students, do you prefer to play with others or by
yourself?
Answer the following questions:
Note to teacher: Remind students there is no
Knowledge 1. Which animal is a member of a
a. Herd (cow, elephant) wrong answer, everyone is unique. Right now, you
● Define the terms:
b. Flock (bird, sheep) are part of a group called your _______ (class or
o survive
c. Swarm (bee) family).
o groups (e.g. herds, nests,
d. Pride (lion)
swarm, packs, pride, troops,
e. Troop (monkey) What are some of the things that you do as a group
flocks, etc.)
2. What are TWO reasons why some
and some things you do alone?
o members
animals form groups? (for protection and
o social
food or to survive)
o solitary
3. “Animals can survive better when they
o predator and prey relationship
are alone.” Discuss the above statement
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
o structure or organization by stating ONE thing that you agree or How do you benefit from being in this group and
within a group disagree with. how do the other members of your group benefit
from you?
● Identify and name the different types
Worksheet on Why Animals Form Groups
of ecosystems in the country
Just like you, some animals prefer to be alone and
indicating their location on a map (ST
Retrieved from: therefore spend most of their lives alone. On the
3 LS ECS 4).
http://www.varsitytutors.com/3rd_grade_sc other hand, some animals prefer to live in groups.
● Identify collective nouns used to ience-help/life-science/why-animals-form- Watch the video below to learn the names of some
describe common groups of animals groups
animal groups.
such as a pride of lions, a herd of cow,
troop of monkeys, a swarm of bees,
Look out for some local animals and their group
flock of sheep or birds, etc.
Question #1: Why Animals Form Groups names as well:
Demonstrate they understand by: Why do animals form groups?
Possible Answers:
https://youtu.be/Pd4MglL97nQ?si=_p8Bf1HTfF
● Identifying types of animals (e.g.
EZNOlv (5:59 mins)
honey bees, jack Spaniard wasps, They enjoy having friends
termites, elephants, wolves, sheep, They do not form groups
Song - Animal Friends (Learn Animal Group
goats, whales, dolphins, mosquitoes, To help them survive
lizards, monkeys, lions, birds) that To do as they are told Names)
form or live in groups of varying sizes. Correct answer:
Note to teacher: The table below shows a list of
● Identifying at least one animal that To help them survive
some common animal group names.
does not live in a group. Explanation:
● Explaining how some animals are able Animals form groups to increase their chance of
to survive alone. survival. The animals work together to hunt,
raise their young, protect each other, and more.
● Showing situations when it is better to
Survival would be much more difficult if some
live in a group than as an individual.
animals lived on their own rather than in a group
● Explaining the roles of different
animals in a group. Question #2: Why Animals Form Groups
Meerkats live in large families. Some are look-
● Explaining how the different roles of
outs while others care for the young. Other
members in a group benefits the
meerkats are in charge of digging tunnels, and
group as a whole.
some are hunters. The meerkats will trade jobs
and take turns.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Giving multiple examples of animals
in groups of various sizes: 1.
Obtaining more food for each
individual animal compared to the
same type of animal looking for food
individually. 2. Displaying more
success in defending themselves than
those same animals acting alone. 3.
Making faster or better adjustments to
harmful changes in their ecosystem
than would those same animals acting
alone.
Why does living in this large family benefit the
meerkats?
Skills
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WRQfUD2
Possible Answers:
● Observe the behaviour of individuals W6Bg (4:08 mins)
in a group. The meerkats don't have to do as much work, so
they get to be lazier. Usually, the animals that live together benefit from
● Compare how an individual member
The meerkats like having company around and
each other in some way. What do you think are
of a group of animals behaves when it
other animals to play with.
is in the group and when it is some of the ways that different animals can benefit
There are more members to split up the work
separated from the group. from being in a group?
and help with survival needs.
● Infer what could happen to members There is no benefit to meerkats living in family
Note to teacher: Record students' responses on
of a group if they are separated from groups; they just do it out of habit.
the group.
the board and guide the discussion towards the
three main benefits which are protection from
● Communicate information gained Correct answer:
predators, gathering food and responding to
from observations, texts, videos etc.
There are more members to split up the work changes in the environment.
with members of your group and the
and help with survival needs.
class.
Let us now watch the following video to find out
● Predict how members of a named
about some of the ways that animals benefit from
animal group may respond to certain Explanation:
being in a group.
changes in their environment.
Living in a large family benefits the meerkats
because they can split up the work and have
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Compile data on the behaviour of members of the family working together to keep https://youtu.be/msdqmE6sRPs?feature=shar
different members of the family safe and healthy. Rather than all of the ed (3:12 mins)
identified/named groups. work falling on a few animals, it can be split up
amongst dozens. Living in large groups like this Teacher Note: A useful book that can respond to
● Analyse data on the behaviour of
help with protection, food collection, and
these questions if technology is not available:
different members of
general survival.
identified/named groups.
Kalman, Bobbie (2016). Animals That Live in
● Graph data provided/generated on the Question #3 : Why Animals Form Groups Social Groups. Crabtree Classics Publishing
behaviour of different members of Elephants live in large herds. When traveling,
identified/named groups they keep the babies in the middle of the line or As you watch the video, please gather information
center of the group.
● Interpret data provided/generated on that will help you answer the following questions.
the behaviour of different members of
identified/named groups 1. What are the different ways that animals
benefit from being in a group?
2. Are these benefits similar to the benefits
Attitudes/Values
that humans gain from being in a group?
● Show an appreciation for the work 3. Name some of the groups of animals
that scientists do in studying animal shown in the video (ants, lions, elephants,
behaviour. birds, penguins, etc.)
● Appreciate that there are solitary 4. Name at least one group that is protecting
How do these large groups help babies survive?
animals. its members? (meerkat, penguin, etc). For each
● Be persistent when studying the
group identified, how was this being done?
Possible Answers:
various groups as it can take a lot of 5. Which group is helping the members to
time. These groups do not help babies survive. gather food? (ants, birds, lions)
The group allows babies to drink more water.
● Show interest in what is happening in
These groups protect babies from predators.
the group or at the class level. The group keeps the babies from seeing the
scenery.
● Use the inquiry approach in Let’s discuss the video that we just watched:
conducting various investigations.
From the video we learnt that some animals form
Correct answer:
groups for protection. Through strength in
These groups protect babies from predators.
numbers each member of a group is protected.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Show respect for evidence in making Explanation: Large herds of elephants can be Some other animals, for example, lions and wolves
various claims about animals living in seen moving across the plains of Africa with form groups to find food. Animals which hunt
groups their babies in the middle of the group's lines as other animals for food are called predators, e.g.
they travel. If predators attack them, the babies lions, sharks, sea gulls, etc. The animals being
● Develop different ways that animals
are usually targets because they are smaller and hunted are called the prey, e.g. fish, small birds,
may be studied.
weaker. If the female elephants keep them lizards, etc.
● Design ways to model the behaviour hidden and guarded, they are protected. This
technique is to help babies survive.
of different members of a group.
Now that we know how animals benefit from living
● Work collaboratively with their group
in a group, we will now look closer at some of the
Question #4: Why Animals Form Groups
members to complete various tasks.
things that animals do with their group members
Fish are one of many animals who form groups
that help them to survive. What do you think the
for survival. They will form "bait balls" with
Stewardship/Respect for Living Things
hundreds (even thousands) of fish to scare away word survive means? To survive means to remain
predators and make it more difficult for alive.
● When observing animals, students
predators to catch them.
should make sure that the animals or
The following are videos focusing on some of
the environment are not harmed.
the benefits of being in a group. The teacher
should pose the questions before the video is
viewed such that children are prepared to
answer after the video plays.
Safety
In Video No. 1, we will find out how being in a
● While observing animals, students
group provides better protection than being alone.
should exhibit appropriate behaviour
to ensure that the animals or students
did not get hurt.
Fish form these groups to help them
_____________.
● While observing animals, students Possible Answers:
should be respectful of the animals
swim
they study.
hunt
splash
survive
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Correct answer:
● Students should be aware that some
animals can harm them. For example, survive
1. Protection
ants can bite. Explanation: Fish form these "bait balls" to
distract their predators and make it more
Video 1:
● When conducting practical and group difficult for them to be eaten. This technique is
work, students should display all about survival. Forming groups makes each Cobra Vs. Meerkat | Wild Africa | National
fish safer than if they were swimming alone.
sensitivity and offer assistance to Geographic Wild UK (5:00min)
classmates/group members who may
Timestamp 2:50 min - 4:38 min
have physical or learning challenges. Question #5: Why Animals Form Groups
How do groups help animals to survive?
Let’s discuss the video:
● Participate actively in classroom
discussions.
Possible Answers: 1. When the young Meerkat encountered the
King Cobra, it was alone.
It does not help them to survive; it makes their
lives worse.
a. What did it do?
It helps them to find food, care for young, and
protect one another.
b. What happened next?
It helps them to feel less lonely, have more fun,
and play together.
2. How are the animals in this group helping
It allows them to look cooler like they have
more friends. each other? (They worked together to fight the
snake)
Correct answer:
3. Why didn't one meerkat fight the snake
It helps them to find food, care for young, and alone? (There is strength in numbers)
protect one another.
4. The Meerkat babies were moved to a safe
place away from the snake. Why was this done?
Explanation: Living in groups provides animals
with many benefits. A large group of animals is
5. What would happen if the Meerkats were
less likely to be bothered by predators, there are
unable to chase the snake away?
more females to care for and protect the young,
and more members to look for food sources.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Working together provides them with more
opportunities for survival than living alone does.
2. Easier to Hunt for Food
Question #6: Why Animals Form Groups
Lions are animals that hunt and eat other animals.
Which answer choice(s) is a benefit of animals
The lion is called a predator and the animals it
forming groups?
hunts are called its prey. While lions do hunt alone
sometimes, they often hunt in groups, using
Possible Answers:
teamwork to catch their prey, which are sometimes
much larger than them. Let us now look at the next
All of the answer choices are correct.
Animals can assist each other with jobs and tasks video to see how this is done.
when in a group.
Animals help each other raise the babies in the
group.
Animals can help to protect each other when in
groups.
Correct answer:
All of the answer choices are correct.
How a Lion Pride Hunts Prey | Cat Attack-tics
Explanation: All of the answer choices list a
(5:00 min)
benefit to animals forming groups. When
animals form groups for survival, they can help
1. How are the lions working together as a
each other raise the young, hunt, keep watch,
team to take down the buffalo?
gather food, find shelter, and survive. Animals in
groups have more eyes looking for predators or
2. Why didn't one lion hunt alone? (There is
prey. They also have less work to do individually
strength in numbers. The buffalo is a very large and
because they can share the workload. Animals in
heavy animal. It is difficult for one lion to take it
groups often survive better than if they lived
down. A lone lion can be easily harmed by the
alone.
buffalo.)
Grade 3 Science
Question #7 : Why Animals Form Groups 3. Do you think catching the buffalo would
Monkeys live in family groups that can grow have been so easy if it was not separated from the
quite large in numbers. If monkeys lived alone,
herd? Explain your answer?
there are some tasks they could not complete.
Based on the photo below, what is a task that
4. What statement in the video tells us that
requires a group to help with?
lions are not as successful hunting alone as they are,
hunting in a group? (A lone lioness kills in only 1 in
5 attempts whereas the pride brings down its prey
in only 1 in 3 attempts.)
3. Social Interactions (e.g. Grooming and
Playing)
In some groups, some members can be seen
grooming each other, where they remove dirt,
insects, etc., from each other's body. Let us look at
the next video, to see how the monkeys are
Possible Answers:
benefitting from living in a group.
Eating
None of the answer choices require a group.
Grooming
Sleeping
Correct answer: Grooming
Explanation: Monkeys are very social and live
in large groups with extended family. Monkeys
Monkey Picking Lice From Another Monkey In
help each other groom and use it as a chance to
Love || Why Do Monkeys Eat Lice ?
spend time with each other. Without a group to
help the monkeys could not groom themselves (1:01 min)
properly. They rely on each other for help with
their survival needs.
Grade 3 Science
Question #8: Why Animals Form Groups 1. How are the monkeys helping each other?
(by removing lice from its fur)
Living in large groups puts animals at risk and
makes them less likely to survive. 2. Do you think the monkey would have been
able to remove the lice by itself? (No)
Possible Answers:
4. Making faster and better responses to
False harmful changes in their environment
True
Correct answer: False
Sometimes the environment where an animal lives
Explanation: Living in groups provides animals changes and the animal has to be able to respond to
with many benefits. A large group of animals is these changes in order to survive. Living in a group
less likely to be bothered by predators, there are helps members to respond to these changes much
more females to care for and protect the young,
more quickly than if that animal was living alone.
and more members to look for food sources.
Working together provides them with more Let us look again at the video that we looked at in
opportunities for survival than living alone does.
the beginning of this topic:
Animals often fare better when living together
than those outcasted to living alone.
Question #9 : Why Animals Form Groups
Video: Why Do Animals Form Groups
Fish are one of many animals who form groups
for survival. They will form "bait balls" with
retrieved from:
hundreds (even thousands) of fish to scare away
https://youtu.be/msdqmE6sRPs?feature=shared
predators and make it more difficult for
predators to catch them. (3:12)
In this video (0:30 to 1:01 min) we see how
penguins are able to survive the cold temperatures
by working together as a group.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Why would it be better for a fish to join the "bait
ball" rather than swim alone?
Possible Answers:
A single fish would stand out and be easier to
catch than a fish mixed in with thousands of
others.
Fish prefer to be in groups because it prevents
them from being lonely and sad.
There is no reason for a fish to join a "bait ball"
instead of swimming alone. Questions:
A fish can swim faster and longer when it is in a
group compared to being on their own. 1. What would happen to the penguins if they
were not able to huddle together to stay warm?
(They would freeze to death)
Correct answer:
A single fish would stand out and be easier to 2. Why do they rotate between being on the
catch than a fish mixed in with thousands of inside of the group and the outside of the group?
others.
(When those on the outside get very cold, they
move to the centre of the group to get warm).
Explanation: Fish form these "bait balls" to
3. What are some of the things that humans
distract their predators and make it more
do as a group to respond quickly to the changes
difficult for them to be eaten. This technique is
all about survival. Forming groups makes each that may occur when a hurricane hits their country?
fish safer than if they were swimming alone. If a (Help to clear roads, move fallen trees, repair
fish is swimming alone, it stands out and is more damaged electrical lines, repair homes, etc.)
likely to be chased and eaten. When the fish are
in a group, their chances of being singled out Sometimes, the homes of some animals may get
and eaten are decreased, and many times the damaged or totally destroyed. Living in a group
large gathering of fish scares the predators off helps the members to repair/rebuild their home
completely.
Grade 3 Science
Question #10: Why Animals Form Groups very quickly. Let us look at the next video to see a
Meerkats live in large families. Some are look- group of ants in action.
outs while others care for the young. Other
meerkats are in charge of digging tunnels, and
some are hunters. The meerkats will trade jobs
and take turns.
Rebuilding Home as a Team
Timelapse: Fire Ant Colony Rebuilding After a
Storm (2:22 min)
Anthill at 6:00 PM
What could happen to the meerkats if they
started living alone instead of in groups?
Possible Answers:
Anthill at 7:00 PM
They could die without the group to help them.
They could become very mean.
They could do all of the different jobs by
themselves.
They could get lonely and find new friends.
Correct answer
They could die without the group to help them.
Explanation: Living in a large family benefits
the meerkats because they can split up the work
and have members of the family working
together to keep the family safe and healthy.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Rather than all of the work falling on a few 1. How are the ants helping each other?
animals, it can be split up amongst dozens.
Living in large groups like this help with 2. Why are the ants working as a team?
protection, food collection, and general survival.
3. Do you think that a single ant would have
If the meerkats were forced to live alone rather
than in family groups, they might die. If they are been able to rebuild its home in such a short time?
busy gathering food or digging tunnels, they may (No, yes) Give two reasons for your answer.
not see predators. It would be hard for a
Investigating the structure within some social
meerkat to do all of the jobs by itself.
groups
Within some group of animals there is a structure
Predator/Prey Assessment
(organization of the roles of members); each member has
Observe the following pictures and identify an important role to play in ensuring the survival of
which animal is the predator and which is the
the group. If any member of the group does not
prey.
complete its role then the survival of the group is at
risk or jeopardised.
Activity: Exploring How Ants work together to
survive
In this activity, we are going to gather evidence
from various sources about ants (observing them
outside, by watching videos about them, reading
texts, etc.) to answer the question: How do ants
work together in colonies to help them survive?
Note to teacher:
Photo retrieved from:
https://www.flickr.com/photos/francesco_vero Identify several anthills on the school grounds or
nesi/7394699170 nearby field, where students will be able to observe
them safely, in small groups.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Predator: ______________________ Class we will begin by going outside to observe ants
to see what happens when we put out food for
them.
Prey: _________________________
Note to teacher:
If it is not possible to take out the entire class at the
same time, students can be taken out group by
group with the help of another teacher or a parent.
Before taking students outside, review safety rules
concerning observing ants.
Once outside, place a small amount of food near
each of the anthills. Assign a small group to each
anthill.
Students, before you begin your observations, I
want you to predict what the ants will do with the
Photo retrieved from:
food when they find it. Give one reason for your
https://www.pickpik.com/grizzly-bear- answer.
dangerous-animal-wild-life-canada-9433
Record the behaviour of the ants and any other
details that you observe. Record your observations
in the form you are provided with. You can also
Predator: ______________________
take photos and/or videos of what you observe.
We will return to the site an hour later. You will
again observe and record the ant behaviour again.
Prey: _________________________
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Note to teacher:
After all observations have been made, ask students
Photo retrieved from: to share their observations with the class and chart
https://www.flickr.com/photos/noaaphotolib/ their observations. Review these observations with
39125333685 the students.
Predator: ______________________
Students, we will now watch two videos to gather
some additional information about ants. Video:
https://youtu.be/HedZXw_hAbs?si=-
Prey: _________________________
LKpTgJnUHiXGKRU (3:14 mins) and The Social
Structure of Ant Colonies (1:20 mins)
Activity 2: Worker Ants Carrying a Leaf Together
Observe the following pictures and discuss what
is happening in each scenario:
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Photo retrieved from: After students finish watching the videos, provide
texts for students to gather any additional
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lion
information that they may need.
ess_vs_Cape_Buffalo.jpg
After students have had a chance to gather data
from multiple sources, have them review their
information and group their evidence into common
categories as shown below.
Photo Retrieved from:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lion
s_hunting_a_buffalo.jpg
Discuss the benefits of being in a group from
the perspective of the lions and the buffalo.
Activity 3:
Now that you have gathered information about ants
from different sources, you will now write a claim
Answer the following questions:
about how ants work together as a group, to help
1. Meerkats live in large groups of about 40 them survive. Back up your claim with evidence
members called gangs or mobs. Some that you have gathered or learned during class or
from any other source.
members act as look-outs, some take care
of the young, some hunt for food while
others dig tunnels.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
a. State two things that could happen to Solitary Animals
a meerkat if it started to live alone
Some animals prefer to spend most of their time
instead of in a group.
alone and only form groups when they need to
b. What do you think will happen if the reproduce. We call these animals, solitary animals.
female meerkats (mothers) or the Can you think of any solitary animals?
lookouts, did not play their role?
A good book:
Write your answer in the table below.
What if one of the above roles did not exist, what
would be the outcome?
In the blank spaces indicate what might happen
if the member identified stops playing its role.
Member Effect
Meerkat Mother
https://youtu.be/w8sX6DfFvvU?si=kT3Nnj-
RUBx4mn0M (3:34 mins)
Why do you think these animals are more often
seen alone? What are some of the advantages of
being alone? (easier to hide from predators, more food for
Photo retrieved from:
https://www.flickr.com/ the individual animal, etc.) What do you think are some
photos/tambako/530593 of the disadvantages of being alone? How does
50093/ being alone affect an animal’s ability to survive?
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Lookouts
Photo retrieved from:
https://commons.wikime
dia.org/wiki/File:Suricato
s_%28Suricata_suricatta
%29,_parque_nacional_
Makgadikgadi_Pans,_Bot
suana,_2018-07-
30,_DD_32.jpg
Activity 4:
Photo retrieved from:
https://depositphotos.com/photo/two-
young-elephants-playing-together-africa-
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
cute-animals-amboseli-park-
334780024.html
1. Elephants live in large herds. When
traveling, they keep the babies in the
centre of the group.
a. How does this help the babies to
survive?
2. Fish form "bait balls" with hundreds
(even thousands) of fish.
Photo retrieved from:
https://www.flickr.com/photos/actor212/38488
76936
a. How does this make it difficult for
predators to catch them?
b. Why would it be better for a fish
to join the "bait ball" rather than
swim alone?
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3. If monkeys lived alone, there are some
tasks they could not do for themselves.
Look at the photo and identify the task a
monkey requires a group to help it with?
Photo retrieved from:
https://www.flickr.com/photos/ekilby/154620
35441
Activity 5
Poster on a local animal living in a group
Ask each student to select an animal that lives in
groups.
Give students time to find out about the animal
they have chosen.
Ask students to use the information gathered to
prepare a poster about the animal. Have students
draw a picture of their animal group. Each poster
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
should also include at least two bullet point facts
below the drawing, explaining how these animals
live and work together to survive. Have students
submit their posters for grading.
Activity 6:
Create a digital poster or multimedia presentation
summarising their findings about specific animal’s
group behaviour.
Activity 7:
Group Assignment
Students will research and gather information
about specific animals and their group behaviour.
The gathered evidence will be used to construct
arguments about the benefits of group living for
specific animals. The arguments will be
presented to the class and they will review and
provide feedback on each other’s arguments.
Tech/Software that can be used: Websites for
animal facts and data, word processing software
for typing out arguments, digital images or
diagrams to support their arguments,
presentation software, and online collaboration
tools or shared documents.
Rubric:
Argument Content: 4
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Organisation and Structure: 4
Presentation and Clarity: 4
Supporting Visual: 4
Overall Persuasiveness: 4
Total: 20
Activity 8:
1. Write a story from the viewpoint of an ant
explaining your role in helping the colony to
survive.
2. State two ways in which the group
behaviour of ants is similar to that of humans.
3. State two ways in which the group
behaviour of ants is different to that of
humans.
Activity 9: Humans Benefit from Groups
Too!
What does this famous quote mean?
“Many hands make light work!
(Many hands make light work” emphasizes the
importance of teamwork and cooperation.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
This idiom represents how a tough, “heavy” task
can become easier, quicker, and “lighter” when
multiple people help.)
Additional Resources and Materials
Let’s look at how a honey bee colony is structured. Use the diagrams below to identify and discuss the roles and functions of the bees within their
colony.
Source: https://englishunite.com/product/short-story-the-honey-bee/ Source: https://www.mannlakeltd.com/blog/how-is-a-honey-bee-
colony-structured/
Grade 3 Science
Activity Showing how tasks can be achieved faster by a group
Assign a task (one that would be completed faster in a group than by an individual, such as drawing shapes and then cutting them out, fitting pieces of a
puzzle together, etc.) to three or four groups of students, then assign the same task to several individual students to complete alone. Allow a few minutes
for completion.
Once the time is up, ask each group to state how far they got with the task. Then ask the individual students to do the same.
Ask the groups to state what made it easier for them to complete the task. Then ask the individual students to state why they were unable to complete
the task. Also ask the individual students what they would need to complete the task.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher such as reading material at a
lower or higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
What Kind of Animals Live in groups?
Some animals such as robins and polar bears live alone. Other animals such as gorillas, bats, honey bees, deer, buffalo and lions live in groups. Animal
groups vary greatly in size and function.
Why do Animals Live in Groups?
Animals live in groups to help each other survive. Living in groups provides animals with many benefits. Animals can hunt together, protect each other
and help raise their young. Survival would be much more difficult if some animals lived on their own rather than in a group.
Animals can form groups that are big or small. For example, an African lion pride usually consists of about 13 lions, while Wildebeest can be found in
huge groups of over 1 million in Eastern Africa. In some groups such as bees and ants, the members have special jobs. This helps the group to
succeed.
Groups can help animals defend themselves.
One of the main reasons animals form groups is to defend themselves. When there are more individuals in the group, there are more eyes to look out
for danger and more animals to defend the members of the group.
Grade 3 Science
Groups can help animals gather food.
Another reason why animals form groups is to gather food. Animals such as the honeybee and the ant, gather food and take it back to the colony. This
food is shared with the other members of the colony.
Groups can help animals find mates.
When animals live together it is much easier for individuals to find mates, as they do not need to travel far to find mates. This helps them survive
because if they have to travel far to look for a mate they could get eaten.
Groups can help animals respond to changes in the environment
Living in a group helps animals defend themselves against predators in several ways. A lone animal must rely only on its own senses, but an animal in a
group, benefits by having others alert it when danger is near. An animal in a group also has a smaller chance of being picked out by a predator.
Definition of animal group behaviour
Group behaviour is what animals do with other animals to help them survive.
Examples of animal behavior in groups
· Leaf cutter ants chop leaves and carry them back to their colony.
· Migrating birds fly in a V-formation to help them conserve energy.
· Most fish swim in schools to avoid predation.
· Some animals such as penguins huddle in groups for warmth.
· Some animals such as ants work in groups to build homes.
Grade 3 Science
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the
curriculum)
English language
● Participate in collaborative conversations with group members on the topic.
● Follow steps in a procedure when carrying out observations/experiments, etc.
Mathematics
● Draw a picture graph and a bar graph to represent the data set generated/data provided. Write explanations about observations/analyses, etc.
● Use a stopwatch to time observations.
● Record number of times observations are seen/taken.
● Graph the average number of organisms that make up a group among a variety of species.
Social studies
● Identify different social groups found in their local country and determine the composition/structure of these groups.
● Determine how persons benefit from being part of the different groups named in a.
● How living in groups impacts the thoughts, feelings and actions of persons.
● How certain group dynamics (for e.g. gang culture) are being used to commit crimes or perpetrate violence on the community.
● Benefits of persons living and working in groups.
● Role of different groups in social development.
Agriculture
● Identify local agriculture groups, e.g., farmers’ groups, research groups, marketing groups.
● Determine the role of the different farmers groups identified.
● Determine the importance of different groups of workers in achieving the objectives of the agriculture sector. For example, picking
fruits on time, planting seedlings on time, weeding on time, transporting produce, etc.
Grade 3 Science
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Note: This section is intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework It will be used to guide the writing but will not
appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have:: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning
outcome and associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies Through analysing animal groups, students develop citizenship competencies
such as:
● Being active and supportive citizens.
● Understanding and respecting the roles of each citizen while also
recognizing the importance of their role as a citizen.
● Understanding the social, economic and political concepts and structures
within a group.
● Appreciating that forming groups improves the sustainability,
development and survival of an individual and the species as a whole.
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication The activities included in this section call on students to use their critical thinking
to see the animal groups, human groups and world by extension from different
Competencies
perspectives and to make ethical decisions based on their understanding and
analysis of groups.
Developed Well-being Competencies The well-being competencies developed in this curriculum are linked to survival
of species as animals form groups which provide them with protection, food,
social interactions and the support needed to make fast adjustments to
environmental changes. Analysing these factors helps students to appreciate how
humans also use groups to ensure their well-being.
eveloped Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies This curriculum develops knowledge as students explore, make observations and
learn about the various groups around them. By exploring the organizational
structures within animal groups, students learn about the management structures
in organizations and the role of its members. Having an appreciation for these
Grade 3 Science
structures can be useful for developing and managing their own businesses in the
future.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Local Culture
● Different groups involved in the development of local culture e.g. church groups, community groups and social clubs.
● The role of different groups in keeping certain aspects of our culture alive. OR
● The role of social groups in the transmission of culture in their society.
TVET
● Many activities under TVET, need different groups of persons to achieve them.
● Some machines in TVET need a group of persons to operate them.
● Factories need different groups of persons to operate them.
● Many different stakeholder groups exist in TVET.
● The different stakeholder groups in TVET each have different roles.
Technology
Information obtained from studying animal groups can be used in designing different technologies.
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Teamwork is the secret that makes common people achieve uncommon results. - Ifeanyi Enoch Onuoha
https://www.southernliving.com/culture/teamwork-quotes
Grade 3 Science
Grade 3 Science
Introduction to the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude
of caring not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic study
of the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from
leveraging and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it
Strand (Topic): Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems
All living things grow, survive, and reproduce because they exist with other living and non-things that help provide the food and other resources that
sustain them. These are interdependent relationships. No living thing can exist without these interdependent relationships, hence the necessity to study
these complex interactions.
Essential Learning Outcomes (ELO -3): Construct an argument with evidence that in a particular habitat some organisms can survive well, some
survive less well, and some cannot survive at all. [Clarification Statement: Examples of evidence could include needs and characteristics of the
organisms, and habitats involved. The organisms and their habitat make up a system in which the parts depend on each other.]
Grade Level Expectations:
Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: An Online Habitat Quiz Opening Scenario: Reviewing Habitat
Knowledge Click the link to do a short quiz on habitats: A factory in the Caribbean uses water from a
river to cool its overheating machinery. The
● Define the terms: https://www.cserc.org/sierra-fun/games/match-
water is then cycled out to the river again. The
o Adaptations habitat/
local people notice that fish and water animals
o Ecosystem
like frogs are showing up dead on the banks.
o Environmental balance
The company is adamant that they are not
o Habitat
o Interdependence polluting the river but still animals are dying.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
o Diversity Matching the Habitat Table Where an animal lives, is called its habitat.
o Abiotic When animals are displaced from their natural
o Biotic habitat this can cause problems but also
● Demonstrate that they understand that humans have a role in protecting the natural
habitats are different and that some
habitat of animals. What do you think is the
animals survive well in a particular
problem with this situation in the river?
habitat, some survive less well, and
some cannot survive at all. (proper water temperature for aquatic animals can be
very important for survival)
● Show evidence that in a particular
habitat, some organisms can survive Teacher Note: This would be a good
well, some survive less well, and some
opportunity to mention global warming and its
cannot survive at all.
potential to cause habitat problems with water
● Account for adaptations observed in temperatures worldwide.
organisms found in different habitats.
And/or
● Explain how some features of
Retrieved from Winston had a pet turtle (Mirtle) he took with
organisms enable their survival in their
habitats. (ST 2 LS ECS 5) https://www.onlineworksheetsforkids.com/api/util him everywhere. Even when he was on his
/pdfview?key=bc298938467a1ff68e5825078f94a715 bicycle, he would keep him in a tiny box in his
● Distinguish between activities that
backpack. In summer, Winston was invited for
harm and those that preserve Classroom Map of Habitats
a holiday at his cousins in California. He
habitat/the environment. (ST 2 LS
Teacher: Label each corner of the classroom with insisted to his mother that his turtle come with
ECS 6)
the name of a different habitat. him. His cousin Michael told him to pack light
● Explain, with examples, what are
clothing because he lived in a desert, and it was
endangered species. (ST 2 LS ECS 12)
Give each student the name of an organism, (one pretty warm most of the time. Winston had
● Identify and describe ways of which the student should be familiar with). Ask never been to a desert before, and he couldn’t
protecting endangered species e.g. him/her to stand in the corner of the class to show wait to ride their bicycles across the sand.
laws, change of human's attitudes to the habitat the given organism lives in. Unfortunately, on the first bike trip, Mirtle the
life and the environment. (ST 2 LS turtle mistakenly fell out of his backpack. It was
ECS 13) Note to teacher: only after an hour that Winston recognized her
● Explain how adaptations of organisms
missing. What would he do? He had to find
enable their survival in their habitats. If pictures are used instead of names, organisms that her. Was Mirtle likely to survive in the desert
the students may not be familiar with can be used. habitat long enough for Winston and Michael
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Explain how some features of Once the student has selected a habitat for his/her to find her? We are going to investigate habitats
organisms enable their survival in their organism, ask him/her to explain why his/her so that you can answer that question!
habitats. (ST 2 LS ECS 5) organism would survive in the habitat selected.
Students, let us look at the variety of habitats
● Identify, with examples, ways in which
The process may be repeated with new animals and that living things prefer and think about how
organisms in a particular habitat
important it is that their habitat be preserved.
depend on each other (feeding, shelter, plants.
protection, beauty)
Students, what can you recall about habitats?
Note: Some organisms may be able to survive in
● Identify, with examples, ways in which
multiple habitats.
plants and animals depend on each To teacher:
other (feeding, shelter, protection,
Can you match the Adaptations?
beauty) (ST 2 LS ECS 17) Write students' responses on the board.
Students, you have given some very good
● Explain to their classmates the need
responses. We will now watch the following
for environmental conservation in their
video to obtain more information about habitats
country, outlining possible scenarios if
such protection is neglected. (ST 3 LS and to see what they provide for organisms,
ECS 7) including human beings.
● Reiterate the meaning of the concept
https://youtu.be/um0hAdGcZsk (0:58
of balance in the environment. (ST 3
mins)
LS ECS 5)
● Explain that living things compete for Let us now summarize what we learnt from the
food and space in the environment and video.
describe how breaking the flow or
supply of food can have serious 1. A habitat is a place where plants and
consequences. (ST 5 LS ECS 2) animals normally live and grow.
● Explain with examples, the ways in
2. There are many different habitats.
which the structure of the land
Examples of habitats include forests,
influences the types of ecosystems. (ST
grasslands, deserts, polar regions and
3 LS ECS 3)
aquatic/water habitats.
● Identify and name the different types
of ecosystems in their country
indicating their location on the map.
(ST 3 LS ECS 4)
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Photo retrieved from: 3. A habitat provides food, air or oxygen,
https://www.k5learning.com/science- water, shelter and the space an organism
Skills
worksheets/third-grade-3/living-things/adaptations needs to survive.
● Identify organisms found within a
particular habitat. Note to Teacher: The flashcards below list
some of the habitats we saw earlier. These cards
What can you observe in this picture?
may be used, along with the video in the link
● Identify the basic needs of living
Use the photo below to answer the following below, to help students explore habitats further.
organisms in various habitats.
questions:
Video link: https://youtu.be/PyO8XbFrde4
(7:59 mins)
● Describe the characteristics of different
types of environments (e.g., soft earth,
The flashcards were prepared using the poster
trees and shrubs, seasonal flowering
found at this link below along with other
plants).
sources.
● Identify at least five different habitats https://www.flickr.com/photos/brickset/2
that exist in different ecosystems. 9860662788
Photo showing fish in a pond
Let us now explore the habitats, one by one, to
● Compare the habitats of many Retrieved from:
see the characteristics of some of these habitats
different kinds of Caribbean plants and https://www.rawpixel.com/search/fish%20pond%
and the organisms that live in them.
animals. 20koi?page=1&sort=curated&topic_group=_topics
As you observe the materials, pay close attention
1. What features (characteristics) do fish have
● Construct a model of a habitat for a to the following
that allow them to survive in a pond? (gills,
given organism. body shape, scales, tails, fins)
1. List the animals and plants you see in
2. The features that the fish have that allow
each habitat.
them to survive in the pond are called
● Describe the characteristics of
____________. (adaptations)
particular organisms that help them to 2. Describe the features of each habitat.
3. How does the pond provide the fish with
adapt to particular environments.
the things they need to survive (i.e. food,
3. Which of these habitats can be found in
air/oxygen, water, shelter and space)? (food -
your country and what are some of the
by feeding on other organisms in the pond, water-
from the pond itself, oxygen- from the water in the
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Identify the needs of named organisms pond, shelter- rocks/aquatic plants, space- from in animals that can be found in those
in a particular habitat (e.g., shelter from the pond itself) habitats?
predators, food, water).
4. What would happen to the fish if they were 4. How the particular habitat is meeting
removed from the pond and placed: the needs of these organisms.
● Identify characteristics of organisms ● on a sand dune in the desert (a dry, hot
that might affect their survival. climate) Food Chains- A Review
● on the grass in a grassland
● on the snow (the fish will not be able to Have students create a simple food chain
● Compare the needs of at least three
breathe, feed, find water, shelter or space and it within one of their country habitats.
types of organisms found in a
will eventually die)
particular habitat.
Have a class discussion about how each part of
Mix and Match Habitat Activity
that chain is important in order to maintain a
● Determine how and what features of healthy environmental balance of food and
a. What’s wrong here?
the habitat are meeting the needs of energy for each part of that food chain.
each of the organisms (i.e., the degree
to which a habitat meets the needs of Flashcards of organisms in their habitats
an organism).
in a
● Determine what features of the habitat
are meeting the needs of each of the Photos retrieved from:
organisms (i.e., the degree to which a
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Polar_B
habitat meets the needs of an
ear_Sitting_%286292639587%29.jpg
organism).
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Wadi_R
um_Dry_Desert,_Jordan.jpg
● Determine what features of the habitat
that are not meeting the needs of each Is this the polar bear’s correct habitat?
of the organisms (i.e., the degree to
which a habitat does not meet the Will the polar bear be able to survive well here?
needs of an organism).
What features/adaptations of the polar bear make it
difficult for survival in this habitat?
● Observe different habitats to
determine key features/their
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
characteristics and that of the animals
living there.
b. What’s wrong here?
● Recognize that organisms and their
habitat form an interconnected system.
in a
● Develop a clear argument about the
survival of organisms in the habitat,
Photos retrieved from:
supported by evidence.
https://www.flickr.com/photos/usfwssoutheast/58
● Make comparisons between different
40602412
organisms' abilities to survive in the
habitat.
https://beechpower.eu/2021/08/25/forestry-
contributes-to-warming-of-forest-ecosystems-
● Classify different habitats based on
during-extreme-summers-study-says/
their characteristics / Classify animals
found in different habitats based on
Is this the turtle’s correct habitat? Explain your
their characteristics/adaptations.
answer.
● Infer which habitat an organism might
Will the turtle be able to survive well here?
survive best in based on its
What features/adaptations of the turtle make it
physical/behavioral characteristics.
difficult for survival in this habitat?
● Measure different variables within a Helping Froggy the frog find its habitat.
given habitat, such as temperature, pH,
etc.
In this exercise, we are going to help Froggy the frog
find its habitat! There are four main parts of a
● Communicate information gained from habitat: food, water, shelter, and space.
observation text, videos etc. with
member of your group and the class.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Construct an argument supported by Small frogs eat insects such as flies and moths, as well
evidence about the ability of organisms as snails, slugs and worms. Water is needed for
to survive in a habitat. drinking and for laying their eggs. They use
camouflage, so that they are less visible to their
predators, such as birds and fish. They use rocks, logs
● Compile/analyse data obtained from
and tree stumps for shelter.
organisms observed in a habitat.
Four different habitats are shown below. Each
● Create and Interpret graph on data habitat has something that Froggy would need to
obtained from organisms observed in a survive. However, there may be things missing from
habitat. each habitat that Froggy would need to survive.
● Carry out simulations exercises to
demonstrate the behaviour of animals
in a habitat.
● Observe homes/habitats of different
animals, indicating how each habitat
satisfies the various needs of animals.
(ST 2 LS ECS 3)
● Infer how food webs help to maintain
nature's balance, and identify the
factors that may disrupt this balance.
(ST 3 LS ECS 2)
● Construct and label simple food chains
to depict feeding interrelationships
among animals and plants. (ST 2-LS
ECS 20)
● Construct and label simple food webs
to show feeding linkages among
animals in a given area(e.g., pond, a
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
section of the school yard) (ST 3 LS
ECS 1)
● Infer how food webs help to maintain Questions:
nature’s balance, and identify the
1. For each habitat given, state which part of
factors that may disrupt this balance.
the habitat, if any, Froggy could use to
(ST 3 LS ECS 2)
survive.
a. Desert
● Interpret simple food webs, referring
_________________________________
to the need of natures balance. (ST 4
LS ECS 1)
b. Coral Reef
__________________________________
● Investigate the characteristics of
mangroves, swamps, rainforests, pods
and explain the importance of these
habitats. (ST 4 LS ECS 2) c. Grassland
__________________________________
● Design and construct the model of a
habitat. (ST 4 LS ECS 3)
d. Rainforest
__________________________________
Attitudes/Values
2. State what things, if any, Froggy may need
● Appreciate the role that the different
that are missing from each habitat.
parts of a habitat play in the survival of
an organism.
a. Desert
_________________________________
● Develop an appreciation for the role
that adaptation to the habitat plays in
an organism’s survival. b. Coral Reef
__________________________________
● Appreciate that not all organisms can
survive well in a given habitat as not all
habitats will meet all their needs.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
c. Grassland
__________________________________
● Show persistence when conducting
studies of organisms within different
habitats.
d. Rainforest
__________________________________
● Demonstrate interest in conservation
of resources in each habitat to ensure 3. Answer the following questions.
that organisms’ needs are met.
a. Which of the four habitats do you think
Froggy the frog would survive best in?
● Use the inquiry approach in conducting
various investigations.
________________________________________
● Show respect for evidence in making b. Explain your answer.
various claims about organisms living
in habitats.
________________________________________
● Work collaboratively with their group
4. Answer the following questions.
members to complete various tasks.
a. Which habitat would be the worst for
Froggy the frog?
● Stewardship/Respect for Living
Things. When observing animals in
________________________________________
their habitats, students should make
sure that neither the animals nor their
b. Explain your answer.
habitats are harmed.
________________________________________
● Safety
o While observing organisms in c. Name two animals that would survive
their habitats, students should better in that habitat.
exhibit appropriate behaviour
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
to ensure that neither the ________________________________________ Special Features or Adaptations that allow
organisms nor themselves get Organisms to Survive in their Natural
hurt. Chip the tortoise: Adapting in the Desert Habitat
Students now that we have looked at a
o While observing organisms in
number of organisms in their habitats, we
their habitats, students should
are now going to focus on a few of them to
be respectful of the organisms
see how the animals and plants are able to
and their habitats.
survive in their habitats.
o Students should be aware that 1. Desert
some organisms can harm
them. For example, ants can We know that some deserts can be very hot
bite or plants can cause hives and dry. There isn't a lot of food or water and
etc. they can also be very sandy yet some plants and
animals are able to survive there very well.
What is it about these plants and animals that
• When conducting practical and
make it possible for them to survive well in a
group work, students should be Retrieved from: https://deserttortoise.org/wp-
desert?
sensitive about the physical or
content/uploads/Cat_1_Robinson_Jacob-
learning challenges of classmates
845x684.jpg Note to Teacher: Allow students to respond if
or group members.
they wish.
Chip the tortoise lives in the desert, which is very hot
• Participate actively in classroom
and dry. Chip has many adaptations that allow it to Let us watch the following video to learn more:
discussions and activities.
survive in the habitat.
Video link:
Chip is hungry and has set out on a journey across https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3XF42x_
the desert to find some food. 72Xs&t=56s (3:47 mins)
Questions:
Questions:
1. What adaptation will help Chip to walk
through the sand?
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
________________________________________
________________________________________
________
2. Chip has predators. On its way across the
desert, it comes into contact with one of the
predators. Photo showing camels in the desert
________________________________________ Source:
________________________________________
________ https://www.pexels.com/photo/camels-
grazing-in-desert-area-7432780/
3. What adaptation does Chip the tortoise have
1. What are some of the special features
that will help to keep it safe from the
that the camel has that allow it to
predator?
survive in the desert?
________________________________________
(Camels have soft feet that help them to walk on the
________________________________________
loose sand. They also have hair over their eyes and inside
________
their ears that protects them from getting sand in those
delicate areas. Additionally, camels have large humps
4. How will the adaptation stated above be
which they use to store fat which can be used as an
used?
energy source. This allows them to go for long periods
without food or water.)
________________________________________
________________________________________
2. Where does the camel get its water
________
from?
5. After finding some food, Chip returns to the 3. Where does it get its food from?
burrow. How does the burrow help Chip to survive
in its habitat? We also learnt from the Habitat for Kids Video
(Timestamp 1:49-1:57 min) that cactuses have
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
________________________________________ special features that allow them to survive in
________________________________________ the desert.
________
Questions:
6. After reading about Chip, you would like to
1. What special features do cactuses have
hike across the desert like Chip with a hiking team.
that allow them to survive in a desert?
What would you bring that would help you cope with
the conditions in the desert and get across safely? (Cactuses have sharp spines and needles to protect
them from animals and to reduce water loss. They are
________________________________________
also able to store water in their roots and trunks so they
________________________________________ can survive a long time without rain.)
_____
So, the camels and cactuses are able to survive
7. Chip would not be able to survive in the Arctic. well in the desert because of the special features
What two adaptations would be needed to survive that they have. We call these special features
there? adaptations. Adaptations are the physical or
behavioural features of an organism that helps
________________________________________ it to survive in its habitat.
________________________________________
Question: What are some other animals and
________
plants that live in the desert? (scorpions,
Comparing organisms in different habitats rattlesnakes, lizards, vultures, date palm trees, aloe vera
plant)
Below is a picture of three animals that live in three
different habitats. Look at each picture carefully and
use your observations along with any information Take a look at some more animal adaptations
you may know about them, to answer the questions by watching the video below:
below.
https://youtu.be/liZ5j1k-XIk (3:55min)
Examples of other adaptations that plants and
animals have to help them to survive in their
habitats include the following:
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Webbed feed - Ducks
● Thick fur - Polar bears
● Long tongue - Some frogs
● Large ears - Elephant
● Shape of leaves - Various plants
1. Polar Habitats/Snow and Ice
The last habitat we looked at, the desert, is a
very hot and dry place. Now let’s look at a very
Complete the table below by including the following: cold habitat to see what types of animals and
plants survive well there.
1. Identify each animal and the habitat it is
shown in. Watch the video below and be prepared to
2. Compare these three animals in terms of the discuss the following: A Walk in the Arctic for
following: Kids | Educational Video for Early Learners
(3:37 min)
✓ The food they eat
✓ How the animal moves
1. In your own words describe the habitat.
✓ How they obtain air/oxygen from their
2. What are some of the animals that live
habitat
in this habitat?
✓ Special adaptation each animal has to
3. Describe the characteristics that help
enable it to survive in its habitat.
these animals to adapt to this
environment.
4. What features of the habitat meet the
needs of the organisms (i.e. where do
the organisms get their shelter, food,
water, oxygen and space) and indicate
how?
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Ecosystems
Frog Polar Shark
Bear
From observing the different habitats, you
would have seen that each habitat has different
Habitat characteristics.
We can group the things found in a habitat as
Food
living things and non-living things. The living
things (plants and animals) found in a habitat are
Source of
known as the biotic components. On the other
Air/Oxyg
hand, the non-living elements like rocks, soil, air,
en
water, etc. in the habitat are referred as the
abiotic components of a habitat.
How it
moves Living things in a habitat, not only depend upon
each other for their survival, they also depend on
the non-living things found in their habitats. We
Special
say that the organisms and the other
Adaptatio
components of their habitat, make up a system
n(s)
in which the parts depend on each other. This is
called interdependence. However, in order to
survive, the living things must interact with the
non-living things. These interactions along with
Comprehension Activity: Unpacking the Complex the physical environment within which these
Interactions in Ecosystems: The Wolf Island Story organisms are found is referred to as an
ecosystem.
Have students watch the following video read-aloud
and explain how it is a story about ecosystems and Within an ecosystem, one or more habitats can
habitats. be found.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N6LsBdRnbo Let us now look at a tropical rainforest
I (6:29 mins) ecosystem in which many different habitats can
be found.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Key questions students should answer in the writing
or oral presentation:
Habitats Rainforest
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fGXYUL
1) How do each of the living things rely on each
MDpSk (1:30 min)
other?
2) How is the habitat changed for the animals?
3) How is balance re-established in the
ecosystem? A tropical rainforest has many different types
4) Can students describe an equivalent balance of plants and trees of varying heights. Starting
in their own community ecosystem with at
from the ground up these plants and trees make
lease 5 different living things?
several vertical layers in which organisms make
their habitat. In a rainforest you may also find
Teacher note: Wolf Island (2006) by Celia Godkin
soft earth, rivers and a variety of animals such
is a very good book to add to your classroom library
as frogs, snakes, birds, monkeys, sloths, jaguars
and more. The rainforest has many different
habitats.
Our Country Habitats: A Research Project
In groups of 4, students will divide a large single
piece of paper, cardboard or Bristol board into four
quadrants. Based on their research online and asking
questions of community leaders, in each quadrant
they will make bulleted lists of information which
answers the quadrant question as below:
What are the habitats in What activities in your
your country? country are a threat to
those habitats?
Photo showing a Forest
What animals are What are communities
Photo retrieved from
endangered in your doing to protect those
https://pxhere.com/en/photo/1542143
country because of habitats and the living
changing habitat? things that reside there?
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Rubric Here is a story about Timber the Monkey and
the Ecosystem in which he lives.
Evidence of research 5 marks
Factual information 5 marks
https://youtu.be/qr_U1P7XwhI?si=sY19z_zg
Clarity of poster 5 marks
auvXHqAg (1:05 mins)
Clarity of oral explanation 5 marks
Why are our local habitats important?
Student research and short presentation.
Have students choose one of the following habitats
in country and give a description of the
characteristics and explain the importance of these
habitats.
● Mangrove
● Swamp
● Rainforest
Timber the Monkey
● Pod
Photo retrieved from:
Rubric https://www.pexels.com/photo/brown-
monkey-sitting-on-tree-branch-3560352/
Evidence of research 5 marks
Factual information 5 marks
Timber the monkey lives deep in the forest
Clarity of poster 5 marks
with his family. He spends most of his time
Clarity of oral explanation 5 high in the trees eating juicy fruits and playing
with the other members in his troop. He and
marks
his family love to help each other remove lice
and other insects from their fur, those times are
the best.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Question: How is Timber’s body adapted for
life in the forest?
Watch the video below to observe a monkey:
Cool Facts About Monkeys
https://youtu.be/A6lmmAyvl3I?si=Kuh9iwni
F2mZCaIP
(2:05 mins)
Timber and his family made the forest their
home because they have adaptations which
help them to survive there. They all have long
limbs that are great for climbing trees; long tails
which they use to swing from the branches and
a fur colour that allows them to hide between
the leaves of the tree.
Question: How do you think the forest habitat
meets Timber’s needs? Do you think monkeys,
like Timber, help to meet the needs of other
organisms?
The trees in the forest offer Timber and his
family shelter, food and protection. The trees in
turn benefit from Timber’s troop when they
move from tree to tree spreading seeds which
grow to become new trees. As they move they
also spread their droppings, which provides
nutrients for the trees. Timber feels safe when
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
he’s high in the trees but on occasion he has to
leave the tree to drink water from the nearby
river. Visiting the river can be dangerous for
Timber because of the many predators that also
live on the forest floor and in the river.
Question: What other organisms would you
expect to find in Timber’s ecosystem?
Timber and his family are not the only animals
that live in the trees of the forest. There are
also iguanas, snakes, various insects, frogs and
birds but of all the creatures he has met, he
finds Boo the Sloth to be the most fascinating.
Boo the Sloth
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Photo retrieved from:
https://www.rawpixel.com/image/3305450/fr
ee-photo-image-costa-rica-animals-sloth
Question: What features make it possible for a
sloth to survive in the same habitat as a
monkey?
Watch the video below to observe a
Three Toed Sloth
https://youtu.be/OTp8W251aiQ?si=ZWQkG
SApS5QKbNoS (1:55 mins)
Like Timber the monkey, Boo has long limbs
but his limbs are tipped with giant claws which
he uses to climb the trees. His colouration
allows him to hide against the tree branches but
instead of eating the fruit of trees he prefers to
eat the leaves, twigs and buds. He also uses the
forest for food, shelter, protection and to get
his water. However, unlike the agile monkeys
that leap and swing through the trees with ease,
Boo the sloth moves extraordinarily slowly.
Timber enjoys swinging in circles around Boo.
He wants to play with Boo, but Boo is just not
interested in his monkey games.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Millie the Jaguar
Photo retrieved from:
https://stock.adobe.com/search?k=jaguar+tre
e
Millie the Jaguar is hungry, what should she eat?
She has an excellent sense of smell and vision.
Millie is built to be a superb predator and now
it's time for lunch. She stalks stealthily around
the base of a tree where she just saw a monkey
swinging. Who could that monkey be? (Timber)
Millie knows she will need to approach the tree
very quietly so that the monkey would not get
away. She uses her spotted coat to hide
between the bushes and dry leaves at the base
of the tree. She then leaps onto a tree branch
using her sharp claws and strong muscles to
climb the tree.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Question: What do you think happens next in
the story??
Activity: students work in groups or
individually to finish the story by either making
a video, drawing, audio recording or short
paragraph of the story's ending.
Question:
What would happen to the animals in this
ecosystem if their habitat is changed in a
negative way? (Less or no food, no shelter, no
protection from predators)
Can organisms survive in habitats that are
not their natural habitats?
From the videos and pictures, we have looked
at, you would have observed that the animals
that live in the different habitats have special
adaptations that allow them to survive in these
habitats.
Results from studies done on plants, and
animals in their habitats, have caused scientists
to conclude that in some habitats, some
organisms survive very well, others not as well,
while others cannot survive in them at all.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The picture below shows a polar bear in a
habitat.
Something is wrong here?
Photos retrieved from:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Pol
ar_Bear_Sitting_%286292639587%29.jpg
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Wa
di_Rum_Dry_Desert,_Jordan.jpg
1. Is this the polar bear’s natural habitat?
2. Will the polar bear be able to survive in
this habitat as well as the animals that
live there?
3. What features/adaptations of the polar
bear make it difficult for it to survive in
this habitat?
4. What adaptation would the polar bear
have to undergo for it to be able to
survive in this habitat?
5. Give reasons for your answer.
6. What about the camel, do you think it
will be able to survive in the habitat that
the polar bear lives in?
7. What is the name of the habitat which
the camel survives well in?
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
8. What is the name of the habitat that the
polar bear survives well in?
9. Compare both habitats and state two
ways they are different and two ways
they are similar.
While the polar bear may not survive in the
desert, or the camel may not survive in the
arctic region, some animals or plants may be
able to survive in other habitats, even if they
may not be able to survive as well as they
would, in their natural habitat. Let us look at a
couple of examples.
1. Alligators are reptiles that live in
freshwater habitats. They need warm,
wet environments to live in. They move
from water body to water body. They
thrive well in swampy areas. They are
however able to survive in saltwater for
short periods.
Which of the following habitats would
the alligator be able to live in but not as
well as if it was living in its natural
environment?
a. A grassland
b. A shoreline
c. A tropical rainforest
d. A desert
Explain your answer.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. A cactus thrives very well in the desert.
Which of the following habitats will it
be able to survive in but not as in the
desert?
a. A grassland
b. The arctic region
c. A tropical rainforest
d. A desert
Explain your answer.
Questions for discussion:
Discuss which of the following habitats
humans survive well in, survive less well in and
cannot survive in at all:
1. grassland
2. ocean
3. polar region
4. desert
What are some of the things humans do to
survive in harsh environments?
Exploring an ecosystem close to home
By this time in the unit, students would have
watched several videos about different habitats,
the animals and plants that live in them and how
these habitats provide their basic needs.
Note to teacher:
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
To help students learn more about adaptations,
take them to a nearby ecosystem such as a pond,
stream, park, rock pool, field, forest, etc.
Ask students to describe the ecosystem. For
example, at a stream, students might observe
that it is made up of water, rocks, mud, sticks
and dead leaves. When students are finished
describing the ecosystem, ask them to observe
and describe the organisms they observe living
in and around the ecosystem. They should be
encouraged to take pictures and videos.
Students should also be reminded not to remove
plants, rocks, animals, from the ecosystem as
they explore it.
Here are some questions that the students could
be required to answer as they explore the
ecosystem.
1. List the animals that you observed living
in the ecosystem.
2. List the plants that you observed living in
the ecosystem.
3. Select three of the plants you have seen
living in this habitat, then answer the
following questions.
a. Are the plants growing inside the
water, around the pond or are floating
on the water?
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
b. How are these plants adapted to
survive there?
c. How does the habitat meet the needs
of these plants?
4. Select three of the animals that you have
seen living in this habitat. then answer the
following questions.
a. Are the plants living inside the water
or around the pond?
b. How are these animals adapted to
survive there?
c. How does the habitat meet the needs
of these animals (What do the animals
eat? How do the animals get air?
Where do they hide from predators,
etc.
Habitat Game
See simulation of habitats here:
https://ssec.si.edu/habitats
Additional Resources and Materials
Grade 3 Science
Source: https://www.flickr.com/photos/opalsson/8620948317 Source: Clyornique Durrant
Grade 3 Science
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Wolf Island book. See: https://www.amazon.ca/Wolf-Island-Celia-
Godkin/dp/1554550084/ref=sr_1_2?crid=2MH4D047MJ9NG&keywords=wolf+island+book&qid=1703201422&sprefix=wolf+isalnd%2Caps%2C
90&sr=8-2
Habitat simulation: https://ssec.si.edu/habitats
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts: new vocabulary, story (stealthily, ecosystem, adaptation, interdependence)
Grade 3 Science
Mathematics: Data collection
Social Studies: Environment, Home/Shelter, Disaster, Protecting habitats
Technology: Habitat simulation: https://ssec.si.edu/habitats
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning outcome
and associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies This curriculum includes competencies such as:
Respect for the environment
Interdependency
Unity
Family cohesion
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication Competencies Conduct studies on habitats
Report the findings of these studies honestly.
Use data to develop policy.
Developed Well-being Competencies Some habitats are used by persons for recreational, educational and spiritual
benefits
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies Businesses that involve the removal of species from their habitat may cause
species to become extinct.
Understand the effects that certain trends may have on species and their habitats.
Grade 3 Science
Elements from Local Culture:
Some habitats are of cultural importance to certain groups.
Certain species are of national significance (national birds, national plants, species used as national foods).
Technology:
Use of technology in studying and protecting habitats.
TVET:
Use of some equipment can affect the habitats of some species (loud sounding equipment, industrial machinery, water use)
Environment that are integrated:
Hunting Season, local forests, natural disasters and their effect on local habitats, rainy and dry season effects on habitats, endangered
species (St. Vincent Parrot: Amazona Guildingii), other local animals (agouti, tattoo)
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Prickly Pear (Locally called: Prickly pay)
Grade 3 Science
Grade 3 Science
Introduction to the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude
of caring not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic
study of the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from
leveraging and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it
Strand (Topic): Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems
All living things grow, survive, and reproduce because they exist with other living and non-things that help provide the food and other resources that
sustain them. These are interdependent relationships. No living thing can exist without these interdependent relationships, hence the necessity to
study these complex interactions.
Essential Learning Outcomes: (ELO-4): Make a claim about the merit of a solution to a problem caused when the environment changes and the
types of plants and animals that live there may change. [Clarification Statement: Examples of environmental changes could include changes in land
characteristics, water distribution, temperature, food, and other organisms.] [Assessment Boundary: Assessment is limited to a single environmental
change. Assessment does not include the greenhouse effect or climate change.]
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to:
1. What is an environment? What is Environmental Change?
Knowledge
2. What do the following terms mean?
Define the terms: a. environment
In our last set of lessons, we looked at
b. environmental change different habitats, the organisms that live in
➢ environment c. environmental destruction them and how these habitats meet the needs
➢ environmental change d. pollution and pollutants of these organisms.
➢ environmental destruction e. conservation and preservation
➢ pollution and pollutants f. endangered species
Each habitat had a different set of features and
➢ conservation and preservation g. extinct species
a different set of organisms living in them. The
h. ecosystem restoration
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
➢ endangered species and extinct i. habitat fragmentation conditions and features of the habitat in which
species an organism lives is called the environment.
➢ ecosystem restoration Activity on Environmental Changes
➢ habitat fragmentation The environment can however undergo
Note to Teacher: The assessment is limited to a
changes or disturbances, we call these changes
single environmental change. Select any ONE of the
environmental changes. Let us now watch a
● Demonstrate they understand that
following changes shown in the photo bank below:
changes in the environment affect the video to learn more about environmental
organisms that live in that changes:
Take a look at the before and after pictures of
environment.
environmental change shown below and identify:
https://youtu.be/94cA_JLDcFk?si=Rly-
Tv2xvcOFjTtq (7:03 min)
● Compare the effects of a habitat 1. What change(s) occurred?
change on two different groups of 2. What may have caused the change(s)?
As you watch look out for the following:
organisms in the same habitat. 3. For the change state if it was caused by
humans, animals or a natural disaster? Questions:
4. How does the change affect the plants,
● Account for changes that are
observed in an ecosystem/habitat. animals and the nonliving parts of the ● What is an environment? (Certain
environment? conditions in which plants, animals and
humans live)
● Explain the importance of
● What are some examples of
environmental conservation in their
environmental change?
country.
Below is a photo bank of before and after environmental
(weather conditions, landform changes,
changes for use in the assessment.
human development of land and waterways,
● Distinguish between the terms
access to food and shelter)
endangered and extinct.
● What can cause environmental
change? (humans, animals and [natural
● Explain how loss of habitat results in
events])
the endangerment or extinction of
species.
From the video, you would have seen that
environmental changes can occur slowly or
● Investigate the factors that cause and Before and After Urban Development very rapidly. You would also have observed
prevent environmental destruction.
that these changes can be caused by nature
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.flickr.com/photos/noaaphotolib/527 (natural events) the actions of humans and
8037228 animals.
● Identify organisms that are deemed to
be endangered in the OECS region.
https://picryl.com/media/grenada-caribbean- Teacher Note: If you don’t have access to
island-nature-landscapes-f0b7b4 technology, pose the following questions
● Identify ways of conserving the
about these two captures from the video.
environment.
● Identify local ecosystems in need of
conservation or restoration.
● Identify some ways in which
environmental destruction may be
prevented.
What happens to living things when the
● Identify solutions to specific problems Before and After Deforestation
desert gets too much rain or the rainforest
caused when an ecosystem/habitat
gets too little rain ? (this poses a change to the
has undergone change. https://libreshot.com/forest-background/
environment which will affect plants and animals)
https://www.flickr.com/photos/noaaphotolib/527
● Describe ways in which plants A closer look at environmental changes
8037228
respond to changes in their caused by natural events
environment.
Note to teacher:
● Describe ways in which animals
If your country has undergone changes and
respond to changes in their
there are students in the class who may have
environment.
experienced these changes or seen the result of
these changes, this could be used to initiate a
● Identify some ways in which an
discussion on environmental events and their
ecosystem can change.
effects on the environment. The discussion
Before and after a Drought
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
● List factors that can bring about https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Small_m can then be expanded to include other natural
changes to ecosystems. ountain_stream_-_panoramio.jpg events.
https://www.publicdomainpictures.net/en/view- Teacher:
● Describe an ecosystem before changes
image.php?image=137909&picture=folsom-lake-
occurred in it.
Students you would have studied some natural
drought-87
events in the previous grade. Some of these
● Describe changes that have occurred Activity: were shown in the video, can you list them?
in an environment. Do you know of other natural events? List
Let’s go for a walk around the community. See if you
students’ responses on the board.
identify changes in the environment that may have
● Describe the problems caused for the
been caused by human actions or natural events. Use Videos or pictures can be used to help
organisms living in this area.
your device (if possible) to take a photo or video of students describe what happens with each
that change. natural event.
● Assess the effects of the solution on
the plants and animals within the For each environmental problem observed, state For example, a volcanic eruption releases ash,
environment.
how natural events or the actions of man may have lava and hot gases, while a hurricane brings
changed organisms and the physical environment. with it a lot of rain and wind and could cause
● Document the resulting changes to Present your findings to the class orally and or via a flooding.
plants and animals living within the slideshow.
changed environment, after the After students have gone through each
solution has been implemented. Answer the following questions: natural event, they could then discuss possible
effects that each natural event could have on
1. List five natural events that would bring
the environment and on organisms.
● Give examples of organisms that have
about physical changes to the environment.
become extinct due to change in their
Teacher:
habitat.
2. List two factors that would bring about
changes in temperature to the environment. Let us look at some of the environmental
● Evaluate the solution to determine changes that each natural event could have on
how the solution reduced the impact 3. List three activities of humans that would different habitats and the organisms living in
of the problem created by the bring about changes in the availability of the
them.
environmental change in the system. following resources in a habitat.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Determine how changes to one part a. Water
Activity
of the system due to the solution,
b. Food
affects the other parts of the system.
c. Shelter I will now assign one of the natural events and
a habitat to each group. Working in your
4. State what would happen if the following
● Explain how environmental
group, discuss the effects that you think the
actions were carried out.
destruction can lead to changes in the
natural event you have been assigned will have
diversity and number of organisms
a. The application of a pesticide to a stream.
on the habitat you and the organisms living in
living in a habitat. Determine how the
solution affects plants and animals. b. Garbage was dumped into the sea. it.
c. Water was removed from a stream.
At the end of your discussion, you will make a
● Identify different ways that organisms 5. How might the building of a highway or a bridge five-minute presentation to the class.
are adapting to changes in their
affect the environment in which it is built and the
habitats.
organisms that live there? Environmental changes caused by the
actions of humans
Look at the picture below then answer the following
● Identify some natural events that
questions: While natural events can cause a significant
cause change in an ecosystem.
amount of damage to the environment,
humans also cause damage to the environment
● Identify some actions or activities of
in many different ways. As a matter of fact,
humans that negatively impact the
humans impact the environment more than
environment.
any other species. Can you think of the ways
that humans change the environment?
● Describe how pollutants affect
people’s activities and health. (ST 2 Watch the following video to introduce the
ESS ER 8)
concept:
https://youtu.be/mhtB7nJKugU?si=kBM20r
● Explain with examples what are
T00GGB-C5S (1:16 min)
endangered species. (ST 2 LS ECS 12)
Photo retrieved from:
deforestation, clearing of lands, draining of swamps,
https://www.pexels.com/photo/forest-on-fire-
● Identify and discuss ways in which release of industrial waste, fires, introduction of
51951/
water may be polluted and ways in
certain species, overfishing, overhunting, water
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
which it may be conserved. (ST 2 LS pollution, improper disposal of garbage, air pollution,
1. What is happening in the picture?
ECS 21) introduction of diseases, mining and the use of
2. What effects could this have on the pesticides, insecticides, and fertilizers.
organisms living there?
● Explain to their classmates the need
Teacher Note: If you don’t have access to
for environmental conservation in
3. Think about what would happen if your city technology, show the students the following
their country outlining possible
experienced what is being shown in the
scenarios if such protection is pictures (from the video) and ask them to
picture
neglected. (ST 3 LS ECS 7) identify how this human change may affect
living things in the environment.
4. Where would you go?
● Define the term environmental
destruction and investigate the factors 5. State three ways you would be affected.
that cause and prevent this
destruction. (ST 2 LS ECS 24)
Creating a class mural
The mural should include animals and plants from
Skills
different habitats.
● Observe and record the effect of
Once the mural has been completed and displayed,
changes upon the living organisms
follow up with a discussion about possible negative
and nonliving things in a small–scale
environment. impacts on the animal’s habitats. What are the
possible environmental changes that could occur due
to littering, pollution, habitat loss, droughts, or
● Distinguish between actions that harm
wildfire? What new adaptations would the animals
a habitat/the environment from those
need to have in order to survive these changes?
that preserve it.
Discuss:
● Demonstrate how one would care for
a habitat/environment. 1. How do national parks help?
2. What human behaviors would help the
environment?
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Predict how a specific environmental 3. “What can you do to protect habitats where
change might affect the survival of a you live?
plant or animal species.
Choose one of the following habitats state a
change or disturbance that this habitat may
● Describe the role of conservation
undergo (from natural events)
methods in maintaining balance in the
environment.
● Examine an ecosystem that has
Let us look again at the first video which
experienced change.
shows some of the impacts of the actions of
humans on the environment. See if you can
● Compare and contrast an
identify them.
ecosystem/habitat before and after it
has experienced a single disturbance.
https://youtu.be/94cA_JLDcFk?si=Rly-
Explain how one of the animals living in that Tv2xvcOFjTtq (Timestamp- 3:10 min to end)
habitat could be affected.
● Compare an ecosystem that has
undergone change before and after a Some of the actions of man that could
________________________________________
solution has been implemented. cause negative changes to the
________________________________________
environment
________
● Infer the changes that can occur to a
habitat due to an action on a habitat. These include:
A major part of the food source found in the
habitat has died off. Your animal could either
● Loss of habitat due to cutting down of
● Classify changes within an ecosystem find a new source of food to eat or move to a
trees, mining, clearing of land for
based on the factors that caused them. new location to find food. Which of these
agriculture, roads, etc.
solutions do you think will be the better
● Habitats become fragmented (broken
solution? Why?
● Take different measurements within up into smaller units) by building
an ecosystem that has undergone
________________________________________ roads, installing power lines, or even
changes before and after the solution
________________________________________ changing the course of rivers or other
was implemented.
________________ waterways. This is known as habitat
fragmentation.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Hypothesize how an ecosystem will Complete the following table to show two ● Contamination of water bodies due to
respond to a solution. effects that the change stated, would have on dumping of garbage, release of factory
the organisms in the area. waste, fertilisers, volcanic ash, etc.
● Air pollution due to gases, dust, soil
● Communicate findings from
investigations to the class, group particles, etc. released into the air.
Change Two effects
members and in the form of reports.
Pollution is the introduction of
harmful materials (pollutants) into
A company clears a
● Communicate effectively about
the environment.
large swamp to build
environmental issues and their
a new playing field.
solutions.
● Soil erosion
● Destruction of coastal areas, coral
A beaver builds a dam
● Develop a proposed plan of action for reefs, etc.
the rehabilitation of a damaged across a stream, ● Drying up of streams and rivers
habitat. causing a pond to
● Loss of some species due to
form in an area that
overfishing, overhunting, migration,
used to be dry land.
● Compile data obtained on a etc
habitat/ecosystem that has ● Introduction of invasive species (new
experienced a disturbance. A highway is built in and harmful species)
the middle of a forest.
● Interpret data obtained from the
Activity on Environmental Change
monitoring of a habitat to determine
A logging company
the effectiveness of a solution. Now that you have looked at natural events
only plants one tree
and the actions of humans that can bring
for every five trees it
about changes to the environment. Take a
● Graph results obtained from cuts down.
look at some pictures of environmental
investigating damage caused to a
named habitat. changes below and discuss:
A fisherman throws
pesticide in the river. 1. What change(s) occurred in each
● Distinguish between the causes of air
picture shown?
pollution and water pollution.
2. What may have caused the change(s)
observed?
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Infer how food webs help to maintain 3. For each change, state if it was caused
nature's balance and identify the Divers stand on a by humans, animals or a natural event?
factors that may disrupt this balance. coral reef.
4. How does the change affect the plants,
(ST 3 LS ECS 2)
animals, and the nonliving parts of the
environment?
Attitudes/Values 5. Which environmental change, if any,
Not all human activities are bad for the have you observed happening where
● Appreciate the fragile nature of
environment.
you live?
ecosystems.
What are some ways that humans help their
environment?
● Appreciate the importance of caring
for plants, animals and their What can humans do to reduce their impact on
environment.
other organisms?
● Recognize the role that humans play
in protecting or destroying
ecosystems.
Assessment Activity
Source: https://stocksnap.io/photo/forest-
For each of the environmental changes below
● Appreciate that the environment aerial-OLWVFFBJSX
indicate if the solution being proposed is a merited
needs to be protected.
(an appropriate) solution and explain why. Source:
Https://www.flicker.com/photo/33037982
● Show persistence in conducting
@ N04/12125 202096
investigations done on habitat
Note: A merited solution will solve the problem
destruction and restoration.
without creating new problems.
● Display interest about what is being
done to protect and maintain different
ecosystems in their country.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Use the inquiry approach in their Source: https://stocksnap.io/photo/forest-
Environmental Proposed Solution
investigation of different habitats. aerial-OLWVFFBJSX
Change
Source:
● Display respect for evidence generated
https://www.publicdomainpictures.net/en/v
from investigations done on habitat
iew-
destruction and restoration.
● Use their inventiveness in the
development of a plan for the
Deforestation
restoration and monitoring of a Planting new trees
habitat that has experienced change.
● Work collaboratively to propose a
course of action to protect the habitat
within a local ecosystem.
● Follow different safety rules which Sources:
were developed to protect themselves https://www.needpix.com/photo/956525/v
and other organisms in their Termite nesting in a
olcano-costa-rica-clouds-blue-sky-mountain-
exploration/investigation of different tree
landscape-nature-arenal-sky
habitats. Kill the Termites
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:S
● When carrying out their olidified_Lava_Flow.jpg
investigations, especially those done
outdoors, extend a helping hand to
persons who may have certain
physical or learning challenges.
● Participate actively in classroom Littering in a local park Put up a “No Littering”
discussions on different aspects about Sign
habitat destruction and restoration.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Photos retrieved from:
https://www.publicdomainpictures.net/en/view-
image.php?image=296125&picture=deforestation
https://www.flickr.com/photos/cifor/5220871057
3
https://www.flickr.com/photos/noaaimages/20694
485941 Source:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:G
https://www.crisis- eloi_Wetland,_2020_vs_2022.jpg
response.com/Articles/668392/Biosurfactants_can
_offer.aspx
https://www.wallpaperflare.com/termitiera-safari-
tanzania-karater-ngorongoro-africa-termites-
wallpaper-ggwxi
Source:
https://www.flicker.com/photos/guldem/21
953611961
https://www.wallpaperflare.com/termitiera-
safari-tanzania-karater-ngorongoro-africa-
termites-wallpaper-ggwxi
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Source:
https://www.pexels.com/photo/tropical-
beach-on-sea-shore-16652213/
Source:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:S
argassum_weed_inside_Cobblers_Reef.JPG
As you can see from the situations above
some environmental changes may affect
the environment in a negative way which may
lead to further changes to animals, plants and
other features of the environment. For
example, animals or plants may die or lose
their homes and the nonliving structures of
the environment may be destroyed or
damaged.
Environmental changes may include changes
to the land characteristics, water distribution,
temperature, light, food and the number and
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
diversity of the organisms living in these
environments.
How organisms are responding to
changes in the environment
Animals can react to change in their habitats
in only three ways: They can move, adapt or
die.
How animals are responding to changes to
ecosystems
Some animals are moving to higher ground
with cooler temperatures to avoid the heat.
● Some animals, however, seem to be
adapting to changing conditions.
● Some migratory animals are delaying
their migration time
● As spring arrives earlier, some insects
are emerging earlier.
● Some migrating birds are laying their
eggs earlier to match insect availability
so their young will have food.
● Some species such as corals are
adapting to the warmer temperatures.
● Some animals are waking from
hibernation sooner.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
How plants are responding to changes to
ecosystems
Unlike animals, plants cannot move. When
the conditions around them change, they
cannot head elsewhere to find better
conditions; plants have to adapt on the spot
to survive or die. These are some of the ways
that plants are adapting to environmental
changes.
● Increasing temperatures and drought
have brought about earlier bloom
times.
● Growing in areas that they normally
do not grow.
● Having a shorter life span.
● Growing towards light or water.
Activity:
Choose two of the different ways that
animals are adapting to changes in the
environment and state how these are helping
the animal or plant to survive in the changed
environment.
New species are moving into the
damaged area
While some animals are moving to new
locations or some are dying, in some cases,
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
new species are moving into the damaged
environments. These species are better
adapted to living under these conditions.
They are sometimes referred to as pioneer
species. How is this a good thing? How
would these new species help the species that
are there?
How are changes in the environment
leading to animals and plants becoming
endangered or extinct
If animals or plants cannot adapt to any of
these changes in the environment, extinction
(the loss of an entire group of organisms) of
that type of animal or plant can occur. Once
a species is extinct, it can never be brought
back.
Over the years, several animals and plants
have gone extinct. This is mainly due to
habitat loss, diseases, overhunting,
overfishing, overharvesting, pollution, etc.
some species have become endangered or
extinct.
What are endangered species?
Endangered species are living organisms
whose population sizes have declined to
critical levels, putting them at risk of
extinction. These species are categorised as
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
endangered when their populations have
decreased to such a degree that they are likely
to disappear entirely from their natural
habitats if appropriate conservation measures
are not implemented.
Examples of some organisms that have
become extinct include:
● The Caribbean Monk Seal
● Japanese Sea Lion
● Baiji
● Rivero's barn owl
Activity:
Procedures
1. Hide the beads around the room
while the students are outside.
2. When they return to the classroom,
ask them to hunt for the beads on
three different occasions.
3. After each hunt, ask students to
count how many beads they found.
4. Discuss the number of beads found
each time they looked for beads. They
should realise that each time the
beads were harder to find and there
were fewer of them. The same is true
with some of the animals on the
earth. There are fewer and they are
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
more difficult to find – that is why
they are called endangered animals.
5. Make a list of endangered animals.
Why are they in danger?
6. Go to the library and find more
information on endangered animals in
your country or in the OECS region.
Here are a few examples of organisms in the
OECS that are endangered
Photos retrieved from:
https://www.flickr.com/photos/46679531@
N02/4441098331
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.flickr.com/photos/75380256@
N06/6925165314
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:R
amphocinclus_brachyurus.jpg
A video showing the St. Lucia Racer Snake
https://youtu.be/VKviFhO77gU?si=ZwcjM
1KGX_k4p2Sg (3:35 min)
Endangered Species Puppet Show
Let the children make puppets of their
favourite endangered animals. Put on a
puppet show. Ask the children why their
animals are endangered and what people can
do to save them.
There is hope
From the videos and pictures you have seen
that there is environmental destruction (i.e.
damage to the environment) everywhere and
that more and more environments are being
destroyed and several species are either
endangered or extinct. However, all is not lost.
Many organizations and individuals in your
country and around the world (including
students like you) are working very hard to
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
protect the environment, reduce habitat
destruction and the impact it can have on
organisms. So, what are some of the ways that
this is being done?
Conservation and preservation
Conservation describes efforts by individuals,
communities, corporations, governments,
and other groups to conserve the natural
environment. With environmental
conservation we are trying to use natural
resources in the best possible way.
Preservation includes protecting the natural
environment from being disturbed in the first
place. It is the protection of natural areas
from human activities.
Conservation and preservation efforts
include:
● Protecting habitats especially nesting
and denning areas, and wildlife
habitats.
● Setting up man-made homes for
different animals.
● Limiting and modifying agricultural
activities.
● Encouraging individuals to care for
any wildlife in their area.
● The passing of laws and legislation.
● Monitoring of species/habitats.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Encouraging individuals to get
involved in conservation efforts, for
example turtle watching, beach clean-
ups, tree planting, etc.
● Restoring habitats to increase local
biodiversity and species population.
● Development of environmental
educational resources to increase
awareness.
● Finding and rescuing animals on the
brink of extinction.
Note to teacher:
To help students understand the conservation
and preservation efforts taking place in their
country, the region and the world over,
personnel from the Ministry or department
responsible for the environment, or persons
from environmental groups can be invited to
the classroom to talk with student on these
issues
Following the session, students can be asked
to find out about the following and to submit
a report in whatever format they please.
Examples should not include those given by
the presenter.
1. Two examples of disturbed areas in your
country.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
2. Examples of protected areas.
3. Two laws in your country developed to
protect habitats from negative
environmental changes.
4. Two things that are being done to protect
species and habitats in the world.
A closer look at Ecosystem Restoration
Can we repair some of the damage humans
have done to habitats and the organisms living
in them? Yes, ecosystems can recover from
destruction. Ecosystem restoration (i.e.
ecosystem repair) seeks to do just that by
repairing disturbed ecosystems through
human intervention.
Ecosystem restoration accelerates the
recovery of an ecosystem that has been
disturbed.
Watch the following video on Ecosystem
Restoration to learn more. As you watch look
for some of the things that can be done to
restore ecosystems:
https://youtu.be/JYNpHEVCVb4?si=Z116
eHE53Ev4Gg7F (1:32 min)
Can you think of any ecosystem restoration
projects that may be happening in your
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
community? Or are there any projects that you
think need to be done to restore any part of a
damaged ecosystem in your community?
Let us now look at an example of a restoration
project carried out by students
To help us to understand how a simple
restoration project can be carried out, we will
now look at a project that was undertaken by
some primary school students just like you.
Note to teacher: Consider having a group of
students roleplay how the project was
conducted.
Students attending a primary school located
near to a park which had a stream running
through it, noticed that the park was not being
used by the residents and that there was a lot
of garbage dumped in the stream. It was a very
nice park and the students and their teachers
felt that something should be done to restore
it to its former state and to stop the dumping
of garbage in the area.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Picture showing the garbage dumped
in the park’s stream
Photo retrieved from:
https://www.americanrivers.org/2022/10/te
aming-up-to-take-care-of-urban-streams/
After conducting a biodiversity study of the
plants and animals found in the area, the
students analyzed their data to determine what
can be done to restore the stream to its former
state.
They then wrote letters to several
environmental groups in the area and shared
their findings. Following this, they carried out
a survey in the local community, produced a
brochure which they distributed to the
residents.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
With the help of their teacher, the students
used mathematics to work out what it would
cost to purchase the resources they needed to
restore the area.
They then prepared presentations so that they
could speak to the different environmental
groups and to the residents. This helped them
to attract some funding, which was used to
restore the area. Some of the residents also
volunteered to help. After the area was
restored, the students continued to monitor
the area.
Suggested questions for discussion:
1. What are some of the effects that the
garbage dumped in the stream could
have on the plants and animals living
there?
2. Why do you think it was important
for the students to involve the
residents of the areas in their plans?
3. Why do you think it was important
for the students to share their
findings with environmental groups
in the area?
4. What are some of the organisms that
could be found in the stream and
other areas of the park?
5. What are some of the reasons why a
person may be dumping garbage in
the stream?
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
6. What are some of the things that the
students and members of the
environmental groups can do to
ensure that the restored park does not
return to the state it was in?
7. When students go to the areas to
monitor it, what are some of the
things they would be looking for to
see if their solution is working?
8. What is some of the information they
should include in their brochure?
Developing a plan to help to restore an area
that has experienced an environmental
change
Activity:
Divide the class into groups of three to four
students, give each group pictures or a video
on their tablet of an area that has experienced
an environmental change. Working in their
groups, students will then develop a plan on
how to make positive changes to the area.
They should consider the following:
● The people who may use the area and
think about how they might use it.
● The other living things that may use
the area when planning.
Draw a plan of how you would change the
area for the better.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
Each group would then be asked to present
their proposed plan of action.
Members of environmental groups in the area
can be invited to listen to the presentations
and to give feedback to the students.
Assessment of a site that has undergone
an environmental change on which a
solution for the restoration of the said site
has been implemented
The goal of habitat restoration is to try to
return a particular habitat or ecosystem to
conditions as close as possible to what it was
before it experienced an environmental
disturbance.
Before the restoration project can be carried
out, one has to determine what damage has
been done and what needs to be done to
restore the area. After this, one has to draft a
plan of action for a possible solution for the
restoration which must include how the
success of the solution is to be determined.
Note to teacher:
For this activity, students can be taken on a
field trip to a site which has sustained an
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
environmental change and to which a solution
has been implemented, to help to reduce the
impact of the change.
If this is not possible a report (preferable a
video report) on a similar site can be looked at
and discussed. Pictures of the site before and
after the solution was implemented could also
be compared and discussed. Additional
information can be had from various
ministries and organizations that may be
involved in the implementation of the
solution.
Before students begin the assessment,
information on the characteristics of the
habitat/ecosystem and the plants and animals
which lived in the habitat/ecosystem before
the given environmental change occurred,
should be provided to students where
possible.
From information obtained from direct
observation, through videos, research, books,
pictures, etc., students could be asked to do
the following:
1. Describe the characteristics of the
environment at the moment.
2. Identify the changes in the
environment.
3. Describe what problem the change in
the given environment caused for the
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies: Inclusive Learning Strategies
plants and animals that were living
there, and soluttions introduced to
deal with the problem.
4. Identify and describe the effect of the
solution on the plants and animals
within the environment.
5. Identify and describe the resulting
changes to plants and animals living
within that changed environment,
after the solution has been
implemented.
6. How well did the solution help to
reduce the impact of the problem
created by the environmental change
in the system?
7. How did the changes the solution
made to one part of the environment,
affect the other parts of the system?
8. What is your conclusion on the
solution to the problem? Do you
think that it was effective? Give
reasons to support your answer.
Additional Resources and Materials
Books
• Wild Animal Groups: https://www.booksource.com/products/wild-animal-groups__9780744075502.aspx
• What’s Your Habitat (2020) by Sarah Leidhold
• The Amazon Rainforest: One of Earth’s Largest Natural Resources (2019) Baby Professor Publishing
• Can You Protect the Coral Reefs?: An Interactive Eco Adventure (2021) by Michael Burgan
Grade 3 Science
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Changes habitats/ecosystems
Many changes can occur within habitats and ecosystems. These changes are referred to as environmental changes.
An environmental change is a change or disturbance of the environment caused by natural events, human influences or by animals. Examples of
environmental changes could include changes in land characteristics, water distribution, temperature, food and the composition of organisms in the
ecosystem.
Natural events: that can cause changes to the environment
There are several natural events that can cause changes to a habitat or ecosystem. These include: Earthquakes, Hurricane/storm, Volcanic eruptions,
Droughts, Wildfires, Dust storms, Landslides and Diseases.
Actions of human beings that can cause changes to the environment
There are many actions of humans that cause changes in the environment that may hurt organisms living in these environments..
○ Removal of water from rivers, ponds, etc.
○ Introduction of diseases.
○ Introduction of invasive species to certain ecosystems.
○ Bad agricultural practices leading to soil erosion.
○ Deforestation (cutting down of trees) and setting of fires.
○ Overgrazing, illegal hunting and overfishing.
○ Draining of wetlands such as swamps.
○ Water pollution due to the release of industrial waste, use of pesticides and insecticides etc., the improper disposal of garbage, etc.
○ Air pollution due to the burning of fuels, dust from construction sites, soil erosion, etc.
How the actions of man and natural events change the environment
Changes to habitats/ecosystems can have serious effects on the organisms living there and the natural environment. These include:
○ Changes in the physical characteristics of the ecosystem.
○ Changes in light intensity.
○ Changes in water availability/redistribution of water sources.
○ Increase/decrease in food or nutrients.
Grade 3 Science
○ Reduction in the space that organisms need to grow and develop.
○ Changes to the diversity and number of organisms living in a habitat.
○ Loss of animal homes e.g., bird nests, ant hills, etc.
How humans are being affected by some of these environmental changes
Like animals, human beings are also affected by changes to the environment. These are just a few ways that human being are being affected:
○ Loss of homes due to fires, volcanic eruptions, floods, earthquakes, etc.
○ Loss of agricultural crops due to drought and plant diseases.
○ Persons suffering from respiratory diseases such as asthma due to air pollution.
○ Persons suffering from skin diseases due to water pollution.
○ Reduced access to clean drinking water due to drought, water contamination, etc.
○ Reduced access to certain plant resources which are used as medicines, to make homes.
○ Loss of land due to landslides.
How animals and plants are responding to these changes
When the environment changes organisms living there react in three different ways: they move to new locations, adapt to the changes or they die.
How animals are responding to these changes
Many animals are moving to higher elevations and latitudes to escape warming temperatures.
Some animals, however, seem to be adapting to changing conditions. Some examples of this are as follows:
● Some animals are delaying their migration time because warmer than normal temperatures fail to cue them to fly south.
● Some insects are emerging earlier.
● Some migrating birds are laying their eggs earlier to match insect availability so that their young will have food to survive.
● Some animals are waking from hibernation sooner.
Some animals are however, losing the battle and are not surviving
Two examples are given below:
Grade 3 Science
1. Puffins in the Gulf of Maine are also losing their food source as the fish they feed on (white hake and herring) are moving North to cooler
waters. As a result, baby puffins are unable to swallow the larger fish, so many are starving to death.
2. Half of the world’s coral reefs have died in the last 30 years. Coral reefs, which are actually colonies of individual animals called polyps, have
experienced extensive bleaching as the oceans warm due to climate change. When Corals are overheated, they expel the colourful algae that
live within them. When corals are without the algae for too long, they die of starvation. Apart from climate change, other factors such as
plastic pollution, overfishing, sedimentation, etc., have also contributed to the destruction of Coral reefs.
How plants are responding to these changes
Unlike animals, plants can’t move to new locations. Therefore, when the conditions around them change, they can’t head elsewhere to find better
conditions; they have to either adapt or perish. Some examples of how plants are adapting are as follows:
● Plants are flowering earlier due to increasing temperatures.
● Some plants are having shorter life span.
● Plants are growing towards light or water.
● Plants are growing in environments that they previously did not grow.
Due to environmental changes many animals and plants have become extinct or have been deemed endangered.
Endangerment and Extinction of plants and animal species
o Threatened refers to any species in near or immediate danger of becoming endangered throughout all or most of the area where it lives.
o Endangered refers to any species in near or immediate danger of becoming extinct throughout all or most of the area where it lives.
Examples of plant and animal species which have become extinct
Endangered Animals 4-9 | WebEnglish is a very good website with a lot of information and teaching resources on the topic
Factors contributing to the Endangerment and Extinction of plants and animal species
Grade 3 Science
The main factors that are contributing to the endangerment or extinction of plants and animals are: overhunting or overharvesting, the introduction
of nonnative species, the spread of disease and habitat degradation or loss.
What can be done to reduce the endangerment or extinction of plant and animal species
Using fewer fossil fuels by lowering the thermostat, driving less frequently, and recycling is one good way to slow the rate of extinctions. Eating less
meat and avoiding products, like ivory, that are made from threatened species also can make a difference. At home, securing garbage in locked cans,
reducing water usage, and refraining from using herbicides and pesticides can protect local wildlife.
What is being done to prevent or reduce environmental destruction and restore habitats that have been affected
Examples of conservation preservation efforts in the Caribbean
● Work done by the Nature Conservancy - https://www.nature.org/en-us/about-us/where-we-work/caribbean/
● Caribbean Sea Conservation Project - https://www.experiencegla.com/dominican-republic/caribbean-sea-conservation-project/
● Examples of policies and regulation aimed at conserving, preserving and restoring habitats/ecosystems.
Examples of restoration work
● Conserving Coral Reefs in the Caribbean - https://www.international-climate-initiative.com/en/iki-media/news/conserving-coral-reefs-in-
the-caribbean/
● Restoration of the Ashton Lagoon - https://susgren.org/scale-up-restoration-at-ashton-lagoon-for-climate-change-adaptation-and-
sustainable- livelihoods-on-union-island/
● Ocean Spirits Leatherback Sea Turtle Volunteer Project, Grenada - https://www.workingabroad.com/projects/volunteer-leatherback-sea-
turtles-caribbean/
● At the UN Decade on Restoration website, many examples of restoration projects being implemented in different parts of the world can be
explored.
Research
● o Research is being done on developing species (plants and animals that are more drought-tolerant).
● o Research is also being done to determine the impact of different changes on species different in different habitats.
Some of the things that individuals can do to protect the environment
● Reduce, reuse and recycle our waste as much as possible
Grade 3 Science
● Reduce our energy use.
● Use water wisely.
● Assist with reforestation.
● Protect local water sources.
● Help with the protection of endangered or protected species.
● Buy Local Products.
● Buy Eco-Friendly Products.
● Reduce our use of plastics.
● Dispose of our garbage in a proper manner.
Habitat restoration and monitoring
The International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) defines “ecosystem restoration” as the process of reversing the degradation of
ecosystems to regain their ecological functionality, and to improve their productivity and capacity to meet the needs of society.
One example of ecosystem restoration is the creation of a protected area where there was an overexploited ecosystem. Ecosystems can also be restored
by the replanting of trees, the removal of invasive species, etc. The aim is to return the ecosystem to the condition it would have been in if degradation
had not occurred.
After a solution is implemented for the restoration of an environment that has experienced change, the area has to be monitored to determine if the
solution was implemented properly and to determine the effectiveness of the solution. Some of the things that might be looked at include the
number of organisms before and after the solution, the quality of the water source, the amount of garbage in the area, etc.
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the
curriculum)
Mathematics
● Counting the number of organisms in a habitat.
● Interpreting Population Changes (Stats) Due to Changes in the Environment.
● Graphing the results obtained from investigations.
English Language
● Description of habitats.
● Communicating information in different formats.
Grade 3 Science
● Reporting findings in the form of reports.
Social studies
● The effects of change to habitats/ecosystems directly impact human beings. These impacts may result in many social problems such as
migration, scarcity of resources such as water and food, death, pollution, etc.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning
outcome and associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies
● Develop respect for the environment.
● Awareness and respect for laws developed for the conservation and
protection of ecosystems.
● Appreciate the need to become involved in protecting the environment.
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication Competencies
● Use information provided on different environmental issues to make
wise decisions with respect to the use, protection and conservation of
different ecosystems/ habitats.
● Communicate information in a truthful manner.
● Develop conservation messaging, to affect positive behavioural change
towards conservation.
Developed Well-being Competencies
● Understand how different aspects of the environment contribute to
their well-being.
● How changes to the physical environment and organisms within
different habitats can affect their well-being.
Grade 3 Science
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies
● Develop tools that can be used to monitor populations of different
organisms within different habitats.
● Develop educational materials that can be used to educate persons on
different environmental issues.
● Ensure that their businesses are not having a negative impact on the
environment.
● Contribute time and finances to the protection of the environment.
● Ensure that their businesses are not involved in certain practices such as
trading in illegal plant or animal species/illegal animal parts.
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Technologies that make life easier for humans often impact the environment. We must engage discussions with students about the relative
environmental costs for establishing human comforts and prosperity.
Local Culture
Traditional knowledge about different ecosystems/habitats contributes to our understanding of plant and animal populations and their interactions.
Hunting/gathering of protected species and its impact on the environment (iguana, manicou, tattoo, turtles, whales, wild orchids, coral, etc.). Include
discussion on the laws and reasons for the laws.
Discuss the methods used by local hunters, fishermen, woodcutters, etc. (both legal and illegal) and the impact of these methods on the
environment.
Local debates on how tourism can change the environment (e.g. destroying forest habitats to build news roads and hotels, pollution caused by yachts,
damage to reef, etc.)
Technology
● Certain technological developments have enabled humans to increase their knowledge about plant and animal populations.
● Certain technologies are being used to monitor environmental destruction, habitat restoration and to map changes in habitats over time.
● Certain technologies are being used to assist with the planting of seedlings in reforestation programmes.
● Certain technologies have impacted the environment.
TVET
Grade 3 Science
Many tools used in TVET are loud and can cause noise pollution which may cause animals to become afraid and disoriented. Noise pollution may
also affect human beings. In addition to this, many substances used in TVET such as paints, solvents and spent oils, can cause harm to habitats.
Trees are cut down to provide wood to produce materials used in TVET.
Agriculture
Practices in agriculture such as the use of pesticides, herbicides and fertilisers can cause land and water pollution. Certain agricultural practices can
also lead to soil erosion, landslides, etc. These can all have profound effects on the environment.
Environment issues
Environmental issues such as climate change, overfishing, illegal hunting of certain species, closed season, coral reef management, etc. will be
addressed.
Grade 3 Science
Science Grade 3
Introduction to the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude
of caring not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic
study of the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from
leveraging and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it
Strand (Topic): Inheritance and Variation of Traits: Life Cycles and Traits
Studies of inheritance help students to understand the patterns we see relating parents and offspring in plants and animals. Fundamentally, genetics
helps to explain what makes individuals unique and how attributes can be passed down between families of living things.
Essential Learning Outcomes: ELO-1
Develop models to describe that organisms have unique and diverse life cycles but all have in common birth, growth, reproduction, and
death. [Clarification Statement: Changes organisms go through during their life form a pattern.] [Assessment Boundary: Assessment of plant life
cycles is limited to those of flowering plants. Assessment does not include details of human reproduction.]
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: What does the word life cycle mean? Students, have you ever heard the words life cycle?
What do you suppose it means? If we break down the
Knowledge two words, it suggests a cycle which means something
Define the terms: that repeats or goes round and life. What does it mean
✓ Life cycle to have life? We are alive, what are the characteristics
✓ Propagating Life Cycle of us as living things?
✓ Reproducing • We breathe.
✓ Vertebrates • We eat and grow.
✓ Invertebrates • We move.
✓ Metamorphosis
• When we grow to be adults we sometimes have
✓ Pollination
children.
✓ Angiosperm
• We react to touch, sound, light & smell.
Ask students why it is important that life continues
✓ Cotyledon
• We are affected by our environment.
in a cycle and that environmental or human factors
✓ Monocot
These are the characteristics of living things!
don’t interrupt that cycle.
✓ Dicot
Look at this picture of a life cycle of a human male.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
✓ Vegetative (Plants and animals need to reproduce otherwise their species will
propagation (ST 3 LS disappear after the last adult animal/plant dies.)
DC 2)
✓ Bulbs Teacher note: You might make reference to
✓ Rhizomes birth/survival/death as the “circle of life” that is
✓ Stolons (runners) highlighted in the Disney film “The Lion King”
✓ Tubers
✓ Leaf propagation
✓ Artificial vegetative Life Cycles That Involve Eggs Retrieved from: https://www.freepik.com
Why is this considered a cycle? (we start as a small human
propagation
✓ Cuttings when we are born and eventually when we reach old age we will
die and if we have children it starts all over again). We say
✓ Grafting
that by having children we are propagating or
✓ Layering
producing more humans. Another word for that is
reproducing humans in a cycle of life.
• Distinguish vertebrates and
invertebrates. Animals that have lifecycles can be classified as
vertebrate (with a backbone or spine) and
• Identify similarities in life
invertebrate (without a spine) Some examples of each
cycles.
are shown below.
• Journaling a life cycle (bean
plant).
• Describe the main
differences between
monocots and dicots (ST 3
LS DC 3).
• Outline two natural
methods of propagation in
flowering plants, giving local
examples(ST 3 LS DC 4). Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=Kj
• Describe and explain Retrieved from: Retrieved from pGfqqvQ3E (3:36 mins)
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/263460646923961353
methods of vegetative
/
propagation (ST 3 LS DC There are five main classifications of vertebrates
5). namely:
fish, amphibians, reptiles, mammals and birds.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Define the terms: Butterfly Puppet Play Unusual Vertebrate Cycle
vertebrates and invertebrates
and list the five (5) classes of To activate student’s sense of wonder around the life Here is an interesting fact about one vertebrate’s life
vertebrates (ST 3 LS DC 8). cycle of butterflies, create simple puppets and perform cycle.
the following puppet show.
• Identify and name some
• At first, a baby kangaroo grows inside its
characteristics of living
mother. But when it is no bigger than your little
things (ST LS DC 2).
Scarlet The Butterfly finger, the baby is born. The tiny baby crawls
• Identify and name at least through the mother’s fur into her pouch where
three (3) characteristics of Scene 1: it grows into a joey (a young kangaroo).
living things (ST 2 LS DC • Kangaroo Life cycle video here:
Scarlet the little caterpillar is talking with her puppet
4). https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UpsnRE
friends about the weather changing and her ferocious
Y-6no (2:23 min)
appetite. She is merrily indulging in a delicious meal of
Skills leaves on a well-endowed branch. She draws attention Ask students why the small kangaroo has to live in the
to her brand-new pink bow.
• Observe the pouch? (not fully developed as yet-needs milk to grow)
characteristics of life
Scene 2
cycles.
Scarlet the large caterpillar, is found by her friends
• Classify vertebrates
moving very slowly along a leafless branch. She is
/invertebrates
complaining of a full tummy and the ensuing cold
weather. Her friends suggest they enjoy the fall
• Communicate your
because of the many apples to eat.
research results identifying
vegetative propagation in
Scene 3
the community.
The fall weather is upon us. Friends of Scarlet,
• Research and
(bundled in warm clothing) come by looking for
Baby kangaroo just born. Baby kangaroo in pouch
communicate a graphic of
Scarlet, calling her by name, searching her out, paying
incomplete
no attention to the pupa hanging on the branch above.
Pictures retrieved from:
metamorphosis.
Of course, there is no response from Scarlet. At this
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=
point little viewers (your students) are telling the
1277722
• Research and identify puppet friends that the pupa must contain Scarlet,
plants in the community because they see her pink bow hanging from the pupa.
that use natural vegetative In disbelief the friends disperse still calling out for
propagation. Scarlet.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Investigate information Scene 4 A Range of Life Cycles
on a particular life cycle. Students let us look at these examples of life cycles and
On the same leafless branch, Scarlet appears before her see what we find that they have in common.
friends as a butterfly. They are surprised that she Teacher Note: Some of these pictures are taken from
Attitudes/Values knows their names but having talked to her and seen several books which you may find useful to have in
the pink bow, they realise that it really is her! They ask your classroom.
• Demonstrate her where she has been all winter and she explains that ➢ Watch it Grow: Backyard Life Cycles by Barbara
Interest/Curiosity for the she could hear them calling from inside her cozy pupa. Reid
life cycles of a range of She explains how she makes the pupa to ready herself Read Aloud here:
plants & animals. for the long winter. She invites them to come and https://us02web.zoom.us/j/83648714002 (7:08 mins)
watch next fall when she is sure other caterpillars will
be preparing for the pupa stage of their life cycle. The ➢ Amazing Life Cycle of Butterflies by Kay Barnham
• Demonstrate
puppet friends are amazed at Scarlet’s transformation ➢ Amazing Life Cycle of Plants by Kay Barnham
Stewardship/Respect for
and the forms she assumes as she progresses from a
living things.
little caterpillar to a butterfly.
• When conducting
Have a discussion with students that identifies the
practical and group work,
stages of development of the butterfly. Emphasize that
display sensitivity and
the life cycle process of a butterfly is called
offer assistance to peers
metamorphosis.
who may have physical or
learning challenges.
Butterflies in Trouble
• Participate actively in
Butterflies are becoming extinct because of spray
classroom discussions.
programs to control weeds and mosquitos. Teachers
should summarize the article here and pose the
question to students how we could respond and save Life cycle of a butterfly is called metamorphosis.
the Monarch butterflies. See:
https://money.cnn.com/2018/05/11/news/companie
s/monarch-butterflies-endangered-
monsanto/index.html
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Journaling the Life Cycle of a Bean Plant
If students have yet to grow a plant indoors
themselves, they can journal the progress of the plant
through it stages.
Observations: eggs start small & increasingly
Retrieved from:
grow, their looks change, which is a cycle that
https://madamemckenzie.wordpress.com/2020/04/
produces more of the living thing (reproduction).
Teacher note:
More on Propagation (continuing the living thing)
How to grow a bean in a bag
We have seen before that plants can propagate or
• Wet the paper towel and put it inside the bag. reproduce by creating seeds during their life cycle.
• Put the bean on the paper towel and seal the These then drop into soil and with the proper
bag.
conditions (soil, moisture/heat) can grow again as
• Tape the bag to a sunny window. another plant.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• The seed needs warmth to germinate and the The goal of every living organism, including plants, is
sun should provide that. Plus the light will to create offspring for the next generation. Animals and
enable everyone to see the germinating seed the wind can physically move seeds from one place to
better. another and promote propagation.
Water Pollution Disturbs Life Cycles: Impact on Flowers can propagate by insects assisting in a process
the Ecosystem? called pollinating.
A recent World Bank report has warned of the danger
of water pollution in the Caribbean. (see: Pollination is the act of transferring pollen grains from
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/48239 the male anther of a flower to the female stigma.
1554225185720/pdf/Marine-Pollution-in-the- Example: Bees in seeking out sugar (nectar) in flowers
Caribbean-Not-a-Minute-to-Waste.pdf accidently can brush against the flower’s parts and
allow other partner flowers to create offspring seeds.
An Amphibian is a cold-blooded vertebrate animal of Teacher Note: see more details of pollination below in
a class that comprises the frogs, toads, newts, and additional materials.
salamanders. They are distinguished by having an
aquatic gill-breathing larval stage followed (typically) by Angiosperms are plants that have flowers and seeds
a terrestrial lung-breathing adult stage. encased in fruit. Angiosperms can be divided into two
major categories, monocots and dicots. The first leaf to
emerge from the seed is called a cotyledon and it can
be single leaf (monocot) or double leaf (dicot) (see
more detail in additional resources below).
Students, let us look at pictures that show life cycles of
plants.
➢ Watch it Grow: Backyard Life Cycles by Barbara
Reid
Read Aloud here:
For amphibians in their life cycle, they are often in
https://us02web.zoom.us/j/83648714002 (7:08 mins)
contact with water.
Because amphibians also breath through their skin,
they are particularly sensitive to chemicals in the water.
It has also been found that fertilizer run-off into
waterways cause certain parasites to thrive and these
infect frogs causing malformations in their life cycle.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
(see: https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn12687-
frog-deformities-linked-to-farm-pollution/)
Have students create a diagram that links the food
chain that includes frogs. Ask them to explain how the
loss of frogs through pollution could affect the bigger
ecosystem.
Teacher note:
Example interactions: Frogs are an integral part of the
food chain. Throughout their lifecycles, frogs occupy a
vital position in the food chain as both predators and
prey. As tadpoles, they consume algae, regulating
blooms. Frogs are an important source of food for a
variety of organisms, including birds, fish, and snakes. Natural Vegetative Propagation
Class, did you know that plants can also grow and
Complete and Incomplete Metamorphosis reproduce without seeds? They do this through a
We normally think of metamorphosis to follow the process called vegetative propagation. This is when
scheme below (egg/larva/pupa/adult) plants reproduce from stems, roots and leaves. There
are natural ways that plants make more plants!
Retrieved rom:
https://www.sciencelearn.org.nz/resources/1662-
vegetative-plant-propagation
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Have students research and draw a cycle diagram for
the incomplete metamorphosis life cycles of such
insects as: grasshoppers, cockroaches, dragonflies and
earwigs.
(see example in Additional Resources below)
Vegetables can Propagate in Different Ways
Naturally
Have students identify plants in their own communities
that propagate using:
Bulbs:
Rhizomes:
Stolons:
Tubers:
Teacher note:
If students have access to phones, have them take
pictures of their examples so the teacher can combine
them in a PowerPoint® or Word® document for later
reference.
Can you Guess?
Which type of Vegetative Propagation do you think
these pictures are showing?
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
(tuber)
Retrieved from:
https://edurev.gumlet.io/ApplicationImages/Temp/59
_15201c33-dee8-4f66-b906-
ccb77d64a8cc_lg.png?w=376&dpr=2.6
Leaf Propagation
Plants like Bryophyllum (leaf of life/ miracle leaf plant),
have buds coming out from the notches of the leaves.
These buds develop into new plants.
(stolon or runner)
Retrieved from: https://www.ruralsprout.com/wp-
content/uploads/2021/06/strawberry-runners-
feature.jpg
Retrieved from:
Plants at home: Artificial propagation
https://d3jlfsfsyc6yvi.cloudfront.net/image/mw:1024/
Students should research plants at home that family
q:85/https%3A%2F%2Fhaygot.s3.amazonaws.com%3
members or neighbors have:
A443%2Fcheatsheet%2F10422.jpg
a) Started a new plant from a cutting
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
b) Start a new plant by grafting. Artificial vegetative propagation
Teacher note: As above, have students record and Gardeners also use vegetative propagation methods
share digital pictures in class of their examples. that plants don’t use naturally. These methods involve
taking a piece of one parent plant and causing it to
Research on Life Cycles regenerate itself into a new plant.
Each student must choose one of the following animals Retrieved from:
and through research write a single page description of https://www.sciencelearn.org.nz/resources/1662-
their life cycle which includes a diagram clearly vegetative-plant-propagation
depicting the stages.
➢ A snake
➢ A turtle
➢ A whale
➢ An oriole
➢ Mahi mahi
➢ A spider
Rubric:
Digital picture (of their own or from the internet) 3
marks
Clearly labelled life cycle diagram 10 marks
Description of the species and where it can be found 5
marks
Description of the stages of the life cycle 10 marks
Typical life span of chosen species 2
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Layering
In the layering method, one of the branches of a plant
is pulled down into the ground and covered with moist
soil in such a way that the tip of the branch remains
above the surface. After a few days, new roots start
growing from the part buried in the soil. This part of
the branch is then separated from the parent plant to
let it develop into a new plant.
Retrieved from: https://qph.cf2.quoracdn.net/main-
qimg-dec699a6705cff1f40948020c859c492.webp
Grade 3 Science
Additional Resources and Materials
Pictures retrieved from : https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dicotyledon and https://www.britannica.com/science/cotyledon-plant-anatomy
Retrieved from: https://www.sciencefacts.net/pollination.html Retrieved from:
http://biologydiva.pbworks.com/w/page/14797001/Zoology%20Chapter%2031
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Plant and animal life cycle worksheets: https://www.k5learning.com/blog/grade-three-living-things-worksheets
Vegetative Propagation: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZQ7P3gMunpg (8:10 mins)
Grade 3 Science
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts:
• New vocabulary
• Books on life cycles
• Watch it Grow: Backyard Life Cycles by Barbara Reid> Read Aloud here: https://us02web.zoom.us/j/83648714002 (7:08 mins)
• Amazing Life Cycle of Butterflies by Kay Barnham> Read Aloud here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aBkqnNOzYc4 (5:29
mins)
• Amazing Life Cycle of Plants by Kay Barnham> Read Aloud here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1Dsbk_1e2VU (5:53 mins)
• Poetry
• Puppet play
• Researching the internet
• Journaling life cycles
Social Studies:
• discussions of the impact of pollution on life cycles.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Note: This section is intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework It will be used to guide the writing but will not
appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have:: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning
outcome and associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies Responsibility to protect plant and animal life cycles from
environmental/human dangers
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication Strategies for propagation of plants
Competencies
Developed Well-being Competencies Understanding life cycles promotes healthy practices.
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies Strong agricultural practices have potential to promote a viable vocation of
farming.
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
• Agricultural science
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
• The study of the life cycles of local plants and animals.
Grade 3 Science
Science Grade 3
Introduction to the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude
of caring not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic study
of the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from
leveraging and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it
Strand (Topic): Inheritance and Variation of Traits: Life Cycles and Traits
Studies of inheritance help students to understand the patterns we see relating parents and offspring in plants and animals. Fundamentally, genetics
helps to explain what makes individuals unique and how attributes can be passed down between families of living things.
Essential Learning Outcomes: (ELO 2): Analyze and interpret data to provide evidence that plants and animals have traits inherited from parents
and that variation of these traits exists in a group of similar organisms. [Clarification Statement: Patterns are the similarities and differences in traits
shared between offspring and their parents, or among siblings. Emphasis is on organisms other than humans.] [Assessment Boundary: Assessment
does not include genetic mechanisms of inheritance and prediction of traits. Assessment is limited to non-human examples.]
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Students did you know that science has been very helpful in
improving agriculture and food production around the world?
Knowledge Here is just one example.
• Define the terms:
o Traits The green tomatoes in the picture are able to resist diseases
o Parents that would normally kill the plant. The red tomato is another
o Offspring variety which grows very quickly.
o Hybridization
o Reproduction
o Flowering plants
o Non-flowering
plants
o Living things
o Herbivores
o Carnivores
o Selective breeding Retrieved from:
o Drought resistant https://www.kidsacademy.mobi/printables/typ
es-flowering-plants/answers/
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
o Disease resistant Scientists have been able to combine the characteristics or
What Function Do These Bird Bill Traits traits of parent plants to create offspring plants in a process
• Outline the main features Have? called hybridization. The tomatoes below are the offspring of
of a plant, and name the the green and red tomatoes above. But the offspring plants are
parts (ST 1 LS ECS 5). now able to prevent disease and grow quickly. These are useful
traits.
• Identify and name at least
All tomato pictures
three characteristics of
captured from:
living things. (ST2 LS DC
https://www.youtube.co
4).
m/watch?v=GwjNhYG
BEN4 (1:58 mins)
Retrieved from:
• Discuss the importance of
https://nhpbs.org/wild/birdcharacteristics.asp
growth, development and
We know that plants and animals are constantly involved in
reproduction in plants and
Students will notice that the bills of birds can reproduction so mixing of traits from parents can happen
animals (ST 4 LS SF 2).
look quite different. This is a trait of the bird. frequently both naturally (mixing of colored flowers in the
Ask students why varied birds have different wild) and artificially (using science experiments) This is a very
• Identify and describe the
bill shapes. important technique that scientists have developed. Around
main features of different
the world the best traits of plant species have combined in
animals in their country
experiments on such food items like rice and corn.
(ST 1 LS ECS 9).
Teacher note: See additional resources below
for an explanation. Plant Review
• Give examples of
In order to understand traits that plants might have, it is useful
hybridization for improved
to review what we know about plants.
plants.
There are different classifications of plants.
The are flowering plants and non-flowering plants.
• Identify and describe the Flowering plants include all the flowers around us including
main features of different
those plants that bear fruit. Some examples are trees, shrubs,
animals in their country herbs and climbers. Non-flowering plants use other ways to
(ST 1 LS ECS 9).
reproduce and they include mosses, ferns and cone bearing
trees (coniferous trees). Teacher note: For overview see:
• Give examples for selective https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=n5eoI9Pc
breeding for improved oyg
animals. (3:38 mins)
and
https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=FbrjnHm
-CnI (4:13 mins)
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Skills Based on Their Traits, Match the Parents
• Observe pictures of with Their Offspring Below. Plants have parts with distinct functions:
parents and offspring and • They have roots, whose function is to bring nutrients
identify similar and and water from the soil but also to hold the plant
different traits. firmly in the ground.
• They have stems that transport the water and minerals
• Interpret the text “Ugly from the roots up to the leaves.
Duckling.” • They have leaves that gather the energy from the
sunshine and make food for the plant (photosynthesis)
• Classify and give examples
of flowering and non- As plants develop, they can have different shapes of leaves
flowering plants. such as elliptical, oval and linear. (see additional descriptions
below). The leaf shape would be considered a trait of that
• Compare pros and cons for plant.
modifying the genes in
plants. Animals Have Traits Too!
Animals are living things so they breath, move, respond to
• Identify and tabulate stimuli, reproduce and grow. They are also dependent on their
Retrieved from: www.turlediary.com
environment. Some animals eat meat (carnivores) and some
personal traits.
eat plants (herbivores).
Can you Guess What Type of Dog Parents
Students, let us make a list of some of the animals in our
• Investigate in a field trip
This Animal Came From?
country.
the traits of plants and
Choose a favorite animal. What are their traits or
animals.
characteristics? (size, eye color, body shape, hair color, hair length,
facial- characteristics like shape nose, ears etc.)
• Compile pictures of
parents
Where do we see Traits Differing in Animals?
• Classify plants according to
certain features such as
Read the story (http://hca.gilead.org.il/ugly_duc.html) of the
size, shape of leaves, , Retrieved from:
Ugly Duckling or watch the video read aloud here:
flowering and non- https://www.dailypaws.com/living-with-
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TyrmcD8Yml0
flowering (ST 1 LS ECS 6). pets/pet-compatibility/doodle-dog-breeds
(9:43mins)
• Classify animals according
to their size, body Clue: He is called a goldendoodle!
Ans: (Golden Retriever and Poodle)
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
coverings, and the food What are the traits from the parents that are
they eat (ST 2 LS DC 2). reflected in the offspring above?
Attitudes/Values
• Appreciation that humans
have a variety of traits and
no person should feel
marginalised because they
are different.
• Interest/Curiosity as to Golden Retriever
Retrieved from: Engage a discussion with the students based on the following
how plants and animal
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Golden_Retriev questions:
parents can produce a
er
range of offspring.
Why did the other ducks not like the Ugly Duckling?
(He did not look like them, he had different traits and they considered
• Inquiry about the ways
him ugly because he was different)
selective breeding and
hybridization can help
Should we dislike someone if he/she doesn’t look like us?
third world countries.
Why? (No, we all can have different traits.)
• When conducting practical
Why did the Ugly duckling seem so odd? (Their traits were quite
and group work, display
different from their parents)
sensitivity and offer
Poodle
assistance to peers who
Retrieved from: Why was the Ugly Duckling not able to fit into the group with
may have physical or
https://www.thesprucepets.com/poodle-dog- the other siblings? (His feathers beak and feet were different from the
learning challenges.
breed-profile-1117988 others and he was bigger as well.)
• Participate actively in
Selective Breeding of Horses Why was it able to fit into the group of swans? (As he grew his
classroom discussions.
While certain dog parents are combined mostly traits looked more like swans, white feathers, orange beak and feet, long
for looks, can students identify reasons why neck, etc.)
• Critically consider whether certain horse parents would be selected?
we should use the
• Speed (racing) Was the egg from which he came, laid by the mother duck? By
technology we have
• Strength (working)
some mistake, a swan’s egg ended up in the duck mother’s nest. He was
developed to create more
actually a baby swan.)
GMO foods.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Smart & agile (horses for herding Have students observe the pictures of the Ugly Duckling and
animals) the other ducks and compare the traits. Then have students
• Food (horse meat is commonly eaten in
observe pictures with the Ugly Duckling and the swans and
compare the traits.
Europe)
What are your Traits?
Can You See the Traits in the Offspring?
Retrieved from:
https://nationalcanineresearchcouncil.com/visual-breed-
identification/
The father of these dogs may have been black in color?
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Inventory worksheets retrieved from:
https://dlewerenz.weebly.com/uploads/1/1/8/9/1189
9377/science_heredity_lesson_5thgrade.pdf
Extended activity
World Problems: A Debate on Solutions
Scientists now have the capability to create rice
and corn that have traits of drought and
Field Trip
disease resistance. These experiments involve
Take students on a field trip to an animal farm and/or
changing the building blocks of these foods at
vegetable farm. Let students observe the groups of animals
the smallest level, something called the genes.
and vegetable plants on the farm. Then compare the traits of
Genetically modified organisms (GMOs) can be
the animals and/or plants.
defined as organisms (e.g., plants or animals) in
Teacher note:
which the genes have been altered in a way that
Highlight the similarities and differences among the offspring, parent and
does not occur naturally through normal
siblings. Focus discussions on similar and different traits between offspring
parenting.
and parent and sibling and that differences exist between organisms of the
same group.
The Cons:
Some people in the public believe that
Breeding for Special Purposes
manipulating these genes is very dangerous.
When farmers want stronger horses, they will select parent
They are primarily worried about the long-term
horses that are the biggest and most muscular. These will
effects of these changes. Will the improved
become the parents of baby horses. This is called selective
corn/rice cause us problems in our diet? Will it
breeding.
affect animals that eat GMOs also?
Other examples where desirable traits are achieved by
The Pros
breeding:
Some people believe that creating these new
• Cows that give more milk
crops will help the developing world and
• Donkeys that can walk longer distances
especially those faced with starvation due to
• Dogs that are less aggressive
poor crop yields when there is lack of water or
a rise in plant diseases. • Sheep that produce more wool
• Animals that can survive on less water and in hotter
climates
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Students can write a one-page response paper What are Your Traits?
after researching opinions on the internet and
speaking with local elders about indigenous Even though you may have brothers or sisters from the same
perspectives. parents and bear some similarities in your traits it is possible,
quite naturally, that you will have some different traits that
have been passed down from your parents.
Have students bring in a picture of a parent(s)and have peers
identify similarities and differences.
Game: mix up the parental pictures and see if the class can
separate out who is the parent of each child based on similar
traits.
Extended Activity: Inventory of traits - see assessment
column
Additional Resources and Materials
10 most interesting cross-bred species (see: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ylQz7ytMQMU (10:55 mins)
Selective breeding: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ad4yB63tryI (2:36 mins)
Artificial selection & Selective Breeding: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zHMqkS60jAg (4:13 mins)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Retrieved from: https://www.treehugger.com/id-trees-using-leaf-shape-venation-1343511
Bird Bills are Different- Why? See: : https://nhpbs.org/wild/birdcharacteristics.asp
Birds' bills are adapted for the food they eat. Cardinals have strong, conical bills that help them crack open seeds. Hummingbirds have long, thin bills
that help them collect nectar. Hawks and falcons have strong, hooked bills that help them tear into their prey. Pelicans have large pouches of skin on
their lower bill that can hold fish. Ducks, swans, and geese have flat bills that help them filter food from the water. Woodpeckers have strong, pointed
Grade 3 Science
bills that help them drill holes into trees and extract insects. Looking at a bird's bill can often tell you a lot about what and how the bird eats, where it
lives, and even how it behaves!
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts: New vocabulary
Books about difference and attitude towards difference:
Cole, Elizabeth (2021) Our Diversity Makes Us Stronger. E Cole Publishing
Perry, LaTashia (2016) Skin Like Mine. G Publishing
Social Studies: Celebrating difference in traits/ethics of modifying traits/ battling world hunger with GMOs
Technology: Accessing internet resources for research
Mathematics: tabulating trait data
Health: The impact of genetically modified food products on our overall health.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning outcome
and associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies Ethical decisions around whether the science and technology of GMO products
should be pursued.
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication Competencies Distinguishing useful traits in plants and animals and deciding whether GMO
solutions serve the greater good.
Developed Well-being Competencies Health concerns for animals that ingest GMO products.
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies Agricultural advances in drought and disease resistant crops has long-range
impacts for working farmers.
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
The traits of local plants and animals should be highlighted in this study.
Impacts of genetically modified plants on our welfare and diet is important for students to consider.
Items of Inspiration: It is important to have students consider the social implications of having a role in controlling traits for human purpose.
Grade 3 Science
Science Grade 3
Introduction to the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude
of caring not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic study
of the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from
leveraging and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it
Strand (Topic): Inheritance and Variation of Traits: Life Cycles and Traits
Studies of inheritance help students to understand the patterns we see relating parents and offspring in plants and animals. Fundamentally, genetics
helps to explain what makes individuals unique and how attributes can be passed down between families of living things.
Essential Learning Outcomes: (ELO 3): Use evidence to support the explanation that traits can be influenced by the environment. [Clarification
Statement: Examples of the environment affecting a trait could include normally tall plants that are grown with insufficient water are stunted; and, a
pet dog that is given too much food and little exercise may become overweight.]
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Examples of Environmental Factors Animals and Climate Zones
Knowledge Ask students to identify three environmental The world is divided into zones that have different
• Define the terms: factors that may affect traits in animals? temperatures during the year.
o Climate Zone
o Temperate zone (predators & prey/availability of food
o Polar zone /temperature/landscape & exercise/shelter/weather)
o Tropical zone
o Environment Where do they likely live?
o Traits
o Genes Which of the following cows would be better
o Photosynthesis suited for a temperate country such as Scotland,
o Energy brown or white? Give a reason for your choice.
transformation
o Evaporation
Zone map Retrieved from:
• Demonstrate they https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/1e/
Latitude_zones.png
understand that plants and
Grade 3 Science
animals in different earth Students, look at these pairs of pictures. They are similar
zones may look different species of animals in different parts of the world where the
because of temperature temperature is different (climate zones). These pictures
variations as they get further show that temperature can certainly affects the traits of
from the equator. animals; in this case color.
• Compare animals in
different environmental
conditions.
• Outline how soils are made
from a variety of rocks (ST
The bear on the left lives in a temperate zone and the one
3 ESS ER 3).
Highland Cow on the left is better suited for a
on the right lives in polar zone.
cooler climate with such a heavy fur coat.
• Describe and demonstrate Retrieved from: https://kilts-n-
Retrieved from: https://www.quora.com/Where-do-
appropriate ways of feeding stuff.com/highland-coo/
brown-bears-black-bears-and-polar-bears-live
and caring for pets (ST 2 LS
ECS 1).
• Describe the physical
features of the parts of a Ask students why they think these elephants may
plant, relating these features look different.
to their function (ST 3 LS (African deserts are hotter than Asian deserts and so the
SF 1). African elephant is usually larger, wrinkled and has larger
ears to release more body heat)
• Discuss the importance of
The colors of winter and summer coats of these deer
growth, development and
change because of temperature variation in the same
reproduction in plants and
climate.
animals (ST 4 LS SF 2).
Retrieved from:
https://www.wildlifeonline.me.uk/animals/article/water-
• Explain the role of the sun
deer-fur-moulting
as the main provider of heat
and light on earth (ST 3 PS
EN 2).
Grade 3 Science
• Discuss simple examples of Retrieved from: https://factanimal.com/african-
energy transformation (ST 3 bush-elephant/
PS EN 8).
Research- How Do Things Live Here?
Skills
• Observe pictures of living The picture below is of a desert. You can tell that
it is very dry.
things and hypothesize how
the environment in which
they live may impact their
traits.
These twins were brought up separately in tropical and
temperate zones. You can see that their skin color is
• Measure water levels of
slightly different.
evaporation.
• Tabulate water level data for
Food Sources and Animal Growth
evaporation.
The amount and quality of food in an animal’s
environment (living surroundings) affects their traits
• Graph the rate of
(characteristics).
evaporation. Retrieved from
https://smartclass4kids.com/animal-adaptations/
• Calculate an evaporation Students should do some research to determine
how the following living things have traits that
rate for bright sunshine
allow them to live in the desert climate. Be
location.
prepared to report back to your classmates on
your findings.
• Classify animals according
to size, body coverings, and
Camel
food they eat (ST 2 LS DC It is important to feed our pet animals so they can grow to
Cactus
2). be healthy. This picture shows a dog on the left that was
Lizard
poorly fed and how much better he thrived when he was
Black Throated Sparrow
• Classify soils as sand, clay fed good food regularly (same dog on the right).
and loam (ST 3 ESS ER 6). Retrieved from:
Teacher notes in additional materials below.
https://blog.theanimalrescuesite.greatergood.com/mauka-
• Investigate which soils dog-transformation/
retains water or drains
Design an Animal
quickest (ST 4 ESS ER 4). A building block of our bodies that comes from our
Can you design a make-believe animal that could
parents are called genes. These genes affect our growth
live in the following environment?
and can sometimes make us susceptible to changes
Grade 3 Science
• Compare the rate of 1. Rocky shale cover ground on steep hills. depending on our environment. The example below
evaporation of water under 2. No trees but very tall thin shrubs with suggests that a difference in diet (fat versus non-fat) can
specific conditions (ST 4 berries. affect two otherwise identical twins as they grow.
ESS ER 7). 3. Very hot climate except at night when it
cools down.
Attitudes/Values 4. Very little rainfall and only small mountain
streams as a water source.
• Appreciation for the 5. Only small rodents for prey. Pets and feeding
6. Large predators that are meat eaters
diversity of living things.
(carnivores) live nearby. Plants and temperature
7. Only tiny hillside caves for shelter. Arizona Pheonx
• Collaboration &
Jamaica and elevation
Cooperation with peers.
Task and Rubric
➢ Draw a picture of your animal and name it:
• Stewardship/Respect for
5 points Retrieved from: https://www.khanacademy.org/test-
Living Things.
➢ Draw a picture of your animal’s habitat: 5 prep/mcat/behavior/behavior-and-genetics/a/genes-
points environment-and-behavior
• When conducting practical
➢ Describe how your animal’s traits allow
and group work, display
them to live in the environment defined by
sensitivity and offer
1-7 above. 7 points Plants are Affected by Their Environment
assistance to peers who may
The sun is a source of light on earth but also energy. Using
have physical or learning
Short Writing/Drawing Exercise. a process called photosynthesis, plants absorb sunlight
challenges.
using their leaves to help create food for the plant to grow.
On a single page draw a picture of a pet you or a As we study more science, we will come to understand the
• Participate actively in
friend may have. Write some short sentences details of how that happens, but it is a good example of
classroom discussions.
about how you manage their environment in order energy transformation.
to best take care of a pet.
• Identify and appreciate the Can You Guess the Animal?- Three Poem What are signs that our plants are not getting enough sun?
importance of caring for Riddles (Retrieved verbatim from:
plants and animals and their Retrieved from: https://apottedlifeblog.com/low-light-4-signs-your-plant-
environment (ST 2 LS ECS https://www.storynory.com/animal-riddle- isnt-getting-enough-sun/
4). rhymes/
Leaf Color: Most plants have rich green leaves, or colors
Poem 1 that appear vibrant when healthy. These glorious hues that
make plants so aesthetically pleasing are from the amount
I am a clever African, my memory’s very long, of chlorophyll within their leaf cells. Without sun, plants
I like it living in my herd, I’m beautiful and strong, can’t function at full capacity and won’t be able to
Grade 3 Science
photosynthesize. Over time, the leaves will lose their
I like the leaves on tops of trees, they’re clean and vibrancy and pale, eventually growing yellow and weak.
very sweet, They’ll easily fall from your plant if nudged.
I like fresh grass untrampled on, I do not care for
meat. Stem Height: As the primary source of energy, sunlight
drives a plant’s ability to grow tall and strong. Plants living
My trunk is very special, it is a sort of nose, in a low light situation, especially those that need bright
I use it for so many things, it’s like a garden hose. and direct light, may experience stunted growth. A plant
without an adequate light source can grow lanky, with
I shower with it, I eat and swim, though heavy as a spindly stems and leaves that are widely spaced. If you’ve
bus noticed that your plant doesn’t seem to be growing
I roll in mud for suncream, which you could do anymore, it may be due to a lack of light.
with us.
Leaf Size: All plants have leaf sizes unique to their
When walking, we go single file, we haven’t hands particular breed and current level of growth. However, if
to hold your plant isn’t receiving the proper amount of sunlight
Our mothers hold us with their tail, the young led and nutrients, the leaves may stop growing at a smaller size
by the old than normal. They may also feel much thinner and softer,
even after they’ve reached maturity. If they also have
Now dear child, you’ve listened, just tell me, brown edges, this is a sign of stress, often due to low light.
what’s my name.
If you don’t know, don’t worry, I’ll tell you all the Plant Tilt: If it appears as though your plant is straining
same! toward a source of sunlight, it probably is. The cells in
(elephant) plants on the sun side will grow shorter and sturdier, while
they’ll grow long and spindly in the shade. This creates a
Poem 2 plant that “leans” toward light. If your plant is tilting
dramatically toward a window, it’s a clear sign that your
My mother laid a clutch of eggs, I had to leave my plant needs more sunshine.
shell
She left me when I came outside, I looked so Plants also need water in their environment to grow. The
wriggly well, water that falls to the ground surrounding a plant gets
absorbed by the soil and the roots of the plant move the
I’m really very handsome, I look like one long tail, water up the stem to promote plant growth. Among other
and my mouth opens really wide, I’d nearly eat a things, two factors may affect how much water the plant
whale! eventually gets in order to grow.
Grade 3 Science
I’m fond of scrumptious mice and frogs, They’re The bright sun in the plant’s environment, may heat up the
just the size for me, and when I’ve had one for my liquid water on top of the ground such that it has enough
lunch, I don’t need one for tea! energy to become water vapor. We know that this process
is called evaporation and it would prevent how much
I mustn’t get too fat you know, Nor scrawny, water the plant received.
weak or thin
I have to stay the perfect size, my hole to slither in Experiment: We can measure the rate or speed of
evaporation in bright sun and determine how much that
I like it there, it’s nice and safe, from birds with may affect our plants.
nasty claws, I’d rather stay alive you know, not end
up in their maws! 1. Measure exactly 20 mls of water into a cup.
2. Set the cup in the bright sun for 1 day.
Now child, you have listened, just tell me, what’s 3. Pour the water into a measuring cylinder and
my name. tabulate how much water is remaining after
If you don’t know, don’t worry evaporation.
I’ll tell you all the same! 4. Return the water to the cup and once again, leave
(a snake) the cup in the bright sun for 1 day.
5. Repeat this process for 4 days completing your
Poem 3 data table as below and then plotting a graph of
water volume (mL)ordinate versus time (day)
My teeth are in my stomach, my goodness fancy abscissa.
that 6. Draw your best straight line through the points on
so do be careful, won’t you? or my tum will eat your graph. Find the rise between two end points
your hat. and divide it by the run between the same two
points. Use this approach to calculate the rate of
I could be white or yellow, I’ve cousins who are evaporation _________(ml/day).
blue
but put me in the cooking pot and I’ll turn red for
you.
Day Start 1 2 3 4
I’ve loads of legs, 5 pairs of them, a runner I’ll >
never be Vol 20
my claws could pinch you very hard, at the bottom (mL)
of the sea.
Were you surprised how much evaporation may have
My shell is like a hard tough rind, inside, I’m soft
robbed your plant of water?
you know
Grade 3 Science
I have to take it off, alas, there is no room to How much water does the soil absorb?
grow.
We know that there are three main types of soil: sand, silt
I change it sometimes when I’m big, more often and loam. These soils are created over very long periods of
when I’m small time from the grinding of rocks and weathering processes.
I want to live for 50 years, and reach 3 long feet Smaller rock particles are mixed with living matter such as
tall dead plants to form layers of soil. As a result of the
different rocks and living matter and the environmental
Now child, you have listened, just tell me, what’s conditions in any one location, soils can have different
my name. composition and properties.
If you don’t know, don’t worry, I’ll tell you all the
same! Teacher note: Set up a demonstration using local soil
(a lobster) types and a filter funnel. Pour 20 mL of water through
each of the soil types. Ask the students to identify which
soil seems to allow the water to pass through the fastest.
(sand).
Students you can see that a sandy soil will not hold water
very long. This is a problem for some plants because they
can’t get the water through the roots to the stem quickly
enough to nourish the plant. The environment of the
plant is very important in terms of its ability to grow; poor
soil will have an effect on the plant’s ability to grow.
Additional Resources and Materials
(Additional material and resources that are not included in the Inclusive Learning and/or Inclusive Assessment Strategies that may be useful for lesson planning )
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Camel Traits:
Humps to store fat which they can break down into water and energy when food and water is scarce.
Two rows of long eyelashes and thick eyebrows help them to keep out sand and desert sun.
Narrow nostrils and hairy ears also help them to keep out sand.
Thick and tough lips help them to pick at dry and thorny desert plants.
Broad and flat feet, so they don’t sink in the sand and walk easily.
They can go for a week or more without water. They can drink up to 32 gallons (46 liters) of water in one go.
Grade 3 Science
Long legs protect them from sand heat.
Rarely sweat. Change their body temperature to avoid water loss through sweating.
They are well hidden. Their body colour helps them to blend into their environment.
Cactus
Cacti are perhaps the best-known desert plants. They have thick stems that store water with a protective covering that keeps the stored water inside.
They also have sparse leaves that minimize evaporation. Some cactus species can go for two years without water.
Lizards
While some animals have developed ways of extracting water from the food they eat, or reducing water lost through evaporation, desert dwelling
lizards don't drink water at all; they absorb it through their skin.
Black Throated Sparrow
Birds, like all animals, perish without water. Desert birds, however, make the most of very little. They tuck into the shade in the heat of the day, so they
won’t lose water in panting. They have extremely efficient kidneys, so they excrete almost no liquid. And they obtain moisture from foods, like nectar
and fruit as well as insects and other prey. Even when eating primarily seeds, Black-throated Sparrows are able to extract enough water from this dry
food that they may never need to take a drink.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts: New vocabulary/Research/Creative writing/Poetry
Mathematics: Measuring and recording data/plotting graphs/computing slope
Social Studies: Protection of the environment
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning outcome
and associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies Protecting community
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication Competencies Investigating traits that allow for stable living in a specific environment
Developed Well-being Competencies Care of the environment for human well-being
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Grade 3 Science
Science Grade 3
Introduction to the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude
of caring not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic
study of the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from
leveraging and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it
Strand (Topic): Inheritance and Variation of Traits: Life Cycles and Traits
Studies of inheritance help students to understand the patterns we see relating parents and offspring in plants and animals. Fundamentally, genetics
helps to explain what makes individuals unique and how attributes can be passed down between families of living things.
Essential Learning Outcomes: (ELO 4): Use evidence to construct an explanation for how the variations in characteristics among individuals of
the same species may provide advantages in surviving, finding mates, and reproducing. [Clarification Statement: Examples of cause and effect
relationships could be plants that have larger thorns than other plants may be less likely to be eaten by predators; and, animals that have better
camouflage coloration than other animals may be more likely to survive and therefore more likely to leave offspring.]
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Students, do you ever wonder how penguins who live
Learners are expected to: in the south pole are able to dive and swim in very cold
water? It is because their bodies have adapted to their
Knowledge environment. Today we are going to investigate not
• Define the terms: just penguins, but also a host of animals and plants that
o Habitat have made amazing adaptations in order to survive.
o Adaptation
o Desert
o Forest Animals live in a variety of home locations we call
o Aquatic habitats. Many have adapted to better survive in the
o Polar conditions that exist there.
o Savannah
o Camouflage Have students watch these videos to learn more about
o Spines adaptation. Teacher provides questions before the
o Manchineel tree video is watched.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
o Predator Retrieved from: https://static1.squarespace.com Teacher note: If you do not have access to
o Prey technology, you may use the captured pictures to
o Reproduction Why do you think this adaptation was necessary? engage a discussion of adaptations.
o Offspring Divide students into research groups to do some
research so they can respond to the following Video 1
• Demonstrate they https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LB8nLZmxN_M
understand that 1. Why does a crocodile have eyes high on its (adaptation) 6:19 mins
adaptations help living head?
things to survive. (So that it can see above the water.) Questions for students to consider as they watch:
What adaptations has the camel made to survive in its
• Give examples of animals
2. Why does a polar bear have thick fur and desert habitat?
layers of fat?
that have adapted.
(To keep it warm in the snow and able to swim in
very cold water.)
• Give examples of plants
that have adapted.
3. Why does an elephant have big ears?
(To help keep it cool in hot sunshine)
• Give reasons why living
things might adapt given
4. Why does a shark have a white belly. (Fish
their environment.
that are prey underneath the shark may not see it
as the background sunshine shining on the water
• Identify some features of
would camouflage the shark.)
organisms that allow them
What adaptations has the monkey made to better
to survive in their homes
Why do you think they call this lizard chameleon? survive in its forest habitat?
/habitat (ST 1 LS ECS 4)
Picture 1 on a branch: Picture 2 seconds later
• Identify and describe the
main features of different
animals found in their
country (ST 1 LS ECS 9).
• Identify and describe
natural defenses that local
animals use to help them
survive (spines, camouflage
etc.) (ST 1 LS ECS 12.) How have fish adapted to aquatic (under water)
habitats?
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Identify and name at least
three characteristics of
living things (ST 2 LS DC
4).
• Explain how some features
of organisms enable their
survival in habitats (ST 2
LS ECS 5).
Retrieved from:
How have penguins adapted to polar (at the south
• Discuss the importance of https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ioblgpA5eTo pole) habitats?
growth, development and (3:01 mins)
reproduction in plants and
animals (ST 4 LS SF 2). How might this adaptation be useful for survival?
(hiding from predators/hunting for prey)
Skills
• Observe carefully pictures Adaptations That Assist Birds: A Beak
of animals and hypothesize Experiment
how their adaptations have Birds have a range of beak types, all for different
helped with their survival. purposes that fit their habitat and living condition. To
understand the importance of matching a beak to the
• Compare habitats and
life survival of a bird, students will experiment with
different simulated bird “beaks” to determine which Video 2:
suggest how the conditions
beak is best for each food item. Students will use a https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fRX2JtKFUzk
shape the adaptations of
toothpick, net, tweezers, spoon, scissors, and clothes (adaptation) 2:20 mins
living things.
pin to pick up various objects. The objects can be
gummy worms, seeds, string, uncooked macaroni, Question for students to consider as they watch:
• Rationalize the
grass, etc. Students will determine which beak works
appropriateness of animals’
best for each food and why.
body shapes that fit their
What adaptations has the giraffe made to better survive
daily needs. (e.g. birds’
Adaptations Project in its savannah (grassland scattered with trees) habitat?
beaks)
Students will be asked to do research on at least three
living things (plants or animals) in their country that
• Research adaptations living
have clear adaptations to the Caribbean habitat.
things in your own
Students have a choice of a poster or PowerPoint ®
country.
to include the following:
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Communicate research ➢ Picture depicting clearly the living thing and its
findings through posters adaptation: 5 marks
and digital expressions. ➢ Description of the habitat: 5 marks
➢ Description of why the adaptation was
• Distinguish definitions of necessary or helpful to the living thing.
predator and prey. necessity of the adaptation: 5 marks
Plants That Adapt for Protection
Attitudes/Values Plants may have barbs, spines, thorns, irritating sap, ➢ Long neck for eating off of tall trees.
poisonous fruit etc. to protect themselves against
being destroyed by animals. Have students identify
• Appreciation of the
examples in their community of plants that have these
diversity of habitats and
properties, adapted for protection.
the importance of humans
protecting them.
Plants That Adapt as Predators
• Interest/Curiosity to
Certain plants have adapted parts so they may actually ➢ Long, tough tongue to protect against thorns
investigate adaptations in
attract, trap and digest insects. Have students do
living things.
research on the Venus Fly Trap. >
Video resource here:
• Collaboration &
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O7eQKSf0LmY
Cooperation in research
(2:50 mins)
and communication of
findings.
Reproduction and Local Bird Species
• Stewardship/Respect for
Living Things.
Many birds will have bright colors and exhibit
dramatic behaviors in order to attract female ➢ Spotted coat to hide it in the trees. When an
• When conducting practical counterparts to create offspring. Have students make animal has an outer body covering that hides it
and group work, display a poster of all the colorful birds in their region. The from possible predators, we say that they have
sensitivity and offer teacher can designate a bird to each group to research camouflage.
assistance to peers who for pictures and typical habitat. As an extended
may have physical or activity, students may search the internet for videos Many animals have adapted in their appearance by
learning challenges. (to share in class) of courting behaviours of Caribbean blending into the background.
birds. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YOIRci0CKzg
• Participate actively in (camouflage) 4:00 mins
classroom discussions.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Example Frigate Bird. See: Students look at these examples from the video:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dhX8TI1bcy4
• Demonstrate respect for (4:55 mins)
plants and animals (ST 4
LS DC 2).
Adapted inflatable chest.
Adaptation of Blubber Keeps Animals Warm: An
Experiment to Demonstrate the Effect
Animals in the North and South Poles (e.g. penguins,
seals, whales, walrus) have a layer of fat just beneath
their skin that helps them keep warm!
Many males trying to attract a mate.
Female Frigate bird looking for a good mate/nesting
site
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Adaptive Behaviors in Animals Experiment retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_DQGAcqhkGs
Around the world, animals are approaching humans
more confidently. The improper disposal of garbage We can demonstrate how that fat can affect the heat
has many animals leaving their forest habits and transfer from our bodies to cooler places. We use
venturing close to dumps and family homes. When sweaters and extra socks to keep our body heat;
surprised or alarmed these animals can be dangerous. animals have blubber!
As a class, the students could design an initiative to
keep animals safely away from homes by managing Materials:
garbage disposal in their communities. • 2 bowls of ice water
• 2 freezer bags
Example:
• 3 cups of shortening
1. Place the shortening inside one of the freezer
bags.
2. Put your hand inside the other empty freezer
bag and force your covered hand inside the fat-
filled first freezer bag.
Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/iJoRl26eYrc
3. Move the fat around so that it nicely covers
your entire protected hand.
4. At the same time, thrust your fat covered hand
in one bowl of ice water while simultaneously
putting your bare hand in the other bowl of ice
water.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_DQGAcqhkGs
Students that try this, one after the other, will find a
huge difference in what they feel on their hands. The
fat covered hand will insulate them from the cold ice
water the same way blubber insulates penguins from
the cold outside temperatures.
Plants also Adapt
The following video gives examples of how plants
adapt. Ask students to take note of these as they watch.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mbj_WQ76F1Q
(adaptation in plants) 7:02 mins
These captures from the video can be used by the
teacher.
Plants with leaves
tend to lose water
by evaporation.
Cacti minimize this
loss of water by
having spines rather
than leaves.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Cacti also have:
➢ a thick stem to prevent water loss.
➢ a waxy coating on the stem to help in the
storage of water.
➢ A long and deep root system to gather water in
lower parts of the soil.
Plants in bodies of water have flexible stems to
accommodate movement of water.
Water lilies have air space in their stems so that they
are able to float on top of water.
Retrieved from:
https://pixabay.com/illustrations/generated-water-lily-
flower-plants-7574456/
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Plants in rainforests often have very large leaves to
collect as much sunlight as possible.
Retrieved from: https://www.freepik.com
Some plants have poisonous flowers or fruit to protect
them from animals that may harm them. A good
example is the Manchineel tree.
Retrieved from:
https://www.britannica.com/plant/manchineel
Interesting fact: Manchineel trees are poisonous to
birds but not Central and South America's striped
iguana, which actually eats and lives among these trees.
Adaptations of Predator and Prey
Some predators adapt to better catch their prey. Have
students guess how these predators have adapted?
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Scorpion: (sleeps during the day and roams at night nocturnal)
Cheetah: (strong legs, very fast)
Octopus: (changes colour to sneak up on prey)
Prey have adapted to avoid being eaten by would be
predators. Students, can you guess how these prey have
adapted?
Tortoise: (hides in its shell)
Gazelle: (very fast runners)
Porcupine: (has barbed spines that inflict pain when an animal
touches)
Skunk: (sprays a foul chemical on the attacking animal)
Venomous snake: (has poison in its fangs that can kill a
predator)
Adaptations that Ensure Offspring.
Ask students why they think male birds are often more
colorful than their female counterpart?
(when male birds compete for a mate so they can have
offspring the brightest bird may attract the female.
Birds have adapted color and showmanship to gain the
female mate’s attention. This adaptation guarantees
offspring and therefore survival.
Grade 3 Science
Additional Resources and Materials
Blubber Experiment: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_DQGAcqhkGs (2:55 mins)/
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=92cAgXcabaE&t=177s (5:20 mins)
Camouflage as adaptation: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3TNv3t8Xl-4 (7:31 mins)/ https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kGZX1_Zy-74
(5:14 mins)
Book Series Animal Adaptations: https://www.amazon.com/What-You-Animal-Parts-
Book/dp/1338559052/ref=sr_1_5?crid=2R45QWG0V438X&keywords=what+if+you+had+-
scholastic&qid=1704134209&sprefix=what+if+you+had+-scholastic%2Caps%2C88&sr=8-5
Adaptation Online Game: https://pbskids.org/wildkratts/games/avivas-powersuit-maker
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
https://creativeclassroomcore.com/top-5-ways-to-teach-all-about-animal-adaptations/
https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=2ahUKEwimq4yE7ryDAxX1v4kEHTj-
AwYQFnoECCsQAQ&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.thinktrees.org%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2019%2F07%2FPlant-
Adaptations.pdf&usg=AOvVaw0mZ2dqwp2Ruq0Ttg-CfIQJ&opi=89978449
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts:
• Read alouds on adaptations
o https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xpn4s_zsfns (10:52 mins)
o https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tWV0SEnI7gc (9:33 mins)
o https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lJB28zSsbc0 (10:02 mins)
o https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5JRRS3rGMoU (9:30 mins)
• Research adaptations’
• Communicate research findings
• New vocabulary
Social Studies:
• Protecting habitats by understanding adaptations of animals/plants
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Note: This section is intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework It will be used to guide the writing but will not
appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
Grade 3 Science
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning outcome
and associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies Protecting habitats
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication Competencies Hypothesizing rational for adaptations
Developed Well-being Competencies Protecting Health of animals based on respecting adaptations
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Mimosa pudica, commonly referred to as “sensitive plant” or “touch-me-not” has an adaption where is closes its leaves when touched. This is an
adaption to protect it from herbivores. Children often play with this plant touching and waiting for it to reopen. They make this into a game.
There are an abundance of online simulations, games, interactive websites around the topic of adaptations.
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Grade 3 Science
Science Grade 3
Introduction to the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude
of caring not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic
study of the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from
leveraging and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it
Strand (Topic): Weather and Climate
As surface and water temperatures rise, human, animal and plant life respond. Scientific studies document these responses. In doing so, science builds
a foundation for understanding how our lives are impacted by climate change and what we can do to slow or reverse changes.
Essential Learning Outcomes: ELO-1
Represent data in tables and graphical displays to describe typical weather conditions expected during a particular season. [Clarification
Statement: Examples of data could include average temperature, precipitation, and wind direction.] [Assessment Boundary: Assessment of graphical
displays is limited to pictographs and bar graphs. Assessment does not include climate change.]
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Review of the Water cycle Importance of Weather Knowledge
Teacher-led Discussion
Have students label the water cycle diagram below as
Knowledge a review. When you hear the word “weather” students, what
does it mean to you? (sunny, rainy, cloudy, windy etc.)
● Define the terms:
o Weather
o Weather forecasting
o meteorologist/
meteorology
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
o temperature Students, have you ever heard the words “weather
o precipitation forecasting”.
o wind direction
o clouds It means to predict or make a good guess at what
o moisture/humidity the weather might be in the future. The people who
o climate do this job of forecasting weather are called
o atmosphere
Meteorologists.
Key questions to ask:
● Demonstrate an understanding
of the formation of clouds. 1) Why is important in our community to pay
Worksheet retrieved from:
attention to weather data and weather
https://ateachingmommy.com/water-cycle-free- forecasting/predictions? (prepare for good
● Review and explain the
printable/
components and processes weather- clothing, picnics; prepare for bad weather-
involved in the water cycle. storms, rainy season, hurricanes etc.)
2) Which occupations in our community are
● Distinguish between weather Terminology Review; Read Aloud Book
often most reliant on good forecasting of
and climate.
The following Read-aloud book introduces many weather? (fishers, farmers, drivers, tour guides,
weather words. It could be used as an introduction or pilots)
● Identify and describe weather
a review of the lesson’s terminology. See more examples here:
patterns at a particular time at a
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LHIN
given time. Before the video begins, promote active listening by
AlqxD6M (5:26 mins)
having them focus on the following terms and
concepts as they watch the video. The teacher may
● Identify instruments used to
measure the elements of want to put these questions on the chalkboard. Ask
Review of the Water Cycle
weather. students to write down some new weather words they
saw in the video. See: Weather Words by Gail
Gibbons - Weather Read Aloud -
● Demonstrate an understanding Weather depends primarily on the water cycle.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wVU31D2Em
of how to use
a) thermometer to measure the EE (7:53 min) In grade 2 you learned about how water on earth is
degree of hotness and coldness in a cycle. Some steps we should review:
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
b) anemometer to measure 1. What weather vocabulary did you hear in the 1) The liquid water molecules in lakes, ponds
wind speed. video? (Sunny, rainy, humidity, temperature, air and rivers get enough heat energy from the
pressure, moisture, wind, dew, water vapor, cumulous sun that they begin to move further apart
c) rain gauge to measure the
clouds, sirius clouds, stratus clouds) and become water in the gas form we call
amount of rainfall.
2. What types of weather was seen? (rainy, cloudy, water vapor. This process is called
d) windvane to measure wind
windy, stormy) evaporation. We say that the air pressure
direction.
3. What is a definition of the word weather? from the weight of the atmosphere above
(condition of the atmosphere at any given time) the water, affects the evaporation process.
4. What is the difference between weather and High pressure systems slow evaporation
Skills
climate? (weather refers to short-term changes in the because water molecules can not easily jump
atmosphere, climate refers to atmospheric changes over into the air, whereas low air pressure allows
longer periods of time) the heat-energized molecules to jump into a
● Identify types of weather
vapor (gas) state quite easily. Air pressure is
conditions by examining
a result of the molecular collisions of the
weather charts. (ST 3 ESS EW Comprehension of Terminology
atmospheric gases above us and is measured
10)
Place the following words in the proper blank in the with a barometer.
sentences below. 2) The water in gas form (vapor) rises into the
● Investigate and report from
sky, and as it cools in the higher atmosphere
data collected about the Precipitation/sun/condensation/evaporation/cl
it loses energy, particles get close again and
weather over a period, using ouds
the water as gas (vapor) turns back to water
simple graphs. (ST 4 ESS EW
7) 1. When water changes into water vapor and moves as a liquid. We call that process
into the air, it is called ____. condensation.
3) The liquid water molecules gather in clouds
● Conduct a simple experiment 2. When water vapor condenses in the
until they become so heavy, they fall to the
to find out if the weather atmosphere, it forms _____.
earth again as rain. We call that process
affects evaporation in natural
settings. (ST 3 ESS ER 8) 3. What happens after the clouds fill up with water precipitation.
vapor and become very heavy? 4) When the air is heavy with moisture, we say
that it is humid.
● Communicate effectively 4. Energy for the water cycle on Earth comes
results of weather experiments. from _____.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Analyze a table and bar graph 5. What is the change of a gas to a liquid called? Measuring Data Related to the Weather
and make predictions based on
In order to forecast or measure the impacts of
the average temperature, wind
speed and precipitation in a Create a Journal That Tracks Weather and weather, we often use special devices to measure
particular area. wind direction, rainfall quantities and temperature.
Creates Data Tables and/or Graphs (such as
These measurements help to give us a picture of the
histograms)
Attitudes/Values
usual weather in our region. This is called the
Assign students to create a journal about their
climate.
● To work respectfully with
observations of the different weather patterns
others in exploring and
observed for a week using drawings and descriptions
investigating the weather.
of the weather. They should also include (temperature,
Pupils will go to the following websites following
wind direction, rainfall data)
instructions on how to make and use the various
● Demonstrate a concern for
Encourage them to use new words they have instruments to measure different weather conditions
weather conservation as well as
learned.
protection of our clean water and explain how it is used.
sources.
KEY
Construction of Weather Instruments
● Describe the weather patterns
that affect the activities of Sunny Windy Rainy Cloudy
➢ How To Make a Rain Gauge Summer STEM
people and the effects they can
have on our daily lives. Eg Project:
flooding, hurricanes,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rh18GM
dehydration, sporting activities,
drought. wwV4M (2:58 mins)
Mon Tues Wed Thurs Fri
● Develop a curiosity of how air,
temperature, moisture,
precipitation, wind speed and
direction make up the weather
Graphing Rainfall Data
in a particular place and time.
(may be undertaken best during the rainy season?)
● Based on an understanding of
the water cycle, show concern
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
for the protection of water Ask students to measure and record in a data table,
resources, the effects of the rainfall in their school yard using a homemade
pollution and climate change. rain gauge. Each day they should empty the gauge
so that it monitors the daily rainfall rather than
● Work cooperatively with peers.
the accumulated rain.
● Participate in classroom At the end of the week, students use the data
discussions. collected to plot a bar graph like the one shown
below. ➢ How to make an anemometer (wind speed
● When conducting practical and
meter)
group work., display sensitivity
and offer assistance to peers https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Af0LB3a
who may have physical or
bBsk&t=23s (2:14 mins)
learning challenges
➢ Make a Thermometer - STEM Activity
Answer the following questions using the
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rtsq-l0AxbY
information plotted on the graph.
(1:54 mins)
1. On which day did they measure the most rainfall?
2. On which day did they measure the least rainfall?
3. What was the average rainfall for the week?
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4. If you left the water in the rain gauge through the Field Trip /visit to Local Weather Station
week, how might evaporation in the sunlight change
your data? (loss of water on the sunniest days affects the ● Field trip to the weather station to observe
correct daily amount)
the different weather instruments that are
used.
Matching the Forecasting Tool to the Desired ● Pupils browse or look at the National
Information
Weather website of their island to learn how
the meteorologist forecasts the weather.
Worksheet below retrieved rom:
Grade 3: Match The Tools With The Correct Names How Do We Forecast Based on Cloud Types?
Worksheet (worksheetzone.org)
Clouds have many overlapping categories but if we
focus on three we can begin to forecast weather.
Cumulous- puffy, wispy vertical movement > fair weather
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Extended Learning: Evaporation Cirrus- high clouds > fair weather
Evaporation rates impact the water cycle and
therefore weather. The liquid water molecules require
energy to become water gas molecules (vapor).
Answer the following true/false questions about this
system.
True or False:
1. Most evaporation took place on the hottest
day. (T)
2. The least evaporation happened on the day
Stratus- low clouds- contain water/ice > poor rainy
with the lowest temperature (T).
weather
3. The weather does not affect how fast water
evaporates. (F)
4. High atmospheric pressure days make
evaporation easier (F)
5. Low atmospheric pressure days often result in
rainy weather. (T)
Preparing for Bad Weather Events
When we get a forecast of bad weather approaching Cloud pictures retrieved from:
our region, what do you see in these pictures below https://www.instructables.com/id/Predicting-
that we could prepare for? Weather-with-Clouds/
Setting Up Our Own Weather Station
After building their own weather measuring devices,
the teacher should supply the students with a
classroom chart table where each day (over a 1
month period) students measure and record the
outside temperature, the wind direction (from which
direction does it originate) and the rainfall.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Day Temp Wind Rainfall
(deg C) Direction (inches
(from) or cms)
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Interpreting Weather Data
(flood breaks-temporary sea walls, boats, protection against Activity One: Planning a Holiday
erosion, trees for windbreak, strong construction and water-tight
Tell students they are planning a holiday to London,
roofing)
England. Present to them, the weather graph below
and pose the following questions:
Constructing a Warning Poster a) If you were wanting to go to London at the
warmest time of year, what would be a good
Hold classroom discussions about safety during
month to choose? (July)
different weather conditions. Encourage students to
b) If you were hoping to see snow in London,
share their experiences, questions, and ideas on how
what months would give the best
to stay safe during storms, extreme heat, cold
combination of temperature and
weather, etc. precipitation? (December/January: lowest
temperature and highest precipitation)
In groups have students prepare an information
poster suggesting preparations.
It may take the form similar to the example below:
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Data retrieved from:
https://mceegeogblog.wordpress.com/2012/11/30
/london-climate-graph/
Activity Two: Precipitation Data
Give Students the Precipitation Table for Lima,
Peru. below and ask the following questions:
Month Avg
Precipitation (mm)
July 1
Aug 1.5
Sept 0.7
Oct 0.2
Nov 0.1
Dec 0.2
Jan 0.8
Feb 0.4
Mar 0.4
Retrieved from:
Apr 0.1
May 0.3
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/6068601185341689
June 0.7
50/
a) What is the total rainfall for the year in
Lima, Peru? (6.4 mm)
b) What are the driest two months in Lima?
(Nov/Apr)
c) What is the average of the wettest three
months in Lima? (1.0 + 1.5+ 0.8)/3=
1.1mm
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Data retrieved from:
https://www.lima.climatemps.com/precipitation.ph
p
Activity Three: Wind in the Caribbean
Provide the following table to students regarding
the wind in Saint Lucia for a particular day (where
the time in the table is a 24 hour clock- i.e. 02=
2AM & 23= 11PM)
a) What was the average wind speed for the
day? (6.11 m/s)
b) What direction did the wind blow from
most of the day as represented in the table?
(from the south east)
c) In terms of wind gusts, what time of the day
would a sailor need to be most careful? (20
hrs or 8 pm)
Data retrieved from:
https://windy.app/forecast2/spot/488863/St+Luci
a
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Where Did the Rain Water Go?
Students we know that on many Caribbean islands
rain water is collected for use in the home. Philip
had put a plastic bottle out in his front yard and
noticed the first day it collected 2 mL of rain water.
The second day his bottle had water up to the 5 mL
mark. How much rain fell the second day? (5 mL- 2
mL = 3 mL)
On the third day it was bright and sunny and he
noticed, at the end of the day, the bottle had water
measuring up to the 3.5 mL mark. Where did the
water go? (it got enough heat energy from the sun to leap
into the sky as water vapor (gas)
How much water had Philip lost? (5mL – 3.5 mL =
1.5 mL)
If Philip wants to keep all the water he collects, how
can he prevent it from evaporating? (place the bottle in
a shady spot where it doesn’t get hot.)
Planning Our Lives Around Weather
Forecasting:
Advantages and Disadvantages of weather
conditions
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Teachers should have a discussion with students
around the following questions:
a) Why is rainy weather good or bad for us?
(Good-Washing and cooking)
(Bad- Excess rainfall causes flooding, landslides,
transportation services e.g., bikers, open vehicles)
b) What are some of the activities we can and
cannot do during the rainy weather?
(planting crops, going to the beach)
c) How do we prepare for rainy weather?
(Umbrellas, coats, clear drains to prevent flooding,
repair roofs, collect water in barrels and drums)
d) How do we harvest rainwater for drinking
and for irrigation? (barrels, eavestroughs)
Severe Weather Conditions
Pupils are presented with these questions to answer
as they watch the following Read Aloud on Severe
Weather:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MBn-
Sdqu66A (3:33 mins)
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.What is severe weather?
(when calm weather turns violent)
2. What type of severe weather was seen in the
video?
(thunder, lightning, tornado, flood, hurricane, blizzard)
3. What damage can a tornado cause?
(It can rip apart houses and move trees.)
4. What damage can a hurricane cause?
(It can damage houses and power lines.)
5. How can flooding affect us?
(It covers the roads, fill up basements and houses.)
6. What is a blizzard?
(A severe snow storm, with strong blowing wind.)
Teacher-Student Discussion:
1) How do we prepare for severe weather
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
conditions?
2) Why is it important that we are prepared for
extreme weather conditions?
(We need to prepare, so that people and animals can
be safe.)
3) How can we prepare for a hurricane?
(By moving to a safe area, listening to the weather
report, collecting food, water, medicines, first aid kit
etc )
Additional Resources and Materials
(Additional material and resources that are not included in the Inclusive Learning and/or Inclusive Assessment Strategies that may be useful for lesson planning)
https://images.app.goo.gl/La5ht184rPc2KXy66
https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/science/grade-2-weather-instruments.pdf
Grade 3 Science
https://th.bing.com/th/id/OIP.MvF8WB_3s1wJa2At3BL5LQAAAA?pid=ImgDet&rs=1
https://th.bing.com/th/id/R.6dd53d915d83bbef23bbfc023abc9da5?rik=8KIA4r6ivIoQXg&pid=ImgRaw&r=0
https://th.bing.com/th/id/OIP.3qxUDuKZXJ1mmTyWCAPSkgAAAA?pid=ImgDet&rs=1
https://cdn.slidesharecdn.com/ss_thumbnails/03how-do-clouds-form-170505174754-thumbnail-4.jpg?cb=1494006506
https://thumbs.dreamstime.com/z/weather-versus-climate-vector-illustration-educational-differences-diagram-nature-measurement-
scheme-temperature-days-162882783.jpg
Weather Vocabulary
-Students will complete the weather journal below. Record the daily weather condition using drawings and answer the questions.
Encourage pupils to express their feelings about the weather.
https://www.teacherspayteachers.com/browse/free?search=weather%20journal
https://www.math-salamanders.com/image-files/free-bar-graph-worksheets-understanding-picture-graphs-1b.gif
Grade 3 Science
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher such as reading
material at a lower or higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
Pupils create a model of the water cycle using the instructions below.Make a Miniature Water Cycle Model | STEM Acti vity (sciencebuddies.org)
Teacher print poster for each pupil
https://thumbs.dreamstime.com/z/weather-versus-climate-vector-illustration-educational-differences-diagram-nature-measurement-
scheme-temperature-days-162882783.jpg
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the
curriculum)
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
● Mathematics: Use simple bar graphs to show the amount of rainfall over a certain period of time .
Use a bar graph to show average temperature over a period of time.
Use graphs to record their observations of weather conditions.
● Language Arts: Vocabulary, Reading comprehension (poem/stories) on weather and weather patterns.
Listen to weather reports, record and share information.
● Social- Science: The importance of the daily study of weather
Recognizing and discussing weather conditions in different parts of the island.
● HFLE: Use emotions to show different weather conditions.
● Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Grade 3 Science
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Note: This section is intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework It will be used to guide the writing but will not
appear in the curriculum guides.
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning
outcome and associated lessons?
Appreciate the work of meteorologists in the study of weather.
Developed Citizenship Competencies
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication Recording, predicting and analyzing weather patterns.
Competencies
Assisting others to prepare for adverse weather patterns.
Developed Well-being Competencies
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies Use and understand the instruments used by meteorologists in gathering
information on different weather patterns.
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research)
Grade 3 Science
Science Grade 3
Introduction to the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude
of caring not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic
study of the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from
leveraging and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it
Strand (Topic): Weather and Climate
As surface and water temperatures rise, human, animal and plant life respond. Scientific studies document these responses. In doing so, science builds
a foundation for understanding how our lives are impacted by climate change and what we can do to slow or reverse changes.
Essential Learning Outcomes: (ELO-2) Obtain and combine information to describe climates in different regions of the world.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Introductory Questions Introductory Discussion
Knowledge True or false? Why is the daily outside temperature so consistent in the
Caribbean?
● Define the terms: a) The earth circles the sun in 365 days. (T)
o Equator b) The difference in seasons in the North and Students, you live in a part of the world near the
o Season South hemispheres is caused by the distance equator (the imaginary line that divides evenly
o Tilt from the earth to the sun during those seasons. the earth between the south/north poles), that
o Rotate (F)
has very consistent temperatures throughout the
o Orbit c) The equatorial countries get nearly the same
year.
o Northern Hemisphere heat energy from the sun year-round. (T)
o Sothern Hemisphere d) The tilt of the earth as it rotates around the sun Example: Dominica temperatures
o Direct sunlight causes the sun’s heat rays to be direct in some
o Indirect sunlight
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
o Climatic zones parts of the earth while indirect for others, thus
▪ polar/frigid causing temperature differences. (T)
▪ temperate e) Climate is a measure of average weather data
▪ tropical/torrid
over a period of time. (T)
o North /South pole
o Climate
Review of Water Cycle
o Weather
You may have friends or relatives or seen
o Temperature Have students draw a picture and explain how the
movies that depict temperatures in the north
o Rainfall water cycle of evaporation and condensation lead to
and south that have a much bigger range. In
o Pressure
humidity in the air.
fact, that range may be so large that they
o Wind Speed
o Humidity experience very cold temperatures and snowfall!
o Greenhouse effect
Challenge question
o Global warming
o Carbon dioxide My question for you is why does that happen?
Students, look at the picture of the sun shining at the It is a common misconception that in the
● Identify and name the sun, earth earth on a tilt. summer we are closer to the sun than the winter
and the moon as parts of the so distance isn’t the reason for temperature
solar system. (ST 1 ESS SS 2) Why does Australia have summer temperatures when
change over the seasons.
Canada has winter temperatures.
● Explain, what is weather. (ST (When the southern hemisphere is pointing more directly at the
ESS EW 1) sun, the northern hemisphere is getting indirect rays from the Look at this picture of the earth as it faces the
sun.) sun. What we notice right away is that the earth
● Describe how temperature rotates on an axis that is tilted (24 hours per
affects weather (ST ESS EW 8) rotation-one day). That means that as the
earth orbits around the sun (once per year), that
Frayer Square-add weather and/or climate to the
the sun’s energy is approaching different places
center
● Explain the role of the sun as the
on the earth at a different angle.
main provider of heat and light
on the earth. (ST 3 PS EN 2)
● Identify and discuss some of the
unintended consequences of
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
using fuels for transport and
production of materials for
commerce. (e.g. pollution). (ST 3
PS EN 5)
● Sustainable use of resources
would help to minimize pollution
and destruction of the
environment. (ST 3 STSE 1)
Retrieved from:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Earth%27s_orbi
● Describe and discuss how
t
burning can cause air pollution.
(ST 6 ESS ER 4)
● Define the terms: rotate, revolve,
planet, star, satellite.(ST 3 ESS SS
Label the Climatic Zones
2)
● Explain how the tilt of the earth
on its rotational axis can cause
the sun’s rays to be direct and
indirect for different parts of the
earth and therefore lead to
temperature changes on the
surface (seasonal changes)
Retrieved from:
● Demonstrate an understanding https://www.bing.com/images/search?view=d
that the earth is divided into Retrieved from: etailV2&ccid=
three major climatic zones.
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/social-
studies/1162764
Imagine you had a torch (flashlight) and you
● Discuss the characteristics of
each type of climate. decided to shine it on a table at different angles;
it can make circles or ovals (try it!). Below is a
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
. Complete the table using the phrases below picture of the sun’s rays hitting the earth at
different angles. In this picture from the
● Compare the different types of Short term, observed daily, long term, changes often, observed over
climates. time, changes within months or year. Northern hemisphere (the half of the earth
above the equator), you can see that the energy
of the sun is spread out much more in
● Identify the plants and animals
December so people at that location would get
that can be found in each Weather Climate
less heat energy at any one spot compared to
climatic zone.
someone in June of that year where the light
energy is more concentrated and shines more
● Explain how people adapt to live directly on that location.
in the different climatic zones.
● Explain in simplified terms the
process of global warming.
Characteristics of Climate Zones
Activity 1
Skills
● Observe different types of Retrieved from:
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/science/9482
weather --rainy, sunny, cloudy http://science8sc.weebly.com/direct-vs-
windy. (ST 2 ESS EW 1) 42 indirect-rays.html
Direct sunlight Indirect sunlight
● Use a thermometer to measure
Allow students to collect pictures and make a collage
temperature, explaining how the
depicting the different climatic zones.
device works. (ST 3 ESS EW 9)
● Identify types of weather
conditions by examining weather
charts. (ST 3 ESS EW 10)
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Guided by the teacher, students engage in an online Retrieved from:
interactive labelling activities of the climate zones. https://physics.weber.edu/schroeder/ua/SunA
● Compare direct and indirect light
ndSeasons.html
using a flashlight (torch) to show https://www..com/w/en/social-science/1649618
how the sun’s energy can be
But, if you look back at our first picture, you
spread out if it shines on the https://wordwall.net/resource/31522862/climate-
will see that sun shines directly on the
earth at an angle. zones-1
equator (circle) the entire year, so we get all the
Animals in Different Climates energy all the time. Anybody the lives in the
Southern Hemisphere (the half of the earth
● Interpret models of the earth and Retrieved from: below the equator) or the Northern
sun and how they interact in the
https://wordwall.net/resource/893234/geography Hemisphere (above the equator) will
universe. (daily rotation, yearly
/climate-zones experience periods of the year where the sun’s
orbit, earth’s axis & tilt)
light is direct and indirect (on an angle). This
means less heat energy when the light is indirect
● Predict weather patterns. (ST 2 and therefore colder temperatures!
ESS EW 4)
Activity 2
● Analyse weather events. The Climatic Zones
Circle the correct answer.
● Use the weather cycle to explain
how/why humidity occurs.
1.This animal is found in the frigid zone. Ask students what they may have seen in books
or in the media about different weather patterns
(polar bear, agouti)
● Design and construct a project to (climates) in the world outside the Caribbean.
learn how we can reduce climate List their observations associated with different
2. This animal is found in tropical / torrid zones.
change. climates on the board as a mind map of prior
knowledge.
(penguins, snakes)
3. Why is the torrid/ tropic zone the hottest?
Now students, we are going to watch two
(The sun’s rays on this zone are direct.) videos that help us put climates in categories.
Attitudes/Values
Video #1:
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Develop appreciation for Science Recording and Reporting the Weather As you watch the following video
by recognising how climate
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C1cU
affects our daily lives. Students should collect the daily weather data using a
EXmDXgc (9:23 mins)
template as shown below and then report the weather
to the school over the intercom or in a school
● Willingly participate in activity to
I want you to pay particular attention so that
newspaper.
identify the climate of different you can answer the following question s when it
regions of the world. is finished.
1) What are the three major types of climate
● Recognise the effects of climate zones mentioned in the video ? (polar/ frigid,
change in a region of the world temperate and tropical)
and take the necessary actions to
reduce the effects of climate
2) Which climate zone is very cold? (Polar zone)
change.
● When undertaking classroom
3) Why is this region of the earth very cold at
activities, display sensitivity to
certain times of the year? (the sun’s rays are indirect
and offer assistance to peers who
because of the tilt of the earth so less heat energy reaches
may have physical or learning
the pole)
challenges.
The teacher can project or draw the following
picture to reinforce the concepts.
● Participate actively in classroom
Retrieved from:
discussions.
https://i.pinimg.com/originals/4c/a8/c9/4ca8c918a9f
d67a50784e86cf22b6eba.jpg
● Consider the dilemma of
abundant fossil fuel resources
Sharing Weather Data-Pen pals
and the damage burning these
will inflict to our environment. Write a letter to your friend who lives in another
climatic zone or region, inviting him or her to collect
weather data such as temperature, rainfall and wind
speed. Create a data table or chart and use a graph to
show how different or similar the climate data is. As a
class project, you could collect data from penpals all
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
over the region and the world to do comparisons. Retrieved from:
https://www.bing.com/images/search?view=d
etailV2&ccid=4XdgcBv7&id=7651997D098DE
Creative Writing/Creative Arts A793C0DBE485C690BF1651199AB&thi
Assessment #1 Students are posed the task of
drawing/labeling a picture of a climate that includes the Video #2
words, weather, rain, heat, humidity, wind, and
As you watch the following video
pressure. The teacher will look for indications that the
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kp7ZhvJ
words are used in the correct context. (comprehension
XrMc 11.31 (mins.)
measure)
I want you to pay particular attention so that
Rubric
you might be able to answer the following
All words included 5 points questions:
Understanding of words evident 5 points
Clarity of picture 5 points 4) What type of clothing do scientists and
explorers wear when they visit the Polar
Climate? (warm snow suits)
Assessment #2 Task students to create a postcard to
depict the different climates around the world. N.B
Learners could choose one climatic condition to 5) What type of animals can be found in the
display on their postcard. Include country, polar climate? (polar bears, reindeers, penguins, killer
whales etc.)
climatic zone and people/animals.
Rubric
6) What type of fruits are in the temperate
Evidence of climate in picture 5 points
zone? (apples, strawberries, peaches, tomatoes etc)
Possible country labelled 2 points
Climate Zone properly labelled 3 points
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Assessment #3 Using the free programme “Bloom” 7) What type of animals can be found in the
(see: tropical climate? (rabbits, snakes, lions, tigers,
gorillas, monkeys etc.)
https://bloomlibrary.org/landing
have students work together collecting online pictures
to create a book and story about travel to different 8)What type of clothing do people wear in the
temperate zones, clothing, food, weather etc. temperate zone? (thick clothing in the winter
and light clothing in the summer.)
Debate on Climate Change
Weather and Climate
Students will be asked to develop arguments for
Ask students how weather and climate are
pro/con around climate change as a result of fossil fuel
different?
use.
The central questions:
Climate is the average temperature and rainfall
➢ New discovery of oil reserves in the Caribbean of an area over time whereas weather is the
and neighboring South America could bring
current conditions.
prosperity in the form of jobs and cheaper
energy to fuel vehicles and power production.
Weather Report
➢ Burning fossil fuels contributes to the
Tell students that they should imagine that they
production of carbon dioxide which in turn
were travel agents and were therefore
seals the heat of the sun into our atmosphere.
This global warming affects surface responsible for giving clients accurate
temperatures and water temperatures so could information about climate in various parts of
have detrimental effects on the ecosystems. the world. This requires that they learn about
climate and why we see different
➢ The teacher should use the following table to temperature/climate zones.
assess participation of students in this
Have students observe the following pictures of
discussion.
different climates.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Can you name a region or part of the world
with the climate seen in any of these pictures? (
1st picture.- North pole (Canada/Russia/ Iceland)
2nd picture (Switzerland/France)
3rd picture.-(Tonga, Caribbean)
Retrieved from::
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Managing-
Small-Group-Learning.- Have students do research and for each picture
Reid/0abd4ba230de054b3016ce1eb10569f22dff278a/fi identify:
gure/4
a) The likely temperature in June.
b) The clothing typically worn in June.
c) The animals that thrive in these climates.
Visitors to Other Climates
Weather Reporting (Review of Instruments)
Play a game called “Pack my Bag”. Children
Listen to a weather report on television or the
describe to their peers what clothing they would
radio or read a report in the newspaper. What
pack in a suitcase to visit another part of the world. type of information do they usually give us?
Their peers have to guess which climatic zone they are
Temperature- measured with a thermometer.
likely to be going to.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Protection Against the Sun’s Rays Rainfall- measured with a rain gauge (volume in
mL)
In certain climates near the equator, the sun’s rays are
direct and intense. Pressure-measured with a barometer)
It is very important that we protect our bodies against ➢ Low pressure means evaporation
too much sun! Our skin and eyes can be particularly happens easily and condensation later
susceptible. forms clouds that can drop rain)
Extended learning: when pressure is
low and temperatures are high, there is a
Have students do research (books and internet)and lot of water evaporating and it places
answer the following questions: significant water in the air. In these
instances, we would say there is high
1) What danger is the sun to our skin?
humidity. These days can be quite
2) What danger is the sun to our eyes?
uncomfortable in the Caribbean!
3) How can we protect our skin?
➢ High pressure means that water
4) How can we protect our eyes?
molecules do not have enough energy to
form water vapor. Evaporation from
lakes and rivers is less likely and
therefore rainfall from condensation-is
less likely-good weather!
Wind speed and direction- anemometer
Weather Events: Example: Dominica
Pose the following questions that students
should answer as they watch the following video
about a weather event in Dominica.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0lXaE
LMiN7s (Mins 6:55)
1. What was the first thing that caught
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
your attention?
2. Where did this weather event take place?
3. What type of weather condition was it?
4. What types of damages did you see?
5. How did you feel about the people
6. What did they have to go through?
7. Could they have prevented the
damages?
8. How would you help the people?
Climate change and global warming
There is evidence that the earth overall has
higher temperatures. This has been referred to
as “global warming” and is caused by something
called the greenhouse effect. (The greenhouse
effect is defined as when the Earth's
atmosphere becomes thick with gases and
substances which trap the sun's radiation, as it
reflects off the earth and back upwards. making
the Earth warmer). One of the greenhouse gases
is Carbon dioxide, a gas produced when we
burn fuels in our stoves or cars. Everyday
functions of the body like digesting your food,
moving your muscles or even just thinking, need
oxygen. When these processes happen, a gas
called carbon dioxide is produced as a waste
product. The job of your lungs is to provide
your body with oxygen and to get rid of the
waste gas, carbon dioxide. There are also gases
such as water vapor, methane and ozone that
trap the heat from the sun.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Notice in the picture how the radiant heat from
the sun is reflected by gases down to the
surface. This increase in surface temperature can
kill plants and animals.
Retrieved from:
https://sigmaearth.com/effective-ways-to-
manage-the-greenhouse-effect/
Using a Simulation to Show Surface
Temperature
Use the following simulation to show children
what happens in this process by increasing the
clouds and watching what happens to the
reflected energy from the sun.
See:
https://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/legac
y/greenhouse
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Discuss with students what citizens can do to
prevent global warming. (e.g. burn less fossil fuels,
produce less gas/smoke from burning in cars and
factories)
Additional Resources and Materials
The Inspired Classroom: Clouds Pt 2 Clouds by altitude flapbook
Retrieved from: https://cdn1.byjus.com/biology/2018/04/23102819/Factors-Affecting-Climate-Changes.jpg
Climate Zones of the Earth | Weather and Climate | Types of Climate Zones
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/social-science/679383
https://www.studyassistant.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/Climate-Zone-2.pdf
https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/science/grade-3-biomes-c.pd
Grade 3 Science
Cardboards, maps, crayons, markers, globe, flashlight, scientific journals, library book, internet access, newspapers, television and radio
to listen
to weather forecasts, Styrofoam balls, strings, paste, map of the world/ globe, etc.
Weather story book
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kj3T19kKPig
8:11 mins)
Weather story book
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ba9Jot0wix0
(4:33 mins)
Types of climate
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iA23Sm-HI4I (5:15 mins)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (
• Weather is the state/ appearance of the atmosphere in a particular location over a short period of time.
• Climate is the average weather of a place over a long period of time. Climate is influenced by temperature, precipitation, humidity and pressure.
• Climate can be used to predict what the weather will be in a given location during a particular season, but short-term observations of weather
cannot be used to draw conclusions about climate.
• The major factors that affect climate are: Latitude, Altitude (height of region), Terrain/Topography, Oceans and water bodies and Earth’s tilt.
• Different regions of the Earth have different climates. These regions are called climatic zones/regions.
Grade 3 Science
• Latitude affects climate by influencing the intensity of the sun in a region. The angle and duration of the sun's energy determine surface temperature
so that higher latitudes receive less heat, but lower latitudes closer to the equator receive significantly more heat.
• Based on latitude, the Earth is divided into three general climate zones: arctic zones, tropic zones and temperate zones. The arctic zones tend to be
snow and ice - covered year-round though they often receive no more precipitation than deserts. The tropic zone, on both sides of the equator,
receives the most sunlight and generally experiences warm weather and seasonal rainfall. The temperate zone, between the arctic and tropical zones,
has the most diversity of weather.
The climatic zones:
- Polar - very cold and dry all year
- Temperate - cold winters and mild summers
- Tropical/ Torrid/Hot Zone - hot and wet all year
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
• Language Arts: Writing - learners write letters describing the climate of the location in which they live. Reading – read the letters written
for the class.
• Mathematics: Graphs- representing weather conditions of locations investigated on bar graphs, pictographs, pie charts etc.
• Expressive Arts: Creativity- designing post cards, storybooks, anchor charts, maps etc.
• Social studies: Place- determining the weather and climate of a place. Identifying how climate affects the activities of people living in a particular
place. Protecting our climate by reducing the causes of global warming.
• TVET: Homes and clothing are designed for people in the various zones to live comfortably.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework
Note: This section is intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the Curriculum and Assessment Framework It will be used to guide the writing but will not
appear in the curriculum guides.
Grade 3 Science
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning
outcome and associated lessons?
Developed Citizenship Competencies Protecting the environment against global warming.
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication Competencies Accounting for the differences in climate on the earth.
Developed Well-being Competencies Protection from the sun’s rays and also pollution.
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies How to portray climates that might be inviting for travellers.
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
On holidays with sunny weather, families usually go the beach or participate in river “limes”.
Salting and drying of meats and fishes is a popular food preservation method that relies on the sun.
Coconut oil and cocoa industries are heavily reliant of sunny days for the drying of the crops as part of the processing.
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Grade 3 Science
Science Grade 3
Introduction to the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude
of caring not only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic
study of the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, students benefit from
leveraging and evaluating available technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it
Strand (Topics):
Weather and Climate
As surface and water temperatures rise, human, animal and plant life respond. Scientific studies document these responses. In doing so, science builds
a foundation for understanding how our lives are impacted by climate change and what we can do to slow or reverse changes.
Engineering
A foundation in engineering design encourages students to formulate a wide range of solutions to problems that arise from everyday phenomena.
This helps them to develop critical thinking skills which will prepare them for the many careers that invoke problem solving strategies.
Essential Learning Outcomes: (ELO 3 Weather /ELO 1 Engineering)
Weather: Make a claim about the merit of a design solution that reduces the impacts of a weather-related hazard.
[Clarification Statement: Examples of design solutions to weather-related hazards could include barriers to prevent flooding, wind resistant roofs, and
lightning rods.]
Engineering: Define a simple design problem reflecting a need or a want that includes specified criteria for success and
constraints on materials, time, or cost.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Present students with a Cause and Effect table to What are Weather Events in the
complete Caribbean?
Fill in the effects, example: Students, I read in the newspaper the other
Knowledge
day that “weather events” have caused
● Define the terms: millions of dollars of damage in the from of
o weather events “environmental destruction” in the
Cause Effects
o hurricane Caribbean. If we break down the words
o typhoon environmental destruction, it must mean that
o tornado High somehow our environment (the world around
o drought Temperatures us) is destroyed or changed in some way.. We
o erosion
are going to look at ways that can happen.
o landslides
High winds What do you suppose they meant by the
o land-borne floods
terms “weather event”?
o sea-borne floods
o tsunami Heavy rain
o pitch roof vs. flat roof
o gable roof vs. hip roof When we think of normal weather patterns
Lack of rain
o levee that contribute to our climate they include
rain, wind, and temperature. But an event
means something more drastic or surprising.
• Discuss how the various weather
Design Prediction
patterns affect their activities, the type
of clothes they wear, and ways of A family is moving to the Caribbean where there is
When winds are more than usual, what do we
dealing with various weather types. potential for hurricanes. What type of house would
call them? (storms, hurricanes, typhoons, tornados)
(ST 1 ESS EW 4)
you suggest that they build. Concentrate on advising
• Explain a problem in their own words them on roof design.
and solutions related to the problem.
Design Challenge Typhoon definition: a tropical storm in the
(ST 1 TE UT 3)
region of the Indian or western Pacific
Engineers design solutions to solve real problems.
oceans.
• Define the term environmental
You are going to do an experiment to decide how
Tornado definition: a mobile formation of
destruction and investigate the factors
to best plug a hole in the retaining wall that protects
rotating winds having the appearance of a
that cause and prevent this
your house from the overflowing brook beside your
destruction. (ST 2 LS ECS 24)
property.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Develop simple technological designs To model this real-world problem, you will need the funnel-shaped cloud and advancing beneath a
in keeping with particular challenges following items. large storm system.
in their environment (ST 2 TE TM 2)
• two Styrofoam cups When our rainfall is more than usual what do
• Explain a problem in their own words • a liter container of water we often see? (overflow of rivers & streams,
and solutions related to the problem. • sample blocking agents flooding)
(ST 2 TE TM 5) o a sheet of paper towel
When our rainfall is less than usual we may
o a piece of kitchen sponge
experience something called drought where
• Explain in their own words, how the o a piece of polyester fill or fabric
the extreme lack of rain can cause crops to
effects of the wind may be useful and • a measuring cylinder or graduated cup
die.
harmful. (ST 3 ESS EW 4) • a timer
• Plan and execute appropriate research
Procedure With more wind and rain we also often see
using technological methodology, to
higher tides and erosion near water.
solve 1) use a pencil to poke a hole in the bottom of
environmental challenges. (ST 4 TE one of the Styrofoam cups.
TM 1/ ST 4 TE NT 1) 2) place a small piece of paper towel over the
hole on the inside of the cup. These could all be called weather events
• Knowledge acquired and products 3) place this cup with the hole inside the cup because they involve effects that go beyond
developed in the search for solutions without a hole. the usual weather patterns in our
to human problems and challenges 4) have your friend time 30 seconds while you communities.
affect everyday life, the society and ½ fill the inside cup with water.
the environment. (ST 4 STSE 1) 5) withdraw the inside cup from the outside
cup and measure how much water went
Recognizing the Problem Created by
• Explain the difference between through the paper towel-blocked hole in 30
Weather Events
weather and climate. (ST 5 ESS EW seconds.
1) 6) Repeat steps 1-5 with the kitchen sponge
and then the polyester fill/fabric.
• Use problem solving, technological 7) Make a data table of material and volume to Students, because we experience weather
processes and resources to find compare which of your three samples was events in the Caribbean as a semi-regular
solutions to human wants and needs. most effective at blocking the hole. i.e., the occurrence, we can actually prepare to limit
(ST 5 TE TM 1) least amount of water went through to the the damage caused.
second Styrofoam cup
• Demonstrate an understanding of the
term weather event and identify how
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
severe weather impacts people’s lives Engineers would use a range of materials to attempt I want to show you some pictures and ask you
and occupations. the very same experiment on a retaining wall that to brainstorm how we might prevent some of
protected our homes from flooding! To solve the damage that is implied in the picture.
● Describe how people can modify their
problems, they use the design loop. (seawalls, diverting water, reinforcing river banks,
homes and other structures in the
drain pipes)
community to reduce the impact of
weather events.
Picture 1: Erosion on the Beach
● Describe how different materials can
be used to prevent damage from
weather events (roof design and
materials.
Skills
The teacher may choose to do other challenges and
• Interpret from pictures, the different
using the worksheet below as a planner for the
types of weather events and the
design process.
problems these events cause for Retrieved from:
humans.
https://www.globalresiliencepartnership.org/
laborie-saint-lucia-a-caribbean-fishing-village-
• Predict possible solutions to weather
navigating-the-turbulent-waves-of-a-
event problems.
changing-climate/
• Infer the best design and materials for
roofing of homes and other buildings. Picture 2: Flooding Due to River Overflows
• Collect data on the impact of flooding
on rivers and floodplains.
• Conduct an experiment that simulates
testing by engineers (hole in a
retaining wall)
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: Retrieved from:
• Plan and design solutions to reduce https://www.teachengineering.org/lessons/view/u https://www.iwnsvg.com/2016/11/29/hous
the impact of severe weather in the mo_challenges_lesson01 es-destroyed-as-rains-trigger-floods-across-st-
community. vincent/
Attitudes/Values Recognizing Weather Hazards from Weather
Events Picture 3: Landslide
• Participate in community support
when weather events pose hazards to
citizens.
• When conducting practical and group
work, display sensitivity and offer
assistance to peers who may have
Retrieved from:
physical or learning challenges.
https://caribbean.loopnews.com/content/do
minica-persons-affected-floods-and-
• Work respectfully with others to share landslides-be-relocated
ideas and materials for solution
Picture 4: Drought
designs to combat the impact of
severe weather.
• Actively participate in classroom
discussions.
Retrieved from:
https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/science
/grade-3-weather-hazards-b.pdf
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://knowledge.unccd.int/sites/default/fil
Problems in Your Community-Extended
es/country_profile_documents/1%2520FIN
Project
AL_NDP_Grenada.pdf
1) Due to excessive rainfall in your
community, the nearby waterways overflow
and flood the community, destroying Who do these weather events affect in our
homes, farms and animals.
communities? Ask children to respond to
the prompts:
Design and construct a structure that will
Road conditions- drivers in the communities
protect the community from floods.
Students work in groups and use the Fields affected by landslides or drought-
engineering design approach to propose a farmers
solution to the problem.
Beaches affected by tidal erosion- tourism
Buildings impacted by winds- homeowners &
2) Tall buildings in the community have been businesses
hit by lightening and are at risk of catching
fire. Investigate the use of lightening rods as
a way of protecting those buildings. Weather Hazards
Students work in groups and use the
engineering design approach to propose a A weather hazard is a problem caused by an
solution to the problem. unexpected weather event.
3) The beach has suffered significant erosion
due to the tidal surge accompanying recent
Divide the students into small groups. Give
storms. The loss of beach front is
each group to do research and answer two
detrimental to homeowners and the tourist
questions.
industry as well. Students work in groups
and use the engineering design approach to 1) What causes the weather hazard and
propose a solution to the problem. 2) How do communities try to prepare
for these weather hazards?
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Landslides
The term landslide includes slides, falls, and
flows of unconsolidated materials. Landslides
can be
triggered by earthquakes, volcanic eruptions,
soil saturated by heavy rains or groundwater
rise,
and river undercutting. Earthquake shaking of
saturated soils creates particularly dangerous
conditions.
If the teacher has internet access, they may
show the following video.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=THyt_I
rnk1Q (11:23 mins)
Flooding
Two types of flooding can be distinguished:
(1) land-borne floods, or river flooding
caused by
excessive run-off brought on by heavy rains,
and (2) sea-borne floods, or coastal flooding,
caused by storm surges, often exacerbated by
storm run-off from the upper watershed.
Tsunamis are a special type of sea-borne
flood that are often caused by earthquakes
that rapidly change the sea level through
movement of the ocean floor.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
If the teacher has internet access, they may
show the following video.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6Z7
25peAOzI (8:09 mins)
Hurricanes
Hurricanes are tropical depressions which
develop into severe storms characterized by
winds directed inward in a spiraling pattern
toward the center. They are generated over
warm ocean water at low latitudes and are
particularly dangerous due to their destructive
potential, large zone of influence,
spontaneous generation, and erratic
movement.
If the teacher has internet access, they may
show the following video.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sKvj
WTBQMpE (8:32 mins)
Drought
Extreme lack of rain in nay country causes the
soil to dry up and the plants to get insufficient
water to grow. The plants then usually wilt
and die. Sometimes farmers will attempt to
keep their plants alive by using irrigation
systems. These are artificial ways of
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
transporting water from one place to another
place where it is needed.
If the teacher has internet access, they may
show the following video.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k_avUa
_schk (1:49 mins)
Weather Events in Other Parts of the
World
Ask students to view the following picture
and predict the problems that are likely to
arise from excessive snowfall.
Retrieved from:
https://www.outlookindia.com/international
/thick-blanket-of-snow-covers-parts-of-
england-photos-269190
➢ slippery roads for walking or driving,
➢ poor visibility for walking or driving.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
➢ heavy power lines break & cut
electricity.
➢ dangerous travel for emergency
vehicles
➢ cold weather & danger of frost bite
Best Designs for a Roof: Teacher-led
Discussion
Students, I want to show you two designs for
a roof on a home.
Retrieved from:
https://www.brickworks.com.au/articles/ho
me/nine-advantages-pitched-roofs-have-over-
flat-roofs/
If it rains very hard, which roof do you think
would be least likely to leak? (the pitch roof would
be better because the water would run off whereas the
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
flat roof may even hold water for a long time and
therefore could leak through)
When you look at these two pictures of the
Gable roof and the Hipped roof. Which of
these two do you think would be better for
resisting the wind in a hurricane?
(the gable roof allows the wind to blow from the end
and cause damage whereas the hipped roof pushes the
wind to the top with no exposed ends)
Retrieved from:
https://www.iko.com/na/document-library/
A roof can be made from several different
types of materials. If you could choose
between a shingled roof (tiles, wood shingles,
or asphalt shingles) or a metal roof, which do
you think would provide the most protection
against a hurricane? And Why?
(all types of shingles would be susceptible to the wind
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
lifting the shingle from the edge. The metal roof has
fewer exposed surfaces and would therefore resist the
wind better.)
Teacher note: if you have any samples of
shingles, you might bring them to class to
show students)
Retrieved from:
https://alphabuilt.com/residential/roofing-
materials/
Floodplain Activity Teacher
Demonstration
Adapted from:
https://www.teachengineering.org/activities/
view/cub_natdis_lesson07_activity1
In this activity the teacher will demonstrate
with a model the impact of water flow in a
narrowing river. The activity is meant to
demonstrate two things:
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1) the flow rate in the river has an
impact primarily at the point of the
narrowing and,
2) a wall or levee can help to prevent
overflow at the narrowing and thus
protect against damaging of homes.
The students will begin by making 6-10
models of houses that will be placed on the
floodplain of the river using the template
below.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The teacher will make a model of the
floodplain using an aluminium pan (with the
end removed) covered with plasticine as
shown below. The entire model can be placed
in a plastic tub (as above) to collect water as it
runs out the bottom of the model.
A narrowing of a river.
The students will place 6 constructed houses
on the riverbank. With the upper end of the
tray leaning on a book, the teacher will pour
water carefully down the river from the top of
the tray.
Trial 1: Pour a half cup of water slowly
through the narrow section riverbed model.
Have students record their observations and
the number of damaged houses as their data
for the trial. Have them remove any damaged
houses. This trial shows that with a modest
amount of water, it flows through the narrow
river section without overflowing the
riverbed.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Trial 2: Clean up any excess water in the tub.
Replace any damaged houses with new ones
placed on the same position, as marked on
the clay floodplain. Have students pour one
cup of water through the rivers bed quickly.
Have students record their observations and
the number of damaged houses as their data
for the trial. Have them remove any damaged
houses. This trial demonstrates water
overflowing at the narrow point of the river
when there is an increase in water flow.
Trial 3: Clean up any excess water in the tub.
Replace any damaged houses with new ones
placed in the same position, as marked on the
clay. Have the students on the team build clay
levees (piece of raised clay or small clay walls)
around the narrow portion of their river.
Again, pour one cup of water quickly through
the river, as in Trial 2. Have students record
their observations of what happened this time
and the number of houses damaged. This trial
shows that the river overflows on the
downstream side of the levees.
➢ This activity can be differentiated by
having students create similar models
and do trials themselves.
➢ This activity can be extended by
experimenting with different types of
rivers as shown below.
Grade 3 Science
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
See trial descriptions here:
https://www.teachengineering.org/activities/
view/cub_natdis_lesson07_activity1
Additional Resources and Materials
Use of multisensory activities and materials to assist all learners Spray bottle (to test designs), scissors (several to share), Markers (enough to share),
Large, shallow plastic storage container or other basins (optional), Assorted roofing materials: 1 roll paper towels, leaves, Fabric scraps, aluminum foil
squares, 3" x 3”, straws, popsicle sticks/other suitable material, Other materials of your choosing, Several rolls of tape, Cardboard, newspaper, charts
of weather patterns, pictures of weather patterns.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher such as reading
material at a lower or higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
Severe weather is any destructive weather phenomenon. The term is usually used to refer to severe thunderstorms and related storms, such as
tornadoes, hail, and downbursts. Unlike normal weather, severe weather does not happen as much. Most severe weather, like hurricanes and severe
thunderstorms, happen in the summer. Winter storms are also kinds of severe weather, and these happen in the winter. Severe weather affects our
daily activities and the environment.
https://www.google.dm/books/edition/Weather_Patterns/Zn1mDwAAQBAJ?hl=en&gbpv=1&dq=weather+patterns+and+their+effects&printse
c=frontcover
https://en.islcollective.com/english-esl-worksheets/weather-conditions-crossword/9672
Grade 3 Science
Opportunities for Subject Integration: (Additional ideas about how the inclusive learning strategies might be adapted and/or applied to include other subjects in the
curriculum)
Literacy: Vocabulary – building word list and decoding new words relating to weather, listening to peers as they share information about design
solutions, speaking, reading passage about weather hazard,
• Mathematics: Geometry – shapes of materials for the construction of models, angles – arranging materials at different angles to complete designs;
Measurement – measuring materials at required lengths for the construction of models.
• Social Studies: Weather and climate – the impact of weather on our daily activities and the environment.
• TVET: Creativity in designing solutions to combat the impact of severe weather. Awareness of solution designs in other parts of the country and
the world. For example, replanting trees in the environment to act as windbreaks, building single story houses in hurricane areas.
Strategies that Support the Curriculum and Assessment Framework Note: This section is intended to assist writers as they check the curriculum to the
Curriculum and Assessment Framework It will be used to guide the writing but will not appear in the curriculum guides.
To ensure all children achieve high standards
• To provide feedback to parents/carers
• To identify areas where improvement is needed
• To monitor attainment against national targets
• To demonstrate effectiveness of teaching
• To improve teacher practice
• To support continuous professional development
• To promote good citizenship
• To encourage self reflection
Elements of the Essential Education Competencies that are addressed:
An educated person in the OECS will demonstrate they have: Where might this competency be promoted/developed in this learning
outcome and associated lessons?
Grade 3 Science
Developed Citizenship Competencies Being helpful as a citizen when natural disasters linked to weather occur.
Developed Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication Competencies Interpreting from pictures the nature of weather event and its impacts
Developed Well-being Competencies Being vigilant and careful when weather events may cause risks in the
community
Developed Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies Understanding the engineering process serves design thinking and problem
solving careers
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
There are companies within our the region that sell prefabricated homes that are hurricane proof.
links: https://www.drmprefab.com/zine/economy-news/hurricane-impact-in-the-caribbean-and-hurricane-proof-homes
https://www.topsiderhomes.com/bahamas-and-caribbean-home-building.php
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
