February 2025
OHPC GRADE 6 SCIENCE
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Introduction
The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of caring not only for themselves,
but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision-making will be enhanced by a systematic study of the structure and behaviour of
the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, learners benefit from leveraging and evaluating available
technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it.
The following Innovation Configuration Map is designed to assist teachers as they continue to develop the pedagogy that supports the curriculum. It
illustrates the key features of research informed best practices that might serve as a guide to teachers as they seek to engage with the curriculum with the
goal of having “Every Learner Succeed”.
The Teacher’s Developmental Sequence
Growth Area No Implementation Beginning Implementation Moderate Implementation Strong Implementation
Constructivist Teacher-centred Evidence of hands-on activities Evidence of teacher-scaffolder Active lessons that begin with questions
Pedagogy delivery of lessons investigations that necessarily involve about the world (and inherent discussions)
teacher-learner & learner-learner that are socially relevant & invoke cultural
discussions. Minds-on learning. perspectives.
Building Lessons that rely solely Learners are involved in experiments The processes of science & 21st Evidence that the lesson, within active
Process Skills on the recall of century skills are highlighted in learner- authentic learning contexts (real world
knowledge centred activities. (e.g., observing, questions) involves tracking & evaluating
inferring, hypothesizing, measuring, learner growth in the processes of science &
graphing etc. & researching, critical 21st century skills.
thinking, communicating)
Integrating Attention to subject Reading about science topics & Emphasizing literacy (Reading anchor Science Investigations that begin with
Subjects focused topics rather collecting/tabulating data. texts, researching, listening, writing & socially relevant questions that require
than learner outcomes communicating). Emphasizing science numerical analysis &, in communication of
studies that invoke social concern & results, invoke quality discussions that
discussion. Emphasizing the collection, develop literacy skills.
interpretation & communication of
numbers as an account of science
investigation
Empowering No technology tools Use of simple technologies to Use of technologies to access Use of digital pictures, video, simulations &
learning with evident. Teacher-led motivate learners. These may or may enhanced types of learning that place probes to pose authentic real world
Instructional instruction accessing not activate new ways of learning. the learner at the centre of questions as a basis for discussions &
Technology traditional resources; constructing knowledge. (e.g. learner- developing process skills.
led simulation activities, use of
2
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Growth Area No Implementation Beginning Implementation Moderate Implementation Strong Implementation
primarily textbook- computer probes to collect data, logic
based instruction exercises with coding)
Integrating No evidence of Simple activities that challenge Activities that emphasize design Lessons that invoke problem solving to
Technology as problem solving in any learners to think about the problem challenges that rely on careful design solutions in response to community
“a way of context solving that has led to human planning, prototyping & testing. problems.
adapting” adaptation in the world. This
necessarily involves developing an
awareness of technology around us
Progression of Learners’ Knowledge Skills & Values P-6
3
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Grade Level Expectations for Skills and Attitudes1:
SKILLS – A Summary of Skills to be demonstrated by the end of Grade 6
In the development of inquiry; problem identification, design and solution; learners should demonstrate the following:
1The skills and attitudes have been taken verbatim from the OECS Primary Grades’ Learning Standards
4
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
ATTITUDES – Summary of Attitudes to be developed by Grade 6 Learners
In the activities throughout Grade 5, learners are encouraged to develop the attitudes required for positively interacting with scientific and technological
ideas and concepts. At the end of the Grade, these are some of the attitudes that should be evident:
5
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Structure and Properties of Matter
Introduction to the Subject: The study of science encompasses knowledge, processes and values. Scientifically literate persons will foster an attitude of caring not
only for themselves, but as responsible citizens, for the world around them. Their decision making will be enhanced by a systematic study of the structure and
behaviour of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment. In learning science, Learners benefit from leveraging and evaluating available
technological tools to study and therefore understand the world and their relationship to it
Strand (Topic): Structure and Properties of Matter:
An understanding of how matter is constructed allows us to build molecules that are useful to humans.
Essential Learning Outcome: ELO 1: Develop models to describe the atomic composition of simple molecules and extended structures.
Clarification Statement: Emphasis is on developing models of molecules that vary in complexity. Examples of simple molecules could include ammonia and
methanol. Examples of extended structures could include sodium chloride or diamonds. Examples of molecular-level models could include drawings, 3D ball and
stick structures, or computer representations showing different molecules with different types of atoms.
Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include valence electrons and bonding energy, discussing the ionic nature of subunits of complex structures, or a
complete depiction of all individual atoms in a complex molecule or extended structure.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Practicing Vocabulary Introductory Activity
Learners, I am sure all of you have taken medication some
Knowledge time in your life to help fight symptoms like a cold or
• Define the terms: infection. Ask Learners how they suppose scientist were able
o Atom to know how what medications would work (experiments,
o Molecule testing)
o Nucleus
o Proton In fact, Learners, the scientist designing medications must
o Neutron know exactly what the medication looks like at the
o Electron microscopic level in order to be sure that it will be effective
o Charge when it enters the body. Many of you would have heard of
o Element the building blocks of these medications called atoms and
6
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
o Bonds molecules. We know they are very small, so small, we can’t
o Molecular formula see them easily so …we are going to build models to
o Tetrahedron represent them.
o Lattice structures First, let’s learn about the smallest building block, the atom.
o Diamond Learners listen “The Atom Song”
o Graphite https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oFLH_0B4ZLg (2:43
o Lubricant mins)
• Demonstrate they understand
that atoms make up matter all The following question card will be distributed to each group. They
around us. are to watch the video carefully to determine the correct answers.
When the song is over the teacher will review the answers by asking
• Compare atomic particles in the each team to report. The answers will be recorded on the board so
nucleus and those that orbit the everyone can learn the facts.
nucleus.
Predicting Shape
1. Using a model, predict what shape NCl
3
• Show how atoms can be
will take.
combined to make molecules. Possible Question Cards
1. When were atoms discovered?
2. What do atoms make up?
• Account for the difference that
3. Can you see an atom?
structure makes in properties of 4. What are the three parts of an atom?
graphite and diamond. 5. Which part of the atom has a
positive charge and resides in the
nucleus?
• Explain how the number of
6. Which part of the atom has a
electrons and protons in an atom
negative charge and orbits the
contributes to its charge. nucleus?
2. Using a model, predict what shape CCl
4
• Distinguish between 2d and 3d will take.
structures (water vs. methane)
Answers: 1. 1803: 2. Atoms make up all things, 3. No because it is
really small: 4. Protons, Neutrons and electrons: 5. Protons: 6.
Skills Electrons
• Calculate charge on an atom.
7
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Make models to reflect
molecular formula Teacher Download 3d Viewer Reinforcing the Vocabulary
In order to reinforce with Learners, the 3 View with Learners a second video to review the parts of the
• Classify atomic particles dimensional nature of molecules download the atom and to emphasize and explain the terminology:
free Rasmol®/Raswin program here:
http://www.openrasmol.org/ Retrieved from:
• Research natural product
It is a molecular viewer that allows you to rotate https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R1RMV5qhwyE
medicines originating from
molecules in real time using your mouse. In the (5:52 mins)
molecules
>display< menu choose >ball & stick<
Atom-small building block of everything!
• Communicate research findings
If you visit the following website you can Molecule- we put atoms together to make molecules (like
download common molecular structures to view words make a sentence)
• Investigate structures using
in Raswin by choosing >download RAW data <
online simulations and viewers in the upper right Nucleus- in the centre of the atom and contains positive and
PDB files can be found here: neutral particles
Attitudes/Values
https://github.com/wesbarnett/OPLS-
• Appreciation that understanding molecules/tree/master/pdb Protons-positive particles in the nucleus
atoms and molecules helps us
Neutrons- neutral particles in the nucleus
plan important research and
development to meet human Writing About Molecules Electrons – negatively charged particles that circle the
needs Choose a natural medicine made from a local nucleus in different orbits
plant.
• Persistence in investigating Include in a two page essay:
structures of molecules we can’t 1) A picture of the molecule (3 marks) After the video, have Learners draw a simple picture of an atom
see 2) What is the medicine used for (3 marks)
3) What natural product does the medicine
come from? (3 marks)
• Interest/Curiosity in how atoms 4) Where is the natural product grown in
are assembled to make the world? (3 marks)
important molecules.
● Be persistent in developing
models of varying complexity.
8
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://www.vectorstock.com/royalty-free-
vector/simple-model-of-atom-structure-with-electrons-vector-
● Foster a habit of inquiry into the
21958597
atomic composition of simple
molecules and extended Learners can build an atom using the PHET simulation here:
structures. https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/build-an-atom/latest/build-
an-atom_all.html
● Demonstrate resourcefulness
as they use everyday materials
to develop models.
● Work collaboratively with group
members and other members of
the class to produce the models,
make presentations, etc.
● Develop a sense of
stewardship towards the
environment and respect for
As a guide they should answer the following questions:
living organisms affected by
a. Where is the only place the simulation will allow you to
energy choices.
add protons? (nucleus)
b. Where is the only place the simulation will allow you to
● Participate in a class discussion add neutrons? (nucleus)
of their ideas and opinions c. What is the charge on the atom when the number of
related to atomic composition. electrons is one more than protons? (-1)
d. What is the charge on the atom when the number of
electrons is one less than the number of protons? (+1)
● When conducting practical and
e. How can the atom assume a neutral charge? (equal protons
group work, display sensitivity
and electrons)
and offer assistance to peers who
may have physical or learning
9
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
challenges. What is an Element?
• Analyze structures to ensure
Tell Learners that when they hear the term element it refers to a
faithfulness to the design.
substance that contains only one type of atom. For instance, if I
said you had a bucket of the element gold, you would know it
contained only gold atoms which have unique numbers of
protons, neutrons and electrons.
Atoms Combine to Form Molecules!
Explain to Learners that atoms can be combined in many different
ways to make new substances called molecules. The atoms are
joined together by something called bonds.
Just like you have a bond or connection to your brother, sister,
mother or father, atoms are bonded together to form molecules.
Building Models
Now Learners, we are going to use marshmallows (atoms) and
toothpicks (bonds) to make some simple molecules.” The
number of atoms in a molecule is called its molecular formula.
E.g. the molecule hydrogen peroxide H O has 2 hydrogen
2 2
atoms and 2 oxygen atoms-note: we don’t usually write “1” in
our formulae so CO is carbon monoxide and it has 1 carbon
and 1 oxygen atom.
Teacher Notes:
a. You could also coffee sticks and plasticine balls if
available.
b. Choose marshmallows or plasticine of different colors
for different types of atoms
The teacher will now distribute marshmallows and toothpicks so
that children can build the molecules along with the teacher as the
teacher demonstrates and poses questions.
10
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The children will use a sheet of paper to create the table below and
fill in drawings as they build their molecules.
It is important that the teacher lead Learners in creating these
molecules by:
i. first telling them how many atoms of each they have
to work with and
ii. getting them to guess how they might be situated
Molecule Picture
Hydrogen (H
2)
Oxygen (O )
2
Water (H O)
2
Ammonia (NH )
3
Methane (CH )
4
Actual models will appear as below
11
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Teacher Note: It is important that you point out that molecules
aren’t necessarily flat.
E.g. The CH molecule is not flat; bonds go out from the carbon
4
atom in such a way that the 4 hydrogen atoms are as far apart as
possible (a tetrahedron)
This activity and photo were retrieved from:
https://betterlesson.com/lesson/resource/3181798/marshmallow-
molecules-directions-and-student-worksheet
Teacher note: If you have access to technology you may want to
build models on screen or have Learners access the simulation at
home for practice. See:
https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/build-a-
molecule/latest/build-a-molecule_all.html
Models of Extended Structures
Some molecules have different types of bonding that allows them
to form what are called lattice structures. Two such examples are
NaCl and diamond.
12
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The teacher may divide the class up to make a model of each for
the classroom using possible materials from the list below.
Materials:
• skewers/sticks/straws
• colored Styrofoam balls/marshmallows
• hot glue gun (optional)
NaCl Sodium chloride (table salt)
Retrieved from:
https://chemistry.stackexchange.com/questions/34119/number-
of-atoms-in-nacl-unit-cell
Diamond is a lattice of carbon atoms each in a tetrahedron shape
13
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://www.physics-in-a-
nutshell.com/article/13/diamond-structure
Because the carbon is bonded in so many directions, it makes
diamond one of the hardest things on earth!
Graphite is another carbon molecule with an unusual structure.
Based on this structure, why do you think it is in effective
lubricant?
The carbon layers are only weakly attracted and so the flat layers
can easily roll over each other. This makes graphite a good choice
for lubricating such things as locks. Its flexibility in one direction
and strength in another makes it useful for making handles and
shafts for sports items. (e.g. golf clubs and field hockey sticks)
Retrieved from: https://www.mechdaily.com/what-is-graphite/
14
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
Atomic Tutorial: https://contrib.pbslearningmedia.org/WGBH/arct15/SimBucket/Simulations/chemthink-atomicstructure/content/index.html
History of Atomic Theory; Rutherford Gold Foil Expt: https://interactives.ck12.org/simulations/chemistry/gold-foil/app/index.html
Build an Atom: https://stemonline.tech/en/chemistry/atoms/
Unique carbon molecule (Buckminster fullerene): https://www.acs.org/molecule-of-the-week/archive/b/buckminsterfullerene.html
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Calculating Atomic charge: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xz14VaLMw1U&t=47s (1:46 mins)
Atoms form Molecules: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hc0EtPPpZUU (1:57 mins)
Constructing Models: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dhhT3tRU0r4 (0:58 mins)
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics: Spatial awareness and the atom/calculating atomic charges/3d geometry of molecules
Language Arts: new terminology/research/communication of research
Social studies: History of atomic theory led to the atomic bomb & warfare decisions
Instructional Technology: Use of simulations for learning
TVET: Inventions that capitalize on the understanding of molecular properties e.g. diamond, graphite, carbon fibre, graphene, composites
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Local Culture
● Several of these molecules are used in our everyday lives (e.g. ammonia for cleaning, methane as a fuel, hydrogen peroxide in hair bleach and
as an antiseptic.
● Salt harvesting from the Salt ponds in Union Island.
● Gases emitted from the volcanic eruption and from sulfur springs.
Environment
• Some of the molecules make up substances commonly found in the environment (e.g. carbon dioxide, water vapour, diamond, sodium chloride, etc.
Agriculture
• Methane produced from animal waste and used as a biofuel.
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
Understanding rudimentary atomic theory allows the student to predict reactivity and build strategies for making novel molecules – careers in chemistry
15
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: ELO 2: Gather and make sense of information to describe that synthetic materials come from natural resources and
impact society
Clarification Statement: Emphasis is on natural resources that undergo a chemical process to form the synthetic material. Examples of new materials could
include new medicine, foods, and alternative fuels.
Assessment Boundary: Assessment is limited to qualitative information.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Think-Pair-Share: Posing a Big Question:
How many of you have ever made a product at home from raw
Knowledge materials or seen someone make an item?
We know that some things occur naturally in nature while other
• Learners are expected to define things are man made from different starting materials. We often
the terms: call the products made by humans, synthetic. A good example
• Natural resources might be the clothes we wear. They can contain cotton which is a
natural fibre which can be spun into thread to make clothes (see:
• Natural products
https://sewport.com/fabrics-directory/cotton-fabric).
• Synthetic materials
• Chemical process
If we check the tags on our clothes, we will often see a synthetic
• Impact on society fibre called polyester which is made from hydrocarbon
compounds. (see: https://sewport.com/fabrics-
• Identify a production process to directory/polyester-fabric)
produce synthetics, taking place
in the home or industry. I want you to work in groups and suggest at least two natural
products at home and community and two synthetic products you
• Explain how polymers are are aware of.
formed. (grass for weaving, milk, eggs, nuts, tubers, silk, jute for rope/plastic rope,
plastic containers, clothing, food products, foam insulation, synthetic cups)
• Describe the different types of
natural resources) and provide Let us get more practice at recognizing the natural versus the
examples of how each could be synthetic in our surroundings.
used in the production of Look at the following table. I think you will see that many natural
synthetic materials. products can sometimes be converted to synthetic products.
16
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Why Have Synthetics Become Important? I bet you thought that polymer clay was made from real clay but
• Classify synthetic materials into Sometimes natural resources are limited and this that isn’t the case. It is actually manmade from compounds made
categories (e.g., plastics, drives the production of synthetic or production from hydrogen and carbon (called hydrocarbons) but it has many
synthetic fibres, medicines, alternatives. properties similar to clay! (see::
alternative fuels) and discuss Have Learners research the examples below and https://www.sculpey.com/blogs/blog/10-surprising-facts-about-
their specific applications in write a response paper that addresses the polymer-clay)
daily life. following questions:
1) Why was synthetic rubber necessary
• Understand that human during world wars?
2) How was penicillin discovered/
production processes make
produced at the industrial level as a
goods and products which may
valuable antibiotic?
impact the environment.
3) How can plastics be useful in the design
and production of prosthetic devices?
• Compare and contrast the
Rubric:
properties of natural products
Logical argument 2 marks
and synthetic materials (e.g.,
Flow of ideas 3
durability, biodegradability, cost
Grammar & punctuation 5 marks
of production, environmental
Adequate sources of information 3 marks
impact).
• Discuss the role of chemistry in
Exit Tickets: At the end of each lesson, ask
society, specifically how
Learners to write down one thing they learned
advancements in chemical
and one question they still have about the topic.
processes have led to the
development of new materials
with significant societal benefits
(e.g., medical advancements,
diet alternatives, food safety)).
• Explore the relationship
between resource scarcity and
the need for synthetic
alternatives (e.g., the use of
17
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
synthetic rubber during wartime
shortages of natural rubber).
• Understand that technological
processes include
manufacturing and constructing
that may have an impact on
their lives.
• Understand the environmental
implications of both the
production and disposal of
synthetic materials (e.g.,
pollution from plastic waste,
energy use in manufacturing
processes).
• Identify careers related to the
development and management
of synthetic materials (e.g.,
chemical engineering,
environmental science,
materials science, waste
management).
Let us review some of the key definitions so we are able to better
Group Projects: Assign small groups to
• Investigate future trends in distinguish materials around us.
research a synthetic material and its impact on
synthetic material development,
society.
including sustainable ●Natural resources are resources that exist in nature not created
alternatives (e.g., bioplastics) by humankind.
and their potential to reduce ●Natural products are substances available in nature that can be
environmental impact. isolated and purified.
●Synthetic materials are new substances made in a laboratory
using readily available starting materials that may be natural in
18
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Skills: origin. Synthetic materials can be made by chemically changing the
starting materials to create a material with different characteristics.
• Differentiate between natural (Paraphrased from:
resources, natural products, and https://www.middleschoolchemistry.com/lessonplans/chapter6/l
synthetic materials by analysing esson12)
their origins and processes of
transformation. Impacts
Making and using synthetic materials can have both positive and
• Identify examples of common negative impacts on society.
Let us think about how a synthetic material has impacted us.
synthetic materials and explain
In groups I want you to discuss and arrive at two examples of the
the natural resources from
positive effects of synthetic plastics and two examples of negative
which they are derived.
impacts of synthetic plastics.
(useful plastic products: containers, bags, protective coverings, waterproof
• Analyse the positive and
clothing, toys, electronics)
negative impacts of synthetic
(negative impacts: disposal of plastic (landfill sites) water pollution, reliance on
materials on society, including
oil as a starting material, lack of recycling, dangerous fumes on burning)
economic, environmental, and
health effects.
What About Natural Resources?
Learners, we have already referred to hydrocarbons as the starting
• Research and present findings
materials for making many synthetic products, We will talk more
on a synthetic material’s impact
ab out that later but you should know these hydrocarbons largely
on society, showing the
Using the above graphic organizer, small student come from oil, a natural resource. For a very long time we have
connection between natural
groups will create a poster, a short essay and a used the burning of wood, coal and oil for cooking and heating. If
resources and synthetic
visual presentation (either poster or PowerPoint we also use oil for making useful synthetic materials, we may run
products.
®) to communicate to their peers their findings. out of this natural resource. This is an argument for developing
more alternate energies like solar, tidal and wind power.
• Undertake simple calculations
For homework, I want you to write a one-page response paper
to project impact of synthetic
Scoring Rubric that outlines the pros and cons of using oil for energy and
materials on cost of living,
synthetic materials.
disposal, landfill and
environment. (e.g. diapers)
Debating the Utility of Synthetic Materials
Learners engage in a debate on the benefits and drawbacks of
• Critically evaluate the societal synthetic materials in society.
implications of synthetic
19
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
material production, such as One group can argue from the perspective of environmentalists,
plastic pollution or while another argues from the industry’s point of view.
advancements in medicine. Have Learners watch the following video on Natural Resources to
help them understand the definition.
Attitudes/Values: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qw6uXh9yM54 (5:16 mins)
Oil and Making Synthetics
• Appreciate the importance of The oil that we find in the ground largely arises from compressing
natural resources in the plant life for 1000’s of years. This oil contains many molecules
production of synthetic made up from carbon and hydrogen atoms as a backbone. These
materials, recognizing the molecules are called hydrocarbons, and they can be refined to
balance needed between extract important building blocks for creating more complicated
resource use and environmental and useful synthetic molecules.
sustainability. One example of a useful hydrocarbon is ethylene purified from
petroleum natural gas. It can be combined with many other
• Appreciate that people use ethylene molecules in a chemical reaction to make a larger
production processes to change Natural Remedy versus Synthetic Drug synthetic molecule called polyethylene. Because ethylene is
considered the building block or unit, we call it a monomer where
materials to satisfy their needs. Learners should create a chart to compare the
“mono” means one. When we combine it with other ethylene
pros and cons of natural medicines versus
molecules, we create polyethylene, which is referred to as a
• Develop environmental synthesized drugs. Based on the chart, in several
polymer where “poly” means many units.
awareness by reflecting on the paragraphs, they should make a case for whether
environmental consequences of one or the other is a better choice for them as a
synthetic material use and consumer nesting their choice in a real example
promoting practices that of an ailment requiring treatment.
minimize harm.
Do the Math on Diapers!
• Respect scientific innovation by
understanding how synthetic A child in diapers for the first 2.5 years, will use,
materials have contributed to on average between 6,000 and 7,000 disposable
Ethylene monomer (C2H4) Polyethylene is called a
societal advancements, while diapers. Disposable diapers are the third largest
polymer.
also considering ethical contributors to landfills in the world. But they
implications. are also costly. Have Learners calculate what the
Polyethylene is a common chemical often associated with the
diapers would cost in total above if they average
• Value collaboration and open-
plastics industry.
$0.25 per diaper. (0.25 x 6500= $1625.00)
mindedness when engaging in
20
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
group projects and discussions, Learners should calculate how many diapers will This pie chart shows the uses of polyethylene. You can see from
listening to and considering be used by 30 Learners in their first 2.5 years of the pie chart that low density polyethylene is used primarily for
diverse perspectives. life if all parents are using disposable diapers for plastic bags and plastic coverings
their children. (30 x 6500= 195,000).
• Cultivate critical thinking about
the use of synthetic materials in
everyday life and the potential
future challenges and
opportunities they present.
Retrieved from:
https://zpolymer.com/products/polyethylene/ldpe/
Video Resource: Making Plastics
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IwdUwffecsM (9:06 mins)
As Learners watch the video they should consider answering the
following questions:
a) What are the raw materials for making plastics?
b) What are the properties of plastics that make them useful?
c) What are the many uses of plastics?
d) What environmental concerns do you think plastics pose?
There are many more polymers made from natural hydrocarbon
monomers.
Have Learners for an overnight assignment look up the uses of
“polyester” and “polypropylene” and “polyvinylchloride”.
21
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Making a Polymer Plastic from Milk: Classroom
Demonstration by the Teacher and/or an experiment for Learners
if resources are available
See instructional video here for materials and process.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QulxqE4XY9M (5:06 mins)
Materials needed: milk, vinegar, sieve, paper towel, hotplate or
microwave
Instructions:
1. Heat 1 cup of 3% homogenised milk on a hot plate or in
the microwave until it bubbles
2. Add the hot milk to 1 tbsp (15 mL) of vinegar in a large
bowl
3. Pour the curdled mixture into a sieve lined with paper
towels
4. Allow the white solid to dry in the sieve for ~30 mins.
Squeeze the solid in a ball between paper towels to further remove
water.
5. Flatten out the dried solid and press it with a cookie
cutter.
6. Place the pressed-out shape in the window for 24 hours to
harden.
You have demonstrated with children that the plastics can be bent
and shaped. You have made a natural polymer plastic from a
protein found in milk called Casein.
The combination of heat and vinegar (acetic acid) helps to pull out
or precipitate the protein casein from the milk. Plastic is now
synthesized from petroleum products but before this way of
making plastic, it was common to make natural plastics from plants
and animal fat.
Making a Polymer from White Glue (teacher demonstration)
In a small glass jar, combine 2 tablespoons of Borax cleaning
powder and 10mL of water/stir.
22
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
In another small jar, place 2 tablespoons of white carpenter’s glue.
Pour the Borax slurry/solution into the jar of glue and stir with a
wooden coffee stick. As you stir the glue will change consistency
from a liquid to a rubbery polymer. Decant the liquid and rinse off
the rubbery glob with water. Dry it off and pass around to children
to see the new polymer.
Useful Polymers Have a Cost (teacher demonstration)
Disposable diapers contain a synthetic polymer called sodium
polyacrylate. It is a polymer that is able to trap up to 30 times its
weight in water.
Over a newspaper on the floor, a teacher can open the cotton in
the middle of the diaper and, running it through their hands, they
will see small sand-like pebbles of the polymer fall on the
newspaper. Gathering the powder up in a jar, the teacher can add
ml volumes of water and with stir note the powder forming a gel.
The capacity of the powder/gel to absorb water will amaze the
Learners. While this technology has been an enormous
convenience for parents, this synthetic invention is said to take 500
years to biodegrade in a landfill site!
Additional Resources and Materials
Video resources:
• Natural vs Synthetic: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QVdv3atjZ3g (2:56 mins)
• Synthetic Polymers: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UwRVj9rz2QQ (4:59 mins)
• Making Plastics https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ggh0Ptk3VGE&t=119s (6:00 mins)
• Plastic Pollution: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VUUUxOl715s (4:21 mins)
• Plastic Pollution of Oceans: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yomf5pBN8dY (4:35 mins)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Core Ideas for meeting specific curriculum outcomes. Matter of any type can be subdivided into particles that are too small to see, but even then, the matter
still exists and can be detected by other means (e.g., by weighing or by its effects on other objects). For example, a model showing that gases are made from
matter particles that are too small to see and are moving freely around in space can explain many observations, including the inflation and shape of a balloon; the
23
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
effects of air on larger particles or objects (e.g., leaves in wind, dust suspended in air); and the appearance of visible scale water droplets in condensation, fog, and,
by extension, also in clouds or the contrails of a jet.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2012. A Framework for K12 Science Education: Practices, Crosscutting Concepts, and Core Ideas.
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/13165.
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Science: Discuss the chemical processes involved in turning natural resources into synthetic materials. You can use simple examples like rubber, plastics, and
medications.
Social Studies: Explore how synthetic materials have impacted Caribbean economies, like the role of oil refineries or agriculture and the use of fertilizers.
Mathematics: Have Learners calculate how much of a natural resource is needed to produce a certain quantity of synthetic material or explore the cost/benefit
analysis of using synthetic vs. natural resources.
Environmental Studies: Discuss the environmental effects of synthetic materials like plastic waste and the impact on marine life in the Caribbean.
Elements from Local Culture
● Vincentian farmers, especially in the rural area make coalpits to create charcoal which is used for fuel in outdoor cooking.
● Also in the rural areas, coconuts are green gold as they are used to make a variety of products i.e. coconut oil, coconut sugar cakes, bottled coconut water
● Some traditional natural remedies have been synthesised into modern medicines (e.g., the use of plants like neem or noni, aloe).
● Some of the traditional materials used in the home like crocus/plant based bags, gourd bowls, bamboo spoons, coconut fibres scrubbers are now being
replaced with products made from synthesised materials.
Environment
● Air masses and air pressure systems greatly influence the Caribbean weather. We have a known hurricane season because of this.
●
Technology
● How is technology used to make synthetic products.(How Its Made tv series. See:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x7ehv8dSHYQ&list=PL4gMXdLO5DEecaT1pOIiQ-Oc75kWuUxwp (5:24 mins)
TVET and Technology
● Incorporate local industries that rely on synthetic materials, such as manufacturing or oil refining. TVET programs that focus on these fields can offer
insight into local job markets and skills development.
Agriculture
● Synthetic fertilisers have impacted local Caribbean agriculture. Discuss natural vs. synthetic fertilizers and their effects on soil health and crop yields.
24
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Cultural Impact:
● Discuss how Caribbean culture interacts with synthetic materials, such as the replacement of traditional materials in clothing or household items with
synthetic alternatives. Explore the cultural significance of this shift, both positive and negative.
● Use timelines and or photos to show the changes in the materials used to make Carnival costumes on your island. Discuss the advantages and
disadvantages that each type material offers to designers, builders, revellers, and the economy.
25
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Chemical Reactions
Strand (Topic): Chemical Reactions:
This study allows us to predict how chemicals should react and assist in planning for synthesis of more complex useful products.
Essential Learning Outcome: ELO 1: Analyse and interpret data on the properties of substances before and after the substances interact to
determine if a chemical reaction has occurred.
Clarification Statement: Examples of reactions could include burning sugar or steel wool, fat reacting with sodium hydroxide, and mixing zinc with hydrogen
chloride.
Assessment Boundary: Assessment is limited to analysis of the following properties: density, melting point, boiling point, solubility, flammability, and odour.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Changes in Water Remind Learners that in grade 5, they would have done several
Learners should explain why state changes of experiments where they cooled substances, melted substances, mixed
Knowledge water from solid >liquid>gas are physical
substances, etc.
• Define the terms: changes and not chemical.
We learned the difference between a physical change and a chemical
o Water vapor Have them explain how this relates to the
change. Let us review, with this picture.
o Phase or state change water cycle and our weather. (Evaporation,
If we place a watch glass on a beaker of boiling water.
o Physical change condensation, precipitation are all physical
o Chemical change changes of water.)
o Starting materials
o Products Practicing Terminology (true or false)?
o Reactants 1. In a chemical reaction the starting
o Acrid smell materials are called reactants. (T)
o Closed system 2. In a reaction of vinegar with steel
o Waft wool we would say that iron oxide
o Endothermic reaction (rust) is a product of the reaction.
o Law of Conservation (T)
of Mass 3. Dissolving solids in water is a
o Collisions physical change. (T)
o Precipitate Retrieved from: https://www.fishersci.ca/shop/products/pyrex-
o Hard and soft water
26
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
o Soap scum 4. A chemical reaction that overall ribbed-watch-glasses-3/p-207592
o Exothermic reaction causes cooling is called an
o Combustion exothermic reaction (F)
• What is happening to the volume of water in the beaker? (it is
5. The reaction of iron and oxygen is
decreasing-disappearing)
• Demonstrate they understand an exothermic reaction because it
• Where does the liquid water go? (it turns to water vapor; water as
the difference between creates heat. (T)
a gas)
physical and chemical changes 6. Combustion is the process of
• What do we see on the bottom of the watch glass? (water
by giving examples of each. burning (T)
droplets; water as a liquid)
• Demonstrate they understand
Experimental Findings • What has happened to the water vapor that was escaping? (it
the range of indicators of
Learners should be asked to list all the cooled on the glass and converted back to liquid water)
chemical change by giving
indictors of chemical change they observed
examples of each.
in experiments and demonstrations held in If you remember, we call these phase or state changes from liquid
class. to gas to liquid.
• Explain how a burning splint
(gas evolved/temperature change/precipitates/color • After these changes, do we end up with liquid water again?
can be used to assess which of
change/ odour change/starting materials (yes)
the following gases are being
released in a chemical consumed/light produced) So the water didn’t chemically change its structure of H 2 O, it just
Graphical Analysis changed its state of matter.
reaction.
Learners should explain why the graph of
temperature versus time for the steel So if I were to ask you what type of change this was chemical or
• Demonstrate they
wool/vinegar experiment eventually flattened physical, what would you say? (physical change)
understand that when a
out? (After the reactants get used up to make iron
chemical reaction has oxide, there is no more heat produced and the What other examples might be physical change of water? (melting an
occurred, new substances temperature of the room will begin to moderate the ice cube from solid to liquid water)
(products) are formed that measured temperature of the system.)
have different properties than
On a piece of paper, I want you to write down why each of the
pictures below represents a physical change.
the original substances
Which Gas is Formed?
(reactants).
Have Learners explain how you would Melting chocolate
determine if the gas given off during a
• Demonstrate they (change from solid chocolate
chemical reaction was Oxygen, Hydrogen or
understand that when two to liquid chocolate upon
Carbon dioxide, using a lighted splint.
chemical compounds react, cooling will become solid again)
(oxygen- burn brighter/ hydrogen flammable
the atoms are rearranged to
explode/carbon dioxide quenches flame)
Retrieved from: https://pixabay.com/photos/chocolate-cream-
27
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
form new products. food-dessert-sweet-89034/
• Differentiate between
Applications Ice Treat
endothermic and exothermic
1. Your grandmother is making a loaf
chemical reaction.
bread in the kitchen. What evidence (change from liquid juice to frozen desert)
can you provide her that this
Skills
represents a chemical change and
• Infer what will happen when not a physical change? (gas evolved to Retrieved from: https://www.freepik.com
certain substances react. rise bread, starting materials consumed)
2. The power goes out and you light a So to review our definition:
wax candle with a match. Through
• Hypothesize the changes that
the evening the candle continues to Physical changes are those changes that do not result in new substances being
would take place after
run until the candle ha almost formed. In most cases, these changes can also be easily reversed.
reactants are mixed.
disappeared.
What evidence can you provide that
The other type of change we have observed in the world around us is
• Represent data collected from burning a candle is a chemical
called a chemical change. Unlike physical changes, these changes
chemical reactions in the form change? (heat is produced, a gas is given
cannot be reversed because a new substance is formed.
off, wax as starting material is consumed)
of a graph or table. Think about cookies and bread. These all started with ingredients like
3. You mistakenly leave a litre of milk
flour, water, baking soda and maybe yeast; we end up with something
out on the counter on a hot day.
• Make careful observations of that has very different characteristics; something we can eat! We can’t
When you return you notice big
go back to the starting materials because they have been
demonstrations and
changes. What evidence can you
transformed into a different product.
experiments.
provide that a chemical change has
occurred? (spoiled odor, curdling-
Today we are going to investigate the evidence we can gather that a
• Exercise the wafting precipitate)
chemical change has actually occurred.
technique. 4. Your parent’s car will not start. You
suspect the battery is the problem.
Experiment 1: Done as a teacher demonstration
• Analyze and interpret You open the hood and observe the
observations to make battery cells and terminals. What
Materials needed for this reaction are:
conclusions about indicators evidence is likely present that would
Tablespoon of Baking soda, 20mL vinegar, a bottle, a balloon, a
of chemical change suggest a chemical change has been
measuring cylinder, safety goggles, a scale and a spatula/spoon, a
occurring that causes the battery to
funnel, thermometer.
• Apply basic malfunction? (corrosion-terminals may
principles/indicators of
28
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
chemical change to real life have white or green solid on copper wires,
NOTE: This experiment can also be done with an Alka seltzter®
occurrences. water in battery cells has diminished)
tablet and water if this is more accessible to teachers
5. You visited a carnival celebration
• Classify endo and exothermic and observed elaborate fireworks
processes. explosions. What evidence can you
suggest that fireworks involves
• Measure temperature changes. chemical reactions? (burning occurs of
the reactants, light is produced, gas is
produced)
• Assemble instrumentation to
carry out an experiment.
Explain the Findings: A One Page
Response Paper Retrieved from:
• Make careful volume and
A wax candle is lit. https://pixabay.com/photos/baking-soda-box-white-powder-
mass measurements of
30 mL of vinegar is added to a beaker. To 768950/
reactants
the same beaker is added a heaping https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:TBBSC_Digital_Scale.jpg
tablespoon of baking soda. Instantly, many
• Communicate
bubbles are produced.
experimental/demonstration Demonstration
The beaker is moved towards the candle and
results by keeping good
the evolving gas is poured out over the
records in student notebooks. Add 20 mL of vinegar to a plastic bottle.
candle wick. The flame is extinguished.
Weigh the total mass of the following: a balloon, 1 tablespoon of
In a one-page response paper, respond to the
• Tabulate data following: baking soda and the bottle containing vinegar. Rccord the total mass
on the board for children to see and record in their notebook. This is
• Draw a picture that depicts the
the before data. Explain to Learners we call these starting materials
• Construct graphs experiment (2 marks)
reactants.
• Explain the chemical changes you
• Interpret graphs are observing. (5 marks)
• Explain how you can predict what
• Identify the products and gas is being produced in the beaker.
reactants in a chemical (3 marks)
reaction. • Bonus question (+5) Research the
two chemical reactions that are
happening in this experiment and
• Write word equations to
write down the word equation for
represent a chemical reaction
each
29
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Teacher note: Retrieved from: https://www.shutterstock.com/search/bottle-
Attitudes/Values Vinegar (acetic acid) plus baking soda balloon
(sodium bicarbonate) generates carbon
• Appreciate the importance of dioxide which puts out the flame. The other Ask them to observe carefully the characteristics of the starting
products are water and sodium acetate. materials and write those down. Pass the bottle around for children to
physical and chemical
The reaction in the flame is carbon plus heat observe and ask these questions.
changes in our everyday life.
and oxygen (in the air) to generate water and • What does the bottle of liquid look like (clear liquid in the bottom
carbon dioxide. of bottle)?
• Demonstrate persistence
• What does the liquid smell like? (sharp or acrid smell)
when conducting
Teacher note: teach Learners to use their hand to waft the
experiments on physical and smell towards their nose- they should not ever put their nose
chemical changes. directly to the opening of the reaction vessel
• What does the baking soda look like? (fine white powder, no smell)
• Show interest/curiosity in the • Using a thermometer, measure the temperature of the liquid
activities and presentations vinegar. Have Learners record this temperature in their
notebook.
on physical and chemical
changes.
Stretch the neck of a balloon several times. With a funnel (make with
paper if necessary), add the baking soda into the bottle and quickly place
• Use the inquiry approach the neck of the balloon over the opening in the top of the bottle.
when conducting scientific • Ask the Learners what they observe happening? (there are
experiments on physical and bubbles in the liquid/the balloon is beginning to inflate)
chemical changes. • What has happened to the solid go that was added to the
bottle? (it is no longer there, it may hay have reacted)
• Show respect for evidence • While the balloon is still on the bottle, weigh the entire
closed system again and have Learners record the mass.
collected on different
(teacher note: the mass should not change- we will speak to
chemical and physical
this later)
changes.
• Remove the balloon and pass the bottle around for Learners
to carefully smell. Teacher note: teach Learners to use their
• Work collaboratively with hand to waft the smell towards their nose- they should not
group members to conduct ever put their nose directly to the opening of the reaction
experiments on physical and vessel (see:
chemical changes.
30
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m0xoin9snHQ (0.54
• Show respect for living things mins) How does the smell compare to the beginning before
we added the baking soda? (not as strong smelling)
and the physical environment
by disposing of chemicals
Measure the temperature of the liquid in the bottle and have
properly as this could harm
Learners record it. (The temperature should have decreased-
organisms.
explanation: It took energy to break the baking soda and vinegar
apart and energy was released when the products were formed.
• Participate actively in Since more energy was needed to break the baking soda and vinegar
classroom discussions on apart, the temperature went down (decreased). A reaction that
overall causes cooling is called an endothermic reaction.)
physical and chemical
changes.
Learners, what are the changes we have observed?
1) A gas is produced
• Wear safety goggles at all 2) The solid baking soda has disappeared and only a liquid remains
times when conducting (irreversible reaction)
experiments. 3) The temperature has changed in the liquid
4) The odor of the gas above the liquid has become less acrid
• Respect and undertake
These are all indicators or signs that a chemical change has occurred.
wafting of odors in
observations
Repeat the experiment for Learners but this time leave the balloon off
of the bottle. Learners, you have already identified that this chemical
• When conducting practical and change produces a gas. There is a simple test we can do to narrow
group work, display sensitivity down what that gas might be.
and help peers who may have What are some of your guesses? It has to be somehow part of the
physical or learning challenges. starting materials.
Vinegar is also called acetic acid and the formula is: CH₃COOH
Baking soda is called sodium bicarbonate and the formula is:
NaHCO₃
If you look at the starting materials, what gasses are possible if we mix
these up?
(oxygen, carbon dioxide, hydrogen)
31
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
After adding the baking soda to the vinegar, prepare to hold a lit
wooden splint at the mouth of the bottle but first ask Learners these
questions:
• Now Learners, we know that to burn something we need
oxygen so if this chemical reaction is producing oxygen, what
will happen? (the splint will continue to burn or burn brighter)
• We also know that carbon dioxide that we breathe out not
only blows out birthday candles but is also used in fire
extinguishers. If this reaction is producing carbon dioxide,
what will likely happen? (It should put the flame out.)
• Lastly, hydrogen gas is very flammable. You may have heard
that hot air balloons of the past that were filled with
hydrogen gas created some big explosions. (see:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fURATK5Yt30 (5:09
mins)
What is likely to happen if the gas produced is hydrogen? (The
splint will burn but maybe explode!)
Proceed to hold the burning splint to the mouth of the bottle- the
splint should go out. Which gas is it Learners? (carbon dioxide)
Explain to Learners that the outcome of this reaction is new materials
we call products of the reaction. Because the balloon sealed off the
bottle, we say that this was a closed system; nothing could escape.
• What did you notice about the masses that you wrote down
before and after the chemical reaction? (they are almost the same)
Why would that be? Let me explain.
Everything in and on Earth is made of matter. The amount of matter
on Earth does not change. Matter is only changed from one form to
another. Matter changes physically and chemically all the time;
however, the total amount of matter always remains the same. This is
known as the Law of Conservation of Matter.
32
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Matter can neither be created nor destroyed. It can only change from
one substance to another.
In our experiment, there was a chemical change but even though we
have new products, the overall mass of the system did not change.
Experiment 2: Done as a teacher demonstration
Materials required
Two clear plastic cups, Sodium carbonate (Washing soda), Magnesium
sulphate (Epsom salt), Water, Measuring cylinder, Measuring spoon
and Popsicle sticks for stirring
Retrieved from:
https://pixabay.com/photos/popsicle-sticks-sticks-wood-35 0084/
https://www.flickr.com/photos/creative_tools/429793 3700
Demonstration
Place two teaspoons of Epsom salts in a cup and 2 teaspoons of
washing soda in a separate cup. Explain to Learners that these should
not be touched, tasted or smelled as you pass them around to make
observations. They should record their observations in their
notebooks.
33
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• What do you observe? (a crystalline solid and a powdery solid)
Ask Learners what they think will happen if you add one solid to
another? (a chemical reaction)
Add the Epsom salts to the washing soda and of course nothing
happens. “Learners, I bet you were expecting an explosion!”
In order for a chemical reaction to happen to happen, the reactants
must somehow have collisions, some way of interacting. In this case
the solids can’t interact at the molecular level because they both exist
as solids. They act like marbles added to sand! Nothing happens.
We are going to repeat the combination but this time, I am going to
add 100mL of water to each solid before I combine them. In this way,
the molecules can collide within the medium of water once they are
dissolved.
Show Learners separate containers and the addition of water and
stirring. It looks different now because the solids are now dissolved in
water. The water and the independent solids have not reacted- We
could prove this by evaporating the water off. We would see that we
got the washing powder and Epsom salts right back again- that would
demonstrate only a physical change.
• What do you notice about the two solutions? Did the solids
dissolve? (the solutions are both clear; you can’t see any solids)
• But what do you predict will happen when we combine the
two solutions? (a chemical reaction)
Slowly add the washing soda solution to the Epsom salts solution.
• Learners, what do you see happening? (a solid is forming in the
water and falling to the bottom)
Scientists call that solid a precipitate.
What do you suppose that solid is? It must be some combination of
the starting materials! What did we start with?
34
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Washing soda has a chemical name sodium carbonate.
Epsom salt has a chemical name magnesium sulfate.
These two chemicals get together and swap partners!
sodium carbonate + magnesium sulfate >
magnesium carbonate + sodium sulfate
As it happens, one product, sodium sulfate readily dissolves in water
but we say that magnesium carbonate precipitates out of the water as
a solid.
So Learners, we see that a precipitate is another indicator of chemical
change.
Compounds of magnesium and calcium are common in our
environment, but they can impact our water supply.
Hard and soft water
Water can be classified as hard water and soft water As water passes
over rocks, some of the minerals (e.g. Calcium and Magnesium), in
these rocks dissolve in the water. As the water picks up the minerals, it
becomes hard water. Hard water has minerals containing magnesium
and calcium salts dissolved in it. Hard water does not lather with soap,
making it difficult to wash clothes with soap.
Soft water on the other hand lathers soap. Rainwater is a very good
example of soft water, as it contains very little dissolved substance
which is why rainwater is suitable for household purposes. As hard
water does not mix well with soap. We have to ‘soften’ hard water
before we can use it
35
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
What happens when soap is mixed with “hard” water?
Soap “scum” is a common example of a precipitate that forms when
certain minerals in water (e.g. calcium and magnesium) react with
soap. In this experiment, you will be making your own hard water
and mixing it with soap to see what happens. You will then compare
the lathering ability of soap and soap scum to find out whether soap
scum is a new substance or it is the same as soap.
Student Experiment
Water, Epsom salt (magnesium sulfate) , liquid soap, paper towels, 2
Popsicle sticks, 2 Empty disposable water bottles (8-oz) with caps,
clear plastic cups, 1 small cup, 1 tablespoon, 1 teaspoon
Procedure
1. Label three plastic cups Soap, Water and Hard Water.
2. Prepare the soap solution (a few drops of liquid soap in a glass
of water and stirring the mixture).
3. Prepare the hard water (2 teaspoons of Epsom salt (magnesium
sulfate) to a glass of water. Stir the solution until no more solid
will dissolve).
4. Place ¼ cup of water in the cup labelled Water.
5. Add 1 tablespoon of the soap solution to both the
Water and Hard Water cups.
6. Look at both cups from the top and the side.
Ask Learners:
● What differences, if any, do you observe in the way soap
combines with water compared with what happened when it
was added to hard water?
36
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Expected results:
The soap solution will mix with water and cause the water to look
cloudy. When the soap solution is added to hard water, a white curd-
like substance will form. This is the precipitate, “soap scum” which
is the result of magnesium sulfate in the hard water undergoing a
chemical reaction with a soap molecule.
Experiment 3: More Indicators of Chemical Change
Teacher note: This can be done as a teacher demonstration or a
student experiment. The chemical reaction of steel wool (iron) and
vinegar (acetic acid) creates a foul smell so it should be carried out in a
well-ventilated area inside the classroom or outside.
Materials needed: Vinegar, steel wool, thermometer, Ziplock® bag,
graduated cylinder, glass reaction container (bowl or beaker)
Procedure
Place the steel wool in a Ziplock® plastic bag and pass it around the
classroom for Learners to observe and take note of the characteristics
of the steel wool. Explain to them that this is iron wool (symbol Fe).
Place 20 mL of vinegar in a bowl or beaker for each student group and
ask them to observe and take note of the characteristics of the vinegar
(e.g. clear liquid with sharp acrid smell) Teacher note: Again, remind
Learners of the practice of wafting a smell towards their nose rather
than putting their nose in close proximity to the vinegar.
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m0xoin9snHQ)
Within the bag, have Learners break off a piece of the steel wool,
remove it from the bag and place it in the reaction bowl containing the
20mL of vinegar.
Be sure to cover the steel wool with vinegar and let it set for one minute.
37
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Remove the steel wool from the vinegar and gently squeeze out any
excess vinegar.
Wrap the steel wool around the base of the thermometer and place the
thermometer into the clean glass beaker. Cover the beaker with a paper
towel or a lid to trap the heat inside.
Record the starting temperature and then record the temperature every
30 seconds for 5 minutes
Ask them to record their observations in their notebooks.
Sample notebook:
Observations of starting materials
Steel wool:
Vinegar:
Temperature (degrees C) Time (secs)
0
30
60 > 5 mins
Observations of reaction and products:
In their notebooks, Learners should plot a graph from their data table
where temperature is on the y axis (ordinate) and time is on the x axis
(abscissa). Have Learners comment on the shape of the graph (increase
in temperature and then leveling of temperature as reaction subsides)
What signs did they see that a chemical reaction maybe happening?
• Disappearance of steel wool starting material
38
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Color change (brownish orange)
• Temperature change (increases and then levels off)
• New odour given off
➢ Learners what do you think the products may have been?
(Perhaps, something with iron in it?)
➢ What was the color change did you see? (orange brown)
➢ Did it remind you of anything you may have seen in the
community that was made of iron? (rusty nails, rusty bicycle, rusty
car, rusty railing)
Rust is iron reacted with oxygen in the air. (Fe O )
2 3
Let me explain this reaction you have just seen.
Explanation:
Steel wool contains iron. It has a protective coating that keeps
oxygen from coming into contact with the iron. When the steel wool
is soaked in the vinegar, the vinegar which contains acetic acid,
removes this coating. When the protective coating is removed, the
iron is exposed and oxygen in the atmosphere can reach the iron in
the steel wool and reacts with it to form rust, also called iron oxide
The iron and the oxygen are referred to as reactants while the rust or
oxide, is the product of the reaction.
The reaction of iron and oxygen creates heat and therefore we call
it an exothermic reaction
Real world applications:
1. Why do you think some items made from steel will
39
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
sometimes rust? (scratching the paint off a car or bicycle)
2. Persons living near to the sea have observed that metal
objects tend to rust more easily than those much further
away from the sea. Why do you think this is so? (the salt
in the air may assist the rust forming reaction)
3. Ask Learners to make a list of items in the community that
rust easily. (steel items)
4. What do you think can be done to help to prevent
rusting? (Coating item with a layer of paint of grease)
5. Why do you think certain items are made from stainless
steel instead of iron? (Stainless steel less likely to rust)
6. Find the cost of an item that is made from stainless steel
and one made from iron? (stainless steel is more costly)
One Last Indicator of Chemical Change: Light
Burning of a candle or wood is the heating of the reactant to a high
enough temperature in the presence of oxygen. This causes what
we call burning and burning gives off light. Besides carbon dioxide
and water, combustion (burning) produces light!
Other things can burn in the presence of oxygen and produce large
bright amounts of light. A good example is the burning of
magnesium wire. See here:
https://www.youtube.com/shorts/1HCtPCHFA5Q
In fact, burning magnesium wire in a closed system was often used
for flash lighting in old cameras. (see:
https://www.youtube.com/shorts/5eUIepuZjKc
40
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Light is also given off in complex biochemical reactions within the
bodies of animals. This is called bioluminescence.
(see: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fYsAK24le6U (3:29
mins) Examples include fireflies and Deep sea animals
Additional Resources and Materials
We observe and use chemical reactions every day. Examples include the hot-packs and cold-packs that we use when we get hurt, burning of wood, baking,
etc. Medicines that we use when we are sick, such as cold medicines, are prepared by chemists in the laboratory by performing chemical reactions. Attempt
to make as many connections as possible to real world examples.
Bread making chemistry: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JlDlzr7Ljrw (5:33 mins)
Wine making: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x1kD6-izWtY (1:24 mins)
Cheese making: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D8AIamucOVQ (2:10 mins)
Making yogurt: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yNxiQEu3C6Q (3:26 mins)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Rusting of Iron: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qd2B9yCKzc0 (3:09 mins)
Nature of Burning: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AALNgOIJTfY (4:01 mins)
Precipitates: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KDR9HJhuvgQ (0:56 mins)
Colour Change as Indicator of Chemical Change: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PKUwxQI0wIo (3:55 mins)
Bioluminescence: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oQPj6S1V51U (3:28 mins)
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics: graphing temperature change
Language Arts: Research and Communication (response paper)
Social Studies: Appropriately disposing of products of chemical reactions
TVET: Inventions like glow sticks/rust prevention strategies/fireworks
Health: chemistry of medicines
41
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Arts & crafts: colour changes caused by chemical aging/ chemistry of restoration of classic art (see: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u3DY52c4Fcs (5:53
mins)
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Culture
● Many chemical reactions are involved in cultural activities (burning candles, burning wood to roast breadfruit, roasting breadfruit, corn, etc. for
campfire, cooking etc., burning sugar for pelau and toolum (type of sugar cakes.)
● As many of the islands have underground springs, the Learners can be asked to compare the ability of detergents to lather in rainwater, tap wate
and spring water.
● Many chemicals are used in everyday life. For example, medicines, cleaning agents, etc., glow sticks in crafts and costumes.
● Fireworks used in festive occasions
Environment
● After rainfall mud sometimes mix with water in the river and affect our water system/reservoir
● Hard water resulting from chemicals dissolving in the water as it passes over rocks or drains through soils
Technology
● Many of the materials that are involved in technological devices, e.g. computers, phones, etc. are created from chemical reactions.
● Many technologies are used to determine if new products are formed and to study these products.
TVET
● A number of areas in TVET utilise both physical changes (e.g. sanding and painting) and chemical changes (hair dressing, dyeing, etc.) in their activities.
Agriculture
● Use of chemicals in agriculture can affect organisms in the environment
Items of Inspiration:
Understadning chemical change is vital to solving many world problems
42
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: ELO 2: Develop and use a model to describe how the total number of atoms does not change in a chemical reaction
and thus mass is conserved.
Clarification Statement: Emphasis is on law of conservation of matter and on physical models or drawings, including digital forms that represent atoms.
Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include the use of atomic masses, balancing symbolic equations, or intermolecular forces.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Conservation of Mass in Closed Systems Introduction
In the Alka Seltzer® experiment and also the Learners, I want to pose to you a simple problem to start today.
Knowledge steel wool experiment, in the reactions, we are I want you to imagine you are operating a car assembly factory.
• Define the terms: able to accurately measure the mass of In that factory each car frame must have 4 wheels attached to it.
o Conservation of matter (mass) reactants (before) and products (after) because So my assembly line instructions would be:
o Effervescent tablets these are closed systems. What does that
o Methane mean? 1 frame + 4 wheels generates >>> 1 car
o Combustion reaction (The reactants before, they are consumed, can easily be
o Reactants measured independently. One of the products however is a. So, if I had 2 frames and 8 wheels, how many cars
o Products a gas. We can measure the mass of the flask and it would I turn out? (two cars)
o Open system contents with ease but we need the balloon to contain b. What if I had 2 frames and 6 wheels?
o Oxidation reaction the gas produced otherwise it would be lost to the (only 1 car with 2 wheels & 1 frame left over)
o Atoms vs molecules atmosphere. Because the balloon keeps the gases inside c. What if I had 1 frames and 9 wheels? (1 cars with 5 wheels
o Coefficients the flask system, we say that we have a closed left over)
o Subscripts system.) In cases b & c above we are limited in the cars we can turn out
by one of the starting materials.
• Demonstrate they understand that Predicting Mass of Products What is limiting us in
Assuming a closed system, if 32 g of Sulfur (b) not enough wheels
matter is neither created nor destroyed
reacts with 32g of Oxygen to form a (c) not enough frames
and that chemical reactions occur based
substance called Sulfur dioxide. Based on the
on the balance of atom son the reactant
principle of conservation of mass, what is the Chemical reactions are exactly the same. They can only make
side and the product side of the
mass of the product formed in this reaction? products if the proper amount of reactants are available.
equation.
(64 grams of sulfur dioxide)
Counting Atoms Another interesting thing I want you to think about with regard
• Compare an open and closed system
Many of you would have seen the experiment to our factory equation.
using an example (balloon
where you combine vinegar with baking soda.
experiments).
43
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The following is the balanced equation that The number of frames and wheels remains the same on both
• Show how to count atoms on each side describes that chemical reaction. sides of the equation. They are just distributed in a different
of an equation using an example. way.
CH₃COOH + NaHCO₃ →CH₃COONa +
• Explain how a factory model of car CO₂ + H₂O
assembly can be used as an analogy of
atoms get redistributed in a chemical Learners should confirm the conservation of
reaction. matter by counting atoms on the reactant and
product sides of the equation and filling in the
• Distinguish atoms and molecules table below. +
Teacher note: You may have to teach
Learners how to count atoms given the
• Distinguish coefficients and subscripts
subscripts on some. You needn’t discuss Chemical equations are exactly the same. Atoms are neither
in a balanced chemical equation.
moles at this point, just explain that the created nor destroyed. Both sides of an equation will have the
balancing of equations will come later. same number of atoms, they will just be distributed in different
ways. Since this is true, this in turn means that the mass of the
Skills
Atoms # Reactant side # Product side reactants will be the same as the mass of the products This is
• Observe reactions for indicators of
H (5) (5) called conservation of matter (mass) and it is centrally
chemical change
important when it comes to planning chemical reactions in the
C (3) (3)
laboratory.
O (5) (5)
• Classify open and closed systems Let us leave our factory now and think more about actual
Na (1) (1)
chemical reactions.
• Measure masses accurately using a scale Conservation of Mass Experiment
Alka Seltzer® Example can be done in student groups or as
• Hypothesize why reactants generate
a teacher demonstration. Either way, it most important to
certain products
engage discussion
• Count and tabulate atoms in a balanced
Alka-Seltzer® is a common antacid used to relieve an upset
chemical reaction.
stomach. Alka-Seltzer® and other fizzing effervescent
tablets produce carbon dioxide when placed in water.
• Predict products based on reactant
identity • Ask Learners if they have ever seen what happens when
an antacid tablet such as Alka-Seltzer® is dropped in
44
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Predict mass of products based on water. Allow Learners to share their experiences. (Learners’
conservation of mass principle. responses will vary).
• Create and use physical models to Explain to Learners that you will be demonstrating the reaction
predict the likely outcome of chemical between an effervescent tablet and water.
reaction
Procedure
Attitudes/Values 1. Using a measuring cylinder/a measuring cup/a beaker,
measure 100 mL of water
• Appreciate the importance of the 2. Add the 100 mL of water to a bottle and place the bottle on
conservation of mass and number of a weighing scale.
atoms in everyday situations. 3. Place an effervescent tablet in a balloon after
breaking it into two or three pieces.
• Show persistence in conducting 4. Place the balloon with the tablet on the scale with the
investigations to demonstrate the
bottle.
conservation of mass and number
5. Learners should note the total mass of the water, the
of atoms in chemical reactions.
bottle, balloon and effervescent tablet in their
notebooks.
• Use the inquiry approach in their
6. Fit the neck of the balloon tightly around the mouth of the
investigation of the conservation
bottle (containing the water) being careful not to drop the
of mass and number of atoms. antacid pieces into the water at the bottom of the bottle.
• Show respect for evidence
generated from investigations done
on the conservation of mass and
number of atoms
• Use their inventiveness in
designing models to represent
atoms in a chemical reaction.
45
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Work collaboratively to carry out 7. Ask Learners what they think might happen when you raise
investigations on the conservation the balloon above the water bottle and allow the tablet
pieces to drop in the bottle? (dissolving of the tablet in water and
of mass and number of atoms.
then a reaction with gas produced)
• Follow the safety rules which were
8. Raise the balloon and allow the tablet pieces to drop into
developed to protect them during
the water. The Learners will see bubbles begin to form and
exploration/investigation of the the balloon should partially inflate.
conservation of mass and number 9. Ask Learners what evidence they have that there has been a
of atoms. chemical reaction? (reactant consumed, gas bubbles produced and
trapped in balloon)
• When conducting practical and 10. When the tablets have fully dissolved and the carbon
dioxide bubbles subside, place the whole system on the
group work, display sensitivity and
weighing scale again. Have Learners record in their
offer assistance to peers who may
notebooks the mass of the system after the chemical
have physical or learning challenges
reaction (i.e. the products).
• Participate actively in classroom Learners should compare the total mass of the reactants (before
discussions. reaction) and the total mass of the products (after reaction).
These numbers should very nearly be the same. Ask Learners
what could lead to a difference in masses? (leaky balloon, poor
mass measurement)
The teacher should then reinforce the principle of
Conservation of Mass.
Reviewing a Past Reaction
You may remember that we can rinse steel wool with vinegar
and then expose it to oxygen in the air and it will form iron
oxide (rust) in a chemical reaction.
If we place the rinsed steel wool in a flask and cover the flask
with a balloon two interesting things happen:
46
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=774TbEUUM-A&t=1s
(2:26 mins) (entire experiment shown here)
1. The balloon will be pushed into the flask as the iron
consumes the oxygen and makes iron oxide (rust),
2. The mass of the system, start to finish, does not
change.
Because this is a closed system, this experiment once again
demonstrates that the mass of the reactants and products does
not change. We know this is because atoms are redistributed
but neither lost or created within the chemical reaction
Considering Conservation at the Atomic Level
Methane (CH ) is a gas made up of carbon and hydrogen.
4
Methane is emitted during the production and transport of coal,
natural gas, and oil. Methane emissions also result from
livestock and other agricultural practices and by the decay of
organic waste in municipal solid waste landfills.
Teacher note; If you have molecular models or coffee
sticks/plasticine, you should demonstrate that methane forms a
tetrahedron structure as per below.
47
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Tetrahedral-molecular-
structure-of-the-Methane_fig1_265533538
Methane is very useful because it can be burned in a
combustion reaction.
• Ask Learners what is needed to burn something? (a fuel, a
kindling temperature and oxygen)
• Ask Learners what is produced from burning? (carbon
dioxide and water)
The Learners should then be shown the balanced equation
below that describes methane burning.
Teacher note: It is not important at this stage to explain “how”
we balance an equation. Just explain that we must have a
balanced equation to adequately describe the mass balance in a
reaction.
48
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VvbX8PitSpg
Reiterate the components that they have already mentioned:
• Methane (CH ) is a molecule containing carbon and
4
hydrogen
• To burn methane, you need oxygen (O ) which is
2
added to the CH
4
• These two are called the reactants
• The products of the chemical reaction are carbon
dioxide (CO ) and water (H O)
2 2
This is called a balanced combustion reaction because it
describes exactly how the burning of the fuel methane occurs.
Ask Learners to look carefully at the chemical structures of each
molecule in the reaction.
• Ask them to count the black colored balls for carbon
(C) on each side of the reaction (1 black ball reactant side,
1 black ball product side)
• Ask them to count the white colored balls for hydrogen
(H) on each side of the reaction (4 white balls reactant
side, 4 white balls product side)
• Ask them to count the red colored balls for oxygen (O)
on each side of the reaction (4 red balls reactant side, 4 red
balls product side)
• Ask them “did we lose any atoms in converting
methane to products through a chemical reaction (No,
the atoms are reorganized but they still count up the
same)
49
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Explain to Learners that this is an example of conservation of
matter that involves a chemical reaction
Introduce a Review Example- Copper Pipe
Give Learners the scenario of a copper pipe that has been
weighed.
• Ask them what happens to the pipe if left in the open
air? (it will rust)
When metals like iron and copper combine with oxygen in the
open air, we say they become oxidized to form rust.
When the copper grabs oxygen from the air, matter has not
increased overall because the copper (Cu) simply reacted with
the oxygen in the atmosphere that itself has mass. This may be
harder to understand because this is an open system but
overall the mass in the entire system has not changed.
50
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VvbX8PitSpg (5:52 mins)
Point out to Learners that in this oxidation reaction, the
number of atoms of each component on the reactant and
product side is the same. The air gave up some oxygen to
oxidized (rust) the copper pipe but overall, the amount of
matter in the world has not changed, it has just been
reorganized.
Representing a Chemical Reaction
In much of our discussions to date, we have written word
equations to represent chemical reactions. However, these
word equations do not tell us what atoms or molecules are
actually involved in the reaction. To describe chemical
reactions, scientists use balanced chemical equations, which
make use of symbols and formulas for elements, molecules
and compounds. In a chemical equation as with word
equations, the reactants are shown on the left-hand side of the
equation and the products are shown on the right-hand side
of the equation.
For example, the balanced chemical equation for the reaction of
sodium and water is the following:
51
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
From this equation, we can see that on the left-hand side we
have sodium and water as reactants. The 2 in front of sodium
tells us there are two sodium atoms reacting and the 2 in front
of water tell us there are 2 molecules of water reacting. These
numbers are referred to as coefficients in the balanced
equation.
Teacher note: reiterate that atoms come together to make
molecules.
Learners,
• How many molecules of sodium hydroxide are
produced? (2)
• How many molecules of hydrogen gas are produced (1)
*explain to Learners that we sometimes don’t add a 1
coefficient because 1 molecule is implied *
If you look again at the equation, you will see the number 2
after the H in water on the reactant side and 2 after the H on
the product side. These numbers called subscripts are simply
the number of atoms that make up the molecule. Example:
There are 2 atoms of H in every water molecule and 2 atoms of
H in every hydrogen gas molecule (H )
2
52
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Let us do an atom count on each side of the reaction to confirm
conservation of matter.
Atoms # Reactant side # Product side
H (4) (4)
O (2) (2)
Na (2) (2)
Additional Resources and Materials
Numbers in a chemical equation: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wV2TUHjgPLQ (2:00 mins)
Counting atoms: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8d8s0Yu8pTE (4:06 mins)
Open & Closed Systems: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rS_EIv3SeoY (1:31 mins)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Atoms versus Molecules: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RbbOBPfH_uk (5:16 mins)
Balanced equations: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4jISjQvdyhs (6:11 mins)
Building molecular models: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dhhT3tRU0r4 (0:58 mins)
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics
• Use tools to measure volume, temperature, mass, etc.
• Count the number of atoms (reactants and products) in a chemical reaction.
• Apply mathematical operations to understanding chemical equations.
• Tabulate data collected on chemical reactions.
• Calculate the mass of reactants or products.
Language Arts:
• Describe substances before and after chemical reactions
• Learners can write descriptive pieces to record their observations.
• Introduction to new vocabulary such as: conservation, chemical equation, balance, etc.
Social Studies:
53
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
• There is need for sustainability in the environment, use of resources to conduct chemical reactions, reduction of pollution from these reactions
Art and craft
• Make physical models to represent chemical reactions
• Draw models of atoms and molecules to show how reactions proceed from reactants to products
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Elements from Local Culture
• The use of scales, measuring cups, and measuring spoons in domestic kitchens, restaurants, and guest houses
• The use of measuring instruments to administer the correct dosages of medicines
• Making local coconut oils, hair products, candles, and confectioneries.
Environment
• Burning wood, old tyres, etc. release a large quantity of substances into the atmosphere, where many are not aware that these substances do not disappear; they
only change form.
• Chemicals that get released into the air do not disappear. They go into our atmosphere where they react with other substances.
• Law of Conservation of matter/mass may be linked to sustainability, the effects of various forms of matter which may change from one form to another
and impact the environment in the process (for example solid/liquid chemicals that change into gases that pollute the environment.
Technology·
• Using a scale to measure luggage at airports to ensure that correct weight allowance is maintained
• Use of 3D printers to change the shape and form of matter
TVET
• The materials to make many TVET tools are as a result of chemical reactions.
• Chemical reactions are used extensively to identify and analyze materials
Agriculture
• Conservation of mass is seen in the uptake of substances which are converted to mass of the plant.
• Photosynthesis is a reaction that demonstrates conservation of mass.
Items of Inspiration (:
Understanding the fundamentals of a balanced equation is worth spending significant time on with Learners as it serves as a foundation for practical planning
for more formal experiments later.
54
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Inheritance, Variation of Traits and Life Cycles
Strand (Topic): Inheritance, Variation of Traits and Life Cycles: (expanded from Grade 3).
Studies of inheritance allow us to predict both desirable and undesirable traits and diseases that could be passed between generations.
Essential Learning Outcome: ELO 1: Develop models to describe that organisms have unique and diverse life cycles but all have in common birth,
growth, reproduction, and death
Clarification Statement: Changes organisms go through during their life form a pattern.
Assessment Boundary: Assessment of plant life cycles is limited to those of flowering plants. Assessment does not include details of human reproduction.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Life Cycles Life cycles
1. State what is meant by the term life Each living thing undergoes a series of changes as it goes through the
Knowledge cycle. different life stages. These changes follow a particular pattern that is very
• Define the following: (It is called a life cycle because it shows the specific to its species. These series of changes are referred to as its life
o life stages different stages that an organism goes through cycle. It is called a cycle because the stages are continuous.
o life cycle from birth to reproduction where the cycle
o offspring Some life cycles are as short as a few hours or a few days, while others last
begins again).
o reproduce for a few hundred years. Some species produce offspring that are very
2. What are the four (4) main stages
o metamorphosis similar to the adult while others produce offspring that undergo several
that any life cycle goes through?
o pupa stages, before emerging as an adult form that can reproduce and start the
(Birth, growth, reproduction and death are the
o chrysalis cycle again.
o larva four stages that all animals go through.)
o proboscis 3. The following is a diagram of the life In this unit, we will be looking at the life cycles of several different
o Dengue fever cycle of a butterfly. Label the diagram organisms. We will start with the butterfly.
o Zika virus and explain what is happening at each
o Yellow fever stage.
o Chikungunya
o egg
55
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
o tadpole Life cycle of a butterfly
o nymph Have you ever noticed that butterflies don’t seem to maintain their
o adolescence beautiful wings throughout the season? So you are telling me that the
o fetus winged butterfly doesn’t appear that way all season? What else do they
o senior look like? (Caterpillars, Cocoons).
o germination
o seed coat Teacher note: Before the lesson starts, collect butterflies, eggs, larvae and pupae.
o embryo
o seedling Start the lesson by asking Learners a series of questions about the butterfly
o cotyledons to pique their interest. If you have a butterfly in a jar that Learners can see,
o photosynthesis that would be very helpful.
o mature plant
o chlorophyll
o flowering plant
o pollen
o stamen
o pistil
o stigma Retrieved from: https://pixabay.com/photos/butterfly-insects-love-spring-
o style 763578/
o sepal
o ovary Ask the Learners what they know about butterflies.
o ovules Answer:
o gametes A. (Egg – Laid by the adult female butterfly. 1. Have you ever touched a butterfly? (Yes/No)
o pollination B. Larva/caterpillar – The caterpillar must 2. What did it look like? (colors, wing shapes, sizes))
o cross-pollination grow quickly so it feeds non-stop. It grows 3. Was it colourful? (Yes/No)
o self-pollination as it feeds and moults (sheds its skin)
o pollinators several times.
o wind-pollination C. Pupa/chrysalis – When the caterpillar Many of you have seen parts of the life cycle of the butterfly but in order to
o fertilization get a complete picture, we should actually make our own observations.
reaches its full size, it turns into a
o seed dispersal
pupa/chrysalis and forms a cocoon around
Activity: Observing the different stages of the butterfly
it.
• Describe the major stages in
D. Adult butterfly – After some time, the Put caterpillars in a box and feed them daily on a fresh supply of the type
the life cycles of selected
pupa/ chrysalis turns into a butterfly and of leaves that they feed on. This allows Learners to observe the stages of
plants and animals.
an adult butterfly emerges.
56
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Identify the stages of the life After a short rest, it pumps blood into its the life cycle (from caterpillar to adult) and to hypothesise how they think
cycle of selected plants and wings and flies off.) their caterpillar will turn into a butterfly and what it may look like.
animals. 4. Some organisms can go through what
• Identify common is termed metamorphosis. It can be You can introduce the term metamorphosis as a passage between stages
characteristics of the life complete or incomplete of the life cycle.
cycles of animals and plants. metamorphosis. State the meaning of
• Explain the need for the following terms: After setting up the box, ask Learners to do the following:
reproduction in living things
and explain the concept of a. Metamorphosis 1 . O b s e rve and record the development of the caterpillars each day.
life cycle of an animal. (ST 6 (The term describes a series of dramatic 2. Record all changes from caterpillar to pupa, to the fully developed
LS DC 1) physical changes that butterfly phase. Learners should draw labelled pictures of the
• Describe the life cycle of an an organism undergoes as it matures.) stages in their notebooks making note of the timeline of each
animal where the young is b. Complete metamorphosis
stage.
3. Learners are expected to use the following materials to create a
born resembling the adult (Complete metamorphosis is the type of
model of the stages of the butterfly development.
and one in which the young insect development that includes egg, larva,
do not resemble the adult at pupal, and adult stages, which differ greatly
Teacher note: Materials which can be used to make models of the life
birth. (ST 6 LS DC 2) in morphology.)
• Describe the role of the c. Incomplete metamorphosis
cycle of the butterfly may include paper plates, and coloured pipe cleaners
(cut in half)/pieces of wool, small beans or peas, cotton balls, green leaves
butterfly in nature. (A type of metamorphosis in which an
cut from construction paper, food colouring, glue/tape, crayons/markers.
• Know the key stages of life insect hatches from an egg and then goes
A variety of pasta can also be used to complete the task: Spiral pasta -
for a range of organisms: through several nymphal stages.)
caterpillar, shell pasta - chrysalis, bow-tie pasta - butterfly, small pasta -
birth, growth, reproduction 5. State which of the following organisms
eggs)
and death. undergo complete metamorphosis and
• Recognize that animals such which undergo incomplete
After the life cycle is completed, release the fully developed butterflies.
as insects, birds, amphibians, metamorphosis, by ticking the correct
reptiles, fish and birds box.
In a closure session, ask the Learners to contribute one stage of the cycle
develop in an egg outside
and add this to the chalk board. Asks Learners to elaborate on their
their mother’s body before
findings and correct any misconceptions as you proceed.
they are hatched.
• Use their diagram to explain what happens at each stage of the life
• Recognize that different
cycle.
stages of the same organism
• As you move through the different stages of the life cycle, have
can have different names.
live or preserved specimens to show to Learners.
• Demonstrate an
understanding that living
57
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
things grow and change over • Identify the different parts of the larva (caterpillar) and adult: head,
time. thorax, abdomen, antenna, mouth, eyes, legs, pro-legs, etc.
• Demonstrate an • Ask Learners how they are similar and how they are different.
understanding that different
types of animals and plants Review: Butterflies pass through four stages during their life cycles: egg,
have different life cycles. caterpillar, chrysalis and adult butterfly. We will now look closer at the
• Recognize that different diagram of the life cycle to see what happens at each stage
stages in an animal’s life
cycle can exist in different Teacher note: After going through the life cycle diagram, reiterate why it is
habitats. called a life cycle and how the diagram depicts this.
• Recognize the vital role that
each stage of the life cycle
plays in the survival and
maintenance of animal life.
Give 2 reasons why it is important to
• Name the life stages in the
human life cycle.
understand the life cycle of organisms.
• Demonstrate an
(Having an understanding of the life Retrieved from:
understanding that the life
cycle of organisms help us to: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Anise_Swallowtail_Life_Cycle_
cycles of all plants and
• (Determine how different organism grows %28hy%29.svg
animals include the stages of
and develops.
birth, growth, reproduction,
and death. • Know what changes takes place as the First stage of life cycle of a butterfly
organism go through the different stages of
• Demonstrate an
their life cycle. A butterfly starts its life as an egg, laid by an adult, female
understanding that some
plant and animal life cycles • Determine how the needs of different butterfly after mating. The adult, female butterfly lays her
eggs on plants. Butterfly eggs vary in size, shape and colour
are shorter or longer than organisms change as they change, and how
but most are surrounded by a protective hard shell.
others. its needs changes.
• Demonstrate an
understanding that some 6. In their life cycle, human beings go
plant and animal life cycles through six major stages. List three of
include dramatic changes these six stages and state one
• Realize that life cycles can characteristic of each stage listed.
help us predict patterns in
58
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
the lives of animals and
plants Retrieved from: https://pixabay.com/photos/eggs-egg-
• Recognize that animals pass tray-butterfly-close-up-3404502/
through the same life cycle
stages as their parents. Second stage of life cycle of a butterfly
• Describe the process of self-
pollination and cross- A caterpillar also called a butterfly larva, develops from the
pollination. (ST 6 LS DC 5) egg and then eats its way out of the shell. A caterpillar
• Classify, using appropriate 7. List four different characteristics in spends all its time eating. The plant supplies food and water
examples, flowering plants which variation might be found among for the caterpillar. As it grows, the caterpillar becomes too
according to pollination type. the Learners in your class. large for its skin and moults (sheds its skin) to make new
(ST 6 LS DC 6) Possible answers: skin.
• Identify pollen grains (male) • Height
and ovules (female) as the • Mass
reproductive cells/ gametes • Hand length
in a flower. (ST 6 LS DC 7) • Foot length
• Explain how pollination and • Skin colour
fertilization occur in flowers.
• Hair colour
(ST 6 LS DC 8)
• Handedness (Left-handed or right- Retrieved from: https://pixabay.com/photos/monarch-
• Describe the processes of (i.)
handed) caterpillar-monarch-nature-2482116/
Self-pollination and (ii.)
• Head size https://pixabay.com/photos/caterpillar-butterfly-dovetail-
Cross-pollination.
2408366/
• Name the agents of
8. State three ways in which the life cycle
pollination.
of a frog is different from the life cycle
• Identify pollen grains and
of human beings. Third stage of the butterfly life cycle
ovules as the reproductive
• (Frogs and humans start as babies,
cells/gametes in a flower.
grow and change, become adults, When the caterpillar reaches its final size, it stops feeding. It
• List animals that undergo
reproduce, and eventually die. However, wriggles and twists, to gradually remove its old skin,
incomplete metamorphosis
there are differences in their life cycle. revealing a new protective skin called a cocoon. Inside the
• List animals that undergo
• Female frogs lay tiny, soft eggs in cocoon, the caterpillar changes into a wormlike creature
complete metamorphosis
standing water and then the baby frogs called a pupa or chrysalis (shown below). You may have
(tadpoles) are born from the eggs. A seen chrysalis hanging from trees.
Female human gives birth to a baby
59
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Skills after approximately nine months of the
• Make careful observations of foetus growing inside of her.
life cycles • Tadpoles have gills to breathe when they
• Take detailed notes of the hatch from the eggs but human babies
stages of life cycles use their lungs to breathe as soon as
• Draw pictures of life cycle they are born.
stages • As tadpoles grow and change, they go
• Infer how different factors through a metamorphosis to become
may affect the stages of the adults and humans do not.)
life cycle of different Retrieved from:
animals. Extending The Butterfly Study https://pixabay.com/photos/pupa-black-veined-white-
• Measure the length of time it Using available textbooks or information from insect-3915166/
takes for an organism to the internet to answer the following questions https://pixabay.com/photos/pupa-butterfly-
change from one stage to the on the adult butterfly. transformation-6122534/
other. https://www.needpix.com/photo/1793541/
• Compare the life cycles of 1. How many parts is its body divided
selected animals and plants into? (3 parts, the head, thorax, and Fourth stage of the butterfly life cycle
abdomen.)
• Use different materials to
2. How many legs does it have? (6 legs) When the pupa reaches adulthood, it changes into a
model the life cycle of a
3. How many wings does it have?(4 wings, butterfly and leaves the cocoon. It pumps blood into its
selected animal or plant
two pairs) wrinkled wings and expands them to their full size before
• Classify organisms according
4. How many eyes does it have? (2 eyes) flying away. When the butterfly comes out of the chrysalis,
to their life cycle
5. How many things are on its head? (2 it is ready to find a mate and lay eggs. Then the cycle can
• Observe selected animals
antennae, eyes, palpi, proboscis) start all over again
and plants to determine the
6. From information available, select a
changes in the appearance
butterfly. What colour is it? (Answer will
and activity of the animals as
vary)
it goes through its life cycle
7. Does it have a tongue? (The butterfly has a
• Describe changes in the
structure called a proboscis that is considered
appearance and activity of an
a tongue. However, it looks more like a straw
animal as it goes through its
than a tongue. It can be rolled and unrolled)
life cycle.
Retrieved from: https://pixabay.com/photos/butterfly-
• Create annotated diagrams to monarch-butterfly-monarch-929798/
explain the life cycle of
selected plants and animals.
60
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Compare different stages of https://pixabay.com/photos/nature-animals-butterfly-
the life cycle of selected Controlling the Mosquito Population insect-2760966/
organisms.
• Compare the different stages 1. Identify sites in and around the home When the presentation is complete, ask the following
in the human life cycle. that mosquitoes may breed in. questions.
2. Look around the home to see what is
• Classify, with examples,
being done by your parents and 1. Where did the caterpillar come from? (an egg)
insects according to their
siblings to control mosquitoes 2. How does the caterpillar meet its own needs? (It
type of life cycle. (ST 6 LS
3. What are three things that can be done meets its needs from the plant it feeds on)
DC 3)
by you and your family members to 3. How does a caterpillar grow and change? As the
• Compare the human life
reduce mosquitoes? caterpillar eats, it gets larger and larger until it becomes too large
cycle to that of another
for its skin and moults to make new skin)
animal. (ST 6 LS DC 4)
The Cycle Game 4. How are caterpillars and butterflies
• Using live organisms or
The teacher should make up group sets of different? (Different body parts, shape, colour, caterpillar
pictures, observe the changes
cards with pictures of each of the stages of crawls while the butterfly flies)
that occur during a plant’s
the butterfly cycle. Each set of cards should 5. Which adult butterfly lays eggs?(Female)
life cycle.
be mixed up and placed on the group desk 6. Why is it called a life cycle? (It is called a life cycle because
• Collect and graphically
Their task is to put the stages in the proper it shows the different stages that an organism goes through from
display data about how
order. birth to reproduction where the cycle begins again)
organisms grow during their
7. What does the caterpillar do in the chrysalis? (inside
lifetime.
This can be repeated for the frog the cocoon, the caterpillar changes into a wormlike creature
• Compare the needs of
mosquito and cockroach cycles. called a pupa or chrysalis)
organisms at different stages
of their life cycles.
• Predict the stages of growth
Activity - What did I look like, what do I Mosquito Life Cycle
an organism will go through
look like now, what will I look like when
based on information about
I become an adult Observing the stages:
other species in their group.
• Interpret data collected on
Fold drawing paper in thirds. Have children 1. Collect the different stages of the mosquito life cycle: Show the
the life cycles of different
draw a picture of themselves as a baby, children examples of eggs, pupa, larva and adult.
organisms.
presently and as an adult. Allow discussion 2. Keep the different stages in a large screw top jar or an aquarium with
• Communicate their findings for changes in pictures. a glass top. Put water weeds in the jar or aquarium.
in oral form, as illustrations
3. Teach the children to identify the different stages in the life cycle of
and in tables.
the mosquito and draw labelled pictures of the stages in their
notebooks.
61
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Compile data on the life What about other animals? Repeat the 4. Do not allow adult mosquitoes to fly out and bite the Learners. This
cycle of different organisms. above for a pet or a favourite animal. can cause Learners to be infected with diseases carried by the
• Analyse data on the life mosquito.
cycles of different organisms. Activity – Photo exhibition Teacher Note:
Have Learners bring in photos (family of It is important that Learners are able to recognize stages in the life cycle of
• Graph data on the life cycles themselves, siblings, friends, and parents at the mosquito, as these insects can transmit diseases such as Dengue fever,
of different organisms various ages. Arrange the photos on a Zika, Yellow fever and Chikungunya and it is important that Learners
• Plan and conduct an timeline on which ages or stages (infant, are part of any monitoring or control activities taking place in their home,
investigation collaboratively baby, toddler, etc.) have been marked so as the majority of mosquito breeding sites, are found on private properties.
to produce data on the life Learners can observe how different people Mosquitoes go through a four-stage life cycle like the butterfly. These
cycle of different organisms. change physically over time) stages include the egg, larva, pupa and adult.
Attitudes/Values Compare the Human Life Cycle to that of Stage 1: Eggs are laid on water singly or stuck together to form floating
Another Animal rafts consisting of hundreds of eggs.
• Appreciate the importance Stage 2: The eggs hatch and enter the larval stage, feeding for
of knowing about the life Divide Learners into groups. Each group is approximately four days until they turn into a pupa.
cycles to solve real world assigned one animal other than humans. Stage 3: The pupa is unusual, because it can wriggle. During the pupal
problems Provide time for groups to conduct research stage, the mosquito does not feed.
to find out the following: Stage 4: The mosquito morphs into an adult after two days as a pupa, then
• Appreciate the significance
of pollination and 1. How long their animal takes care of its lives as an adult for two to four weeks. The mosquito life cycle lasts about
babies, if at all? Why this is necessary. seven days. Breeding occurs during the adult stage.
fertilization in plants, as a
2. What their animal do to take care of its
means of obtaining seeds.
(ST 6 LS DC 9)
babies?
3. Identify the animal when it is very
• Work collaboratively as a
young and when the animal is older.
whole-class with partners
4. Describe the changes they see between
and independently, to
the different stages of the animal’s life
explore their understanding
cycle.
of life cycles using a variety
5. How does the life cycle of the animal
of tools, activities, and
compare to that of a human being?
resources
6. After Learners have completed their
• Show persistence when
searches/ readings, ask Learners to
conducting investigations on
come together as a class and have each Adapted from: https://openclipart.org/pdf/324257
the life cycle of different
group present their findings. Prompts
organisms
for discussion could include:
62
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Show interest/curiosity • How long do human parents take
Recognizing mosquito life cycle at home/ Controlling Mosquitos
about the life cycle of care of their children?
different organisms • What are the reasons for the
1. Show the children diagrams of the Aedes aegypti mosquito that carries
• Use the inquiry approach different kinds of care animals
dengue fever. Point out to them that this is the same mosquito that
when conducting research receive from their parents?
spreads Zika and Chikungunya viruses. Allow them time to observe
on the life cycle of different
the diagrams.
organisms Variation among Learners in the class
2. Encourage the children to collect stages of the life cycle of the
• Have respect for evidence Provide a list of physical characteristics that
mosquito found near their homes.
collected on the cycle of Learners can measure. Tell Learners that they
3. Discuss areas in and around the home and in the community that
different organisms will need to collect measurements of these
may be good breeding sites for mosquitoes.
• Show respect for the physical characteristic from their classmates. 4. Discuss what can be done to control mosquitoes near homes and
organisms that they would Characteristics that Learners could be asked to
in the community.
be investigating and their measure include:
habitats. Control
• Have an awareness that • head circumference
some organisms can be • leg length • Mosquitoes carry diseases such as malaria fever, dengue fever,
harmful. • foot length encephalitis, and the Ross River virus.
• Take care not to harm the • hand size • The larva is the stage when you can most easily control the
organisms that they are • height mosquito, because it has to live in water for a long time.
studying. • mass • Remove water containers, e.g. buckets, discarded containers, roof
• When conducting practical gutters, pot plant trays.
and group work, display When Learners are finished collecting the
• Cover entry spaces to rainwater tanks with fine wire mesh.
sensitivity with Learners may data from the activity, answer the following
• Put fish that eat mosquito larvae in ponds.
be afraid of different questions
• Remove water containers, e.g. buckets, discarded containers, roof
organisms.
gutters, pot plant trays. Draining the water or adding insecticide to
• Participate actively in 1. Which is the most common shoe
the water kills the larvae and controls mosquitoes.
classroom discussions on the length in the class?
• If you must go outside, wear a long-sleeved shirt, long pants and
life cycle of different 2. Which is the least common shoe
use an insect repellent. Products such as burning citronella candles
organisms. length in the class
have been found to repel insects in the outdoors.
3. Which is the most common shoe
length in the class?
Complete metamorphosis and incomplete metamorphosis
4. Which is the least common shoe
length in the class
Next, we will be looking at the life cycle of the frog. However, before we
do so, let us look again at the life cycles we have just looked at. You
63
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
5. What was the size of the would have noticed that as the organism went through each stage of its
largest/smallest hand, etc. that you life cycle, it experienced certain changes. These set of changes is referred
measured? to as metamorphosis.
6. What were the differences in hand There are two types of metamorphosis: one is referred to as complete
sizes between people of the same metamorphosis and the other, incomplete metamorphosis.
age? Complete metamorphosis
7. What was the difference between the Animals that undergo complete metamorphosis go through four distinct
smallest and largest head size? stages: egg, larva, pupa and adult. The butterfly and the mosquito are two examples
of organisms that undergo complete metamorphosis.
Activity: Drawing and describing the Incomplete metamorphosis
different stages of a plant's life cycle Incomplete metamorphosis is a type of metamorphosis in which an
insect hatches from an egg and then goes through several nymphal
1. Print diagrams showing the different stages. Each nymphal stage looks like a small version of the adult but
stages of a plant's life cycle. getting slightly bigger with age. At the final nymphal stage, the insect
2. Ask Learners to label each stage and then molts into the adult form.
explain what is happening at each Examples of animals that undergo incomplete metamorphosis include
stage. Cockroach, grasshopper, termites, cricket, and praying mantis.
Homework Assignment We will look at an example of an animal that undergoes incomplete metamorphosis a
little later.
Look around your yard, select five plants and
state what stage of their lifecycle they are at. Frog Life Cycle
Activity: Creating an art piece of a stage Observing the Frog Life cycle
of the life cycle of a flowering plant 1. Gather frog eggs and place them in an aquarium and observe each
day. Tadpoles hatch from frog eggs in a week to ten days and the
In this activity, Learners will create an art piece process from tadpole to frog is fascinating to observe.
to accompany an explanation of each stage of 2. A frog lays eggs; they hatch into tadpoles, then grow into frogs. You
the life cycle. Depending on time available, can draw a picture on the board of a complete cycle of an animal of
each student can create an entire life cycle your choice.
sequence or a single life cycle stage to 3. Fertilised frog eggs are usually easy to find.
contribute to a whole-class life cycle art piece. 4. Place them in an aquarium and observe each day. Tadpoles hatch
from frog eggs in a week to ten days and the process from tadpole to
To do this, you will need:
frog is fascinating to observe.
64
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• White art paper/cardstock, scissors, glue, 5. Learners should draw in their notebooks, a labelled picture of the
coloured paper stages be sure to include a timeline of the development.
• Natural materials (e.g. bark, dried leaves). 6. As Learners make their observations, they should answer the
• Recycled materials (e.g. cardboard boxes, following question sin their notebooks:
plastic containers, scrap fabrics, old
magazines/ newspapers) Questions
1. At which stage or stages of its life cycle is a frog most like a fish?
Discussion Points: Explain your answer. (Tadpole stage) (When the tadpole hatches,
it looks more like a fish than a frog. It doesn't have any legs and it has gills that
• What features in your artwork show allow it to breathe underwater).
that your plant is at a particular life 2. At which stage does it look like its half frog and half fish? (Young frog
cycle stage (e.g. fruit, flowers etc.)? or froglet)
• Why is it important to know the life 3. At which stage does it look like a frog? (It looks like a frog when it gets to the
cycle stages of a plant? (nurturing the final stage or an adult frog.)
plant, harvesting, assisting with
propagation)
• What does a plant need to move Comparing Student Findings: A Review of the Life Cycle
from one life cycle stage to the next?
(water, sunlight, nutrients in the soil) We will now look at the life cycle of the frog. The frog is another
example of an animal that undergoes complete metamorphosis
While the frog goes through four stages of life, its life cycle can be divided
Simulation: Being a pollinator into two main stages. Here are the four stages.
In this activity, you will be a pollinator.
However, instead of pollinating flowers, you
will be pollinating donuts, using powdered
sugar.
Materials: One powdered donut, one plain
doughnut, 2 plates (1 for each donut),
Procedure:
Instruct Learners as follows:
65
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1. Make sure you have a powdered donut Retrieved from: https://www.sciencewithme.com/learn-about-the-life-
and a plain donut in front of you. cyle-of-the-frog/
Stage 1: Egg
Female frogs lay eggs. They are laid in still waters where there are no strong
currents to threaten their survival. Why do you think fast water currents
will affect frog eggs? (They could wash them down the river or out to sea or they
may get bashed about in the water.).
Retrieved from:
https://pixabay.com/photos/cake-pastry- Tadpoles hatch from the eggs after about one to three weeks.
sweet-sugar-unhealthy-2201820/
https://pixabay.com/photos/donut- Stage 2: Tadpoles.
doughnut-recipe-eat-and-drink-179983/
• A tadpole hatches from an egg. A tadpole is born with a tail, poorly
2. Put your hands behind your back. formed gills but no legs. The tadpole lives in water. The tadpole
3. Take a bite of your powdered donut breathes underwater through gills and swims like a fish.
without using your hands. • The tadpole does not stay this way: Firstly, the tadpole’s body changes
4. Without wiping your mouth, take a bite
shape. Secondly, it grows back legs and its jaws are formed.
of your plain donut (again, without using
your hand)
5. Observe your plain doughnut. Froglet
Questions: A tadpole eventually grows into a froglet. The froglet is different from the
1. What do you observe about your plain tadpole because it has legs for hopping and it breathes with lungs.
donut? (It now has powdered sugar, from the
other doughnut.) After about four weeks, the gills it had as a tadpole, are covered over with
2. Discuss with Learners how this skin. When this happens, breathing will begin to take place through the
exercise compares with actual lungs.
pollination involving pollinators and
flowers.
66
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Imaginary garden Frog
Set up an imaginary garden with flowers that
are tagged with certain information about each
plant and its flower. Each group will select a
flower that the pollinator they were assigned,
would be attracted to. Once they have selected A froglet grows into an adult frog. As this happens, it undergoes tow
their flower, they will take it back to their changes:
table.
Change No. 1: a head will be easier to discern and the body will get longer.
Have a member from each group present their
flower to the class and explain why it would Change No. 2: By about 12 weeks, the next step in the frog’s development
be attractive to their pollinator. will be almost complete. At this point, it will stop eating plants for
nutrition, it reabsorbs its tail (which is why the tail disappears and the adult
Before Learners do the next activity, frog has no tail). When the final stage of development is complete, the
demonstrate the process of pollination froglet is now an adult frog. A new life cycle begins when a female frog
between 2 flowers: take the pollen from the lays eggs.
anther of one flower and put it on the stigma
of the other flower. Life cycle of the cockroach: An Example of Incomplete Metamorphosis
Designing a flower The cockroach is a difficult life cycle to observe, so I am simply going to
review what we know about the cycle, and I want you to think about where
1. For this assignment, each student will you have seen some of the stages.
design a flower using construction The cockroach has three life stages: the egg, a nymphal and the adult stage.
paper, pipe cleaners and other craft The life cycle from egg to adult averages about 600 days.
materials, or using a computer
software Cockroach Eggs
2. Have them describe how it would be The life cycle of a cockroach life begins with a cockroach egg. The
pollinated (by an animal, wind, or cockroach lays egg in an egg case also called an ootheca, each egg case
humans) and how the features of the contains 10 to 50 eggs. The deposited ootheca contains water sufficient for
flower help in the pollination process. the eggs to develop without receiving additional water
Nymph
Learners will present their flower to the rest Next in the cockroach life cycle is the nymphal stage. Nymphs hatch and
of the class. Presenters will name their undergo several molts, growing a little each time they shed their skins. They
flower, describe it and state how it is will reach full adult size and coloration with their last molt.
67
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
pollinated. At random points, ask the Adult
presenter to identify the part of the flower. After their final molt, nymphs enter the adult stage and reproduce to start
the cycle over again.
Plant Cycle Stations (rotating centers with
questions at each center for groups to cycle
through with their notebooks )
Bees play a very important role in nature.
One such role is the role of a pollinator.
a. What is a pollinator?
(A pollinator is an organism that
helps to carry pollen from the male
part of the flower (stamen) to the
female part of the same or another
flower.)
b. List four pollinators other than bees
(Birds, Moths, Ants and Humans)
c. State two other ways in which bees Retrieved from: https://www.ecomist.co.nz/life-cycle-cockroaches/
are important in nature.
• (Bees produce honey to feed their
colonies, man and other
organisms.
• Bee hives provide shelter for many Questions
other insects.
• Bees also serve as food for other 1. How is the life cycle of the cockroach similar and different from
organisms.) the life cycle of a butterfly? (time frame of life cycle)
d. State two ways that we can protect 2. Which areas of the home do you think you will find cockroach
bees and other pollinators. eggs? (dark, warm & damp areas)
• (Plant plants that produce 3. The cockroach is a pest, what are some of the reasons why it is
flowers in home gardens difficult to control? (fast insects/sensitive to vibrations/known to develop
and in the community. resistance to insecticides)
• Avoid using pesticides and
herbicides in gardens.
68
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Support local beekeepers
Life cycles that involve live births instead of hatching from eggs
• Create areas that bees would
be able to build their nests
The third animal life cycle involves live births. Nearly all mammals
undisturbed.)
including humans, dogs, bears, horses, and many others go through a live
birth life cycle. These animals do not lay eggs, the animal grows in a special
Pollination is the process whereby pollen is
way inside the female’s body. They are then born alive. When the young are
transferred from the anther to the stigma.
born, they resemble the adult form of the species. Sometimes brothers and
sisters (offspring) will display traits of one parent or the other or even
a. What is self-pollination?
perhaps a trait passed down through the generations. In this way offspring
(Self-pollination is defined as the
can actually look quite different from each other, even though they have
deposition of pollen grains from a
the same parents. They usually need a lot of care. In almost all cases, the
flower to the stigma of the same
mother produces milk to feed them. The young then grow through several
flower.)
stages into adulthood. Although the young doesn’t change much in
b. What is cross-pollination?
appearance, it gets larger over time, as it goes through the different stages
(Cross-pollination is defined as the
of the life cycle.
deposition of pollen grains from a
flower to the stigma of another flower.)
The Human life cycle
c. What is wind-pollination?
(Wind pollination describes the process
Every human being goes through the same stages of life in the same order.
of the transfer of pollen from one
There are six main stages in the human life cycle
individual plant to another, whereby
the pollen is carried by air currents.)
1. Foetus -At this time, a baby is growing inside its mum's womb.
During this stage, the foetus is entirely dependent on the female
for everything
Plants that are pollinated by the wind (wind-
2. Baby - A baby is born after spending nine months inside the
pollinated) have different characteristics from
womb
those pollinated by insects (insect-pollinated).
3. Childhood -At this stage, the child learns to walk, talk and eat
independently.
a. Give two characteristics of
4. Adolescence - The stage between childhood and adulthood when
plants that are wind-pollination.
children become teenagers. Here, bodies develop during
• (Flowers are usually small and
adolescence.
inconspicuous, and do not possess
5. Adulthood - At this stage, the human body is fully developed and
a scent or produce nectar.)
this is usually the stage where reproduction usually takes place.
69
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• (The anthers may produce a large 6. This is the last stage in the lifecycle of a human. This period starts
number of pollen grains, while the from 65 years of age, until the end of their lives.
stamens are generally long and
protrude out of flower.)
b. Give two characteristics of
plants that are insect-pollination.
• (Flowers are brightly colored,
scented, and secrete nectar.
• Pollen grains are larger, sticky,
and spiny. Pollen grains are fewer
in number as they are transported
mechanically by insects.
• The stigma of flowers is small
Retrieved from: https://www.freepik.com/free-photos-vectors/black-
and deep within the corolla.)
child-cartoon/25
c. State which of the following
flowers is a wind-pollinated
https://www.freepik.com/free-vector/collection-fetal-development-
flower. (No. 2)
moments_21743826.htm#fromView=search&page=1&position=24&uuid
=81767083-181e-4e70-8791-b6ee923f19e5
Discussion: Think about the stages of human development from fetus to
senior adult.
The following questions can be used to guide the discussion.
What is fertilization in plants?
a. What are some of the things that human beings can or cannot do
(Plant fertilization is the process of the fusion of
at each stage of their life? (physical abilities related to strength &
male and female reproductive cells or gametes to
mobility)
produce a fertilized egg).
b. State the physical changes that take place as humans move from
one stage to another. (height, mass, size, hair, strength)
Following the processes of pollination and
c. What are some of the things that often remain the same
fertilization, the next stage is the formation
throughout the life cycle of a human being? (eye color, hair color until
of fruits.
senior, number of limbs and fingers/toes)
d. Is it better to be a baby, a child, or an adult? Give reasons for your
answer. What are the challenges that accompany each stage?
70
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
State two ways in which fertilization and e. Name the stage of life different members of your family are in. For
pollination are important. example, you are a child while your parents and siblings are adults.
f. What are some of the changes that you have observed in your
(Pollinators depend on plants to provide them
siblings, parents, grandparents, pets, etc.? (aging processes, height,
with nectar, pollen and shelter. Without
hair )
pollinators, most flowers cannot be fertilized. If
flowers are not fertilized, they cannot produce
Life Cycle of Plants
seeds and will not be able to reproduce. When
plants reproduce, they make more of themselves.
Teacher note: Some of what follows represents a review of fundamental
These plants provide food for animals. In
theory covered in Grade 3 science. It does however extend ideas to allow
addition to this, if plants do not reproduce, they
for comparison with life cycles of living things.
can become extinct.)
Life cycle stages and processes of a flowering plant
Explain how fruits are formed.
Like all living things, plants grow, reproduce and go through a life cycle.
(After fertilization, the ovary develops and become
While the life cycle of a plant is different from that of an animal, it still goes
a fruit, with seeds inside it. A fruit is the ripened
through the same basic stages as other living things.
ovary of a flower. So at the place on a plant where
Different types of plants have different life cycles. In this section, we will
a flower was originally found, a fruit (which is the
look at the life cycle of a flowering plant (plants that produce flowers) only.
ovary of the flower containing seeds). A fruit
The life cycle of a flowering plant is shown in the diagram below. It begins
protects the seeds inside them).
with a seed and ends with a mature plant. Let us go through the different
stages together.
Give two examples of a fruit with one seed.
(Avocado, coconut, mango, plum)
Give two examples of a fruit with a few
seeds.(Orange, apple, sapodilla)
Diagram by Amaala
Give two examples of a fruit with many
Muhammad
seeds.(Watermelon, Kiwi, Guava)
What is germination?
71
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
In the diagram below, explain what is The seed
happening at the stages labelled A and B.
A seed is a structure that contains a small embryonic plant covered by a
thin outer covering called the seed coat. The embryo is what will grow to
become a fully-grown plant. Seeds come in all different shapes and sizes,
from the tiny orchid seed to the palm tree seed, to the large seed of a
coconut.
Teacher note: Review the different parts of the seed with Learners and
their functions. Experiments on germination can also be set up for
Learners’ observation, if necessary.
Label the following diagram of a seed.
Retrieved from: https://www.sciencefacts.net/parts-of-a-seed.html
https://www.education.com/worksheet/article/parts-of-a-seed-1/
Germination
Once a seed is provided with the necessary resources and receives the right
signals for germination, the seed will begin to absorb water through its
seed coat, which will expand and burst open. The embryo found inside
the seed, is made up of a shoot and a root. The root emerges first from
inside the seed and begins to grow down into the soil. Next, the shoot
emerges and grows upwards towards the sun. The shoot develops into a
small seedling.
72
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Answers
A. Cotyledon – Provides food for the embryo until
it has formed sufficient roots and leaves to produce its
own food.
B. Seed coat – Protects the embryo from damage.
C. Plumule – It emerges from the seed after the Retrieved from: https://www.britannica.com/science/seed-plant-
radicle, during germination. It develops into a shoot reproductive-part/Germination
system.
See also time lapse bean growth:
D. Radicle – It emerges from the seed first during https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w77zPAtVTuI (3:09 mins)
germination. It develops into a root system.
Seedling
E. Micropyle A small opening/hole through
which water enters into the seed during germination.) The shoot develops into a stem with either one or two ‘leaves’. These first
leaves are called cotyledons and are not considered ‘true leaves’.
Flowers Cotyledons provide the developing seedling with nutrients (that are stored
in the leaf-like structures) until it grows true leaves that can produce food
The following is a diagram of a flower. through photosynthesis.
a. Label the diagram below and then Young Plant
write down one function of each
part labelled. As time (days, weeks, months or years) passes, the leaves and stem will get
taller, wider and thicker, as the seedling matures into a young plant. Its
roots, stems and branches will also grow thicker and stronger, allowing it to
support the growing plant and structures such as leaves and flowers.
Mature plant
The young plant develops into a mature plant. Depending on the species of
plant, this can take anything from days to weeks to even years. A mature
plant grows flowers, fruits and leaves.
73
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://pixabay.com/photos/tree-palm-coconuts-coconut-tree-
Answer: 1281680/
A. Stigma - The tip of the pistil (the female https://pixabay.com/photos/banana-blossom-bloom-banana-flower-
part of the flower), which receives the male 64420/
pollen grains
https://pxhere.com/en/photo/703093
B. Style. The style is the tube that joins the
stigma to the ovary. It is the tube through Mature plants make their own food through photosynthesis, using the
which pollen is delivered to the ovary. green pigment chlorophyll in their leaves to combine energy from the sun,
C. Anther - Where the pollen is produced carbon dioxide and water to make sugar, while releasing oxygen as a by-
D. Filament - The thin, tubular structure that product.
supports the anther.
E. Petal – Attract pollinators to the flower.
b. Name the male and female
Reproducing stage
Plants, like animals, need to reproduce for their species to survive. One way
reproductive cells that are present in
that plants produce offspring is by making seeds. Flowering plants
a flower. (Female – ovules, Male – pollen
produce seeds through the use of their flowers.
grains)
The Flowering stage
Order the following statements to show what When a flowering plant is ready to reproduce it produces flowers.
happens in the processes of pollination and
Once the plant has reached maturity, the flower buds will develop into
fertilization.
flowers. These flowers are important in a plant’s life cycle as this is where
a. ____ the pollen from the first flower the new seeds are made. In other words, the flower is where reproduction
falls off the pollinator onto the happens. There are two key events involved in this stage: pollination and
stigma of the second flower. fertilisation.
74
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
b. ____ a pollinator goes to drink
nectar at a flower.
c. ___ the pollinator goes to drink
nectar from a different flower.
d. ____ the pollen fertilizes the eggs in
the ovules.
e. ____ New seeds can grow from
fertilized egg Retrieved from: https://pixabay.com/photos/nature-wildflowers-reed-
f. ____ Pollen sticks to the pollinator grass-4737410/ https://pixabay.com/photos/rose-flower-buds-pink-rose-
as it is drinking nectar. 3475452/
g. ____ the pollen travels from the
stigma down the style (pollen tube) Parts of a flower
to the ovules, which are in the ovary. Within the flower, you will find a stamen, which is the male part of the
flower, and a pistil the female part. A stamen is composed of the filament
Answer: and anther. The male part of the flower produces small grains of pollen.
The pistil consists of the stigma, style (pollen tube), ovary and ovules
(female gametes).
Some flowers have only male parts, some have only female parts and some
have both male and female parts together.
The basic parts of the flower are shown in the diagram below.
Explain the following statement using an
example: “Pollination is helpful for both the
plant and the pollinator”.
Example of an answer that may be given.
• (Pollination and fertilization result in the
production of seeds that are necessary for
many plants to reproduce.)
• (At the same time, the sweet nectar
produced by plants, provides pollinators
with food. Pollen grains also provide bees
75
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
with minerals, proteins, fats and other
necessary substances.
Retrieved from: https://www.vectorstock.com/royalty-free-
Research and Writing vector/diagram-of-pollination-flowering-plants-vector-41661198
Learner groups will be tasked with writing a
one-page response paper that responds to the Vocabulary - Parts of a Flower
following questions.
• pollen: a fine powder produced by certain plants that plays a role in
1) What are the statistics
reproduction
around impact of mosquito-
• Stamen: the (male) part of a flower where pollen is produced.
born diseases in your
• Stigma: the tip of the pistil (the female part of the flower), which
country? Include charts and
receives the male pollen grains
graphs to explain the status
• pistil: the (female) part of the flower that receives the pollen
in your country (e.g. pie
• Ovule: a minute structure that, after fertilization, becomes a plant
charts, histograms, standard
seed
graphs)
2) What initiatives have been
Activity - labelling a diagram of a flower
taken in your country to
reduce the incidence of
Show Learners a diagram of a flower. Which parts do you think are male?
mosquito-borne ailments?
Which parts do you think are female? Have Learners label their own
3) What could you do in the
diagrams.
immediate area around your
school to reduce the
We will now take a closer look at pollination and fertilization - Two very
breeding of mosquitos?
important processes in the life cycle of a flowering plant
Include alternatives to
chemical pesticides which
What is pollination
may be harmful to the
student body.
To produce seeds that grow into new plants, flowers must be pollinated.
To be pollinated, pollen must be moved from the stamen to the stigma.
Life Cycle Project
This movement of the pollen from the male anther to the female stigma is
Student groups should search the internet
called pollination. Pollination can be of two types: self-pollination or
and library to access information to create a
cross-pollination.
poster that outlines the dangers that the
monarch butterfly faces in its life cycle.
76
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
(e.g. pesticides GMO plants, migration patterns, food
sources, destruction of habitat) Self-pollination occurs when the pollen from the anther is deposited on
Rubric: the stigma of the same flower, or another flower on the same plant.
Comprehensive explanation of dangers
(10 marks) Cross-pollination is the transfer of pollen from the anther of one flower
Clarity of data presented (3 marks) to the stigma of another flower on a different plant of the same species.
Clarity of Explanation 5 marks
Drawings and pictures (3 marks) Pollinators
Punctuation and grammar (5 marks) Since plants cannot move from place to place, most of them need help
with pollination. Animals that pollinate flowers are called pollinators.
Pollinators include bees, butterflies, moths, wasps, flies, bats, birds and
even hummingbirds but the most common pollinators are insects.
Retrieved from: https://pixabay.com/photos/bee-honey-bee-insect-fauna-
bloom-7413333/
https://pixabay.com/photos/insect-lime-butterfly-entomology-7025881/
https://pixabay.com/photos/rufus-hummingbird-bird-humming-4885971
How pollinators move pollen?
When creatures come to feed or collect sweet nectar (made at the base of
the petals), from the flowers, or shelter and nest-building materials, they
become covered in pollen. As they fly from flower to flower in order to
collect nectar, they accidentally rub against the stamens and get pollen stuck
all over themselves. When they move to another flower to feed, some of
the pollen can rub off onto this new plant's stigma.
77
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://www.britannica.com/science/cross-pollination
People can accidentally transfer pollen from one flower to another by going
from flower to flower and handling them. Humans can also manually
pollinate some flowers
Discuss why farmers sometimes have to transfer pollen for themselves.
Similarly, when animals pass by a flower, pollen can be carried on their
bodies and fur and transferred to different flowers.
On a breezy day, pollen can be transported by air currents. Plants that are
wind-pollinated include wheat, rice, corn and rye. Pollen can also be
transferred from plant to plant by water.
Features of Insect pollinated plants
• Flowers are brightly coloured, scented and secrete nectar.
• Pollen grains are larger, sticky and spiny.
• Pollen grains are fewer in number
• The stigma of flowers is small and deep within the flower.
• The stamens are within the flower tube
78
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Some may have a shape that fits with the pollinator (i.e. hibiscus
and hummingbird).
Retrieved from:
https://pixabay.com/photos/tomato-blossom-tomatoes-blossom-
1447877/ https://pixabay.com/photos/flower-pumpkin-yellow-
nature-yard-5394594/ https://pixabay.com/photos/hibiscus-red-
hibiscus-red-flower-1052018/
Features of Wind pollinated plants
• Flowers have no bright colours, special odours, or nectar.
• Flowers are small and most have no petals.
• Stamens and stigmas are exposed to air currents.
• Large amounts of pollen are produced.
• Pollen grains are smooth, light and easily airborne.
• Stigma are feathery to catch pollen from the wind.
Examples of wind-pollinated plants include: wheat, rice, corn, rye, barley,
several grasses and oats.
79
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Observing pollinators
For the first part of this activity, take Learners around the neighbourhood
for a casual observation walk. If a flower garden is nearby, it can also be
used.
Before Learners are taken on the visit/walk, visit the area to see the plants
with brightly coloured flowers, where they are located and the pollinators
that are found in the area. Before you leave for the visit/walk, remind
Learners that they should not remove or damage any of the plants.
When they get to the area, ask Learners to do the following:
1. Make a list of the plants with brightly coloured flowers. Take as
many pictures of the pictures of the flowers as possible. Make
sketches of these flowers if you do not have a camera. Note their
colour and size.
2. Make a note of the insects or birds that visit these flowers. Find out
the names of these organisms with your teacher’s help.
3. Try to catch a few of the insect pollinators, using a net, not your
hands. See if a yellow powdery substance is sticking to their legs and
bodies. This substance is pollen (pollen grains).
4. Take as many pictures as possible of the organisms visiting the
flowers.
5. When Learners return to the classroom, discuss their findings with
them. Make a list of the pollinators that were seen and the flowers
they visited.
After the class discussion:
1. Assign each group a pollinator. Provide the group with a Profile card
that corresponds to the pollinator that they were assigned.
2. Pass out the Pollinator Observation Data Sheet.
3. Learners will then return to the area they first visited and use the data
sheet on their pollinator to find out the following:
80
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4. What number of flowers did your pollinator visit the most? (Answers
will vary.)
5. What are three flower traits that you think attracted your pollinator?
(Answers will vary.)
Other questions
1. Why do pollinators visit flowers? (Pollinators visit flowers in search of
nectar and pollen, to use as food).
2. How do pollinators know which flowers to go to?
(There are many different ways pollinators decide which flowers to visit, these
include the colour, taste, patterns and popularity of the flower.)
3. What are two strategies that flowers have to attract the most
pollinators? (Many flowers use colours to attract insects, sometimes helped by
coloured marks to guide them. Flowers are often shaped to provide a landing
platform for visiting insects to land on or to force them to brush
against anthers and stigmas.)
What is fertilization
After a flower is pollinated, each pollen grain which is on the stigma grows
a tiny tube down towards the ovules in the ovary.
81
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://k8schoollessons.com/pollination-and-
fertilization/
Then the male gametes in pollen grains can reach the ovules, the pollen
tube breaks into the ovule and join female gametes or eggs produced in
ovules. The female gametes or eggs then join with the male gametes. This
joining or the combination of male gametes and female gametes is called
fertilization. Fertilization cannot take place without pollination.
After fertilization, a seed forms. The fertilized egg grows to become the
embryo found in a seed that will later grow into a new plant. There is also a
protective coat around the seed called the seed coat.
The petals, the stamen and the stigma then fall off and the ovary develops
into a fruit to protect the seed; fruits take on a variety of different shapes
and sizes and colour.
Fruits contain one, a few or many seeds. Some flowers, such as avocados,
have only one ovule in their ovary, so their fruit will have only one seed.
Many flowers, such as kiwifruit, have lots of ovules in their ovaries, so their
fruit contains many seeds. The fruit also helps in dispersing the seeds from
the parent plant to continue the cycle.
82
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Questions:
1. Why do you think the petals, the stamen and the stigma fall off?
(They fall off because they are no longer needed.)
2. Why is it important to protect the embryo?
(It is necessary to protect the embryo from drying out and from any injuries. If
the embryo is damaged, it will not be able to germinate and produce a new
plant.)
3. Give 2 examples of fruits that contain 1 seed, a few seed and many
seeds
• (Examples of fruits that contain one seed are: Avocado pear,
Coconut, Mango, Plum.
• Examples of fruits that contain a few seeds are:
Sapodilla, Grape, Apple, Grapefruit
• Examples of fruits that contain many seeds are:
Watermelon, Papaya, Guava, Passion Fruit Dragon fruit,
Pomegranate)
Activity: Fertilization
Dissect the flower and show Learners the path the pollen takes.
1. Have Learners trace the path of the pollen and label where
fertilization happens on their diagrams.
2. Observe the stamen (with anthers and filament) and the small,
thin, pistil. Do you see pollen? (Yes/No)
3. There is an anther cap; pollen is not released until the flower is
ready. How is this pistil different from the diagrams you have
seen? (Answers will depend on the type of flower used).
4. How many stamens are there? (Answers will depend on the type of flower
used).
5. Draw the stamens and pistils in your notebook and label them.
83
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6. Gently pull out each of the stamens. Only a pistil and ovary (the
bottom bulb-like structure) will remain.
Dissect the ovary.
1. With your toothpick, make a vertical slice down the middle of the
ovary and open it like a book.
2. Place the two halves of the ovary on your plate. What do you see
inside the ovary? What do you notice about the way ovules are
arranged? What needs to happen so ovules grow into seeds? Draw
your dissected ovary with ovules in your notebook and label them.
Use your hand lens to see the arrangement of ovules. Select a few
on the end of your toothpick to observe.
3. Indicate the location of pollen grains and ovules on a diagram of a
flower and trace the path from the stigma to the ovary of a flower.
Seed dispersal
The final stage in a flowering plant life cycle is seed dispersal. These
seeds, when ready, are dispersed into the environment, so that they can
themselves germinate and grow into new plants. The seeds are dispersed by
wind, animals, and water.
Teacher note
Review with Learners the agents of dispersal and discuss the role that
dispersal plays in the life cycle of plants.
Plant death
Eventually the plant will age and die. This is the end of the life cycle for
that individual, not the end of the species. This may not happen until the
plant has reproduced several times. If the plant had successfully produced
seeds, its species would survive into the future as the cycle begins again.
84
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Discuss with Learners why plant death is an important part of the plant life
cycle.
Additional Resources and Materials
Life Cycle of a Mosquito
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-IifzvIqGSM (4:35 mins)
The life cycle of a butterfly
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3kZD6rlSLUw: (0:00 - 3:04 mins)
Cockroach Life Cycle
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ue-xqu_JwP0 (1:57 mins)
Frog life cycle
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F3ElGMVU6SY (4:09 mins)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Comparing Life Cycles of Animals and Plants:
https://www.alabamawildlife.org/uploadedFiles/File/OC_Field_Journal-Comparing_Life_Cycles_QA_PPT.pdf
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dDSuU1Kys2k (2:53 mins)
Biological control of Pests: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biological_pest_control
Using Pheromones & knowledge of life cycle to limit offspring of forest pests: https://healthyforestpartnership.ca/playing-matchbreakers-scientists-explore-
pheromones-in-managing-spruce-budworm-populations/
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics
• Count different organisms.
• Measure the length of organisms.
• Interpreting statistics and graphs around mosquito borne illnesses
Language Arts:
• New terminology
• Comprehensive note taking on observations of life cycles
• Research & writing about life cycle issues
• Creating pictorial explanations of the life cycles
85
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
• Make oral presentation
Social Studies:
• Effects of pollution on life cycles
• Other factors that impact life cycles.
• Economic impact of destroyed/diverted life cycles of plants & animals
Art
• Creation of 3d models of life cycles
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
• Some stages in the life cycle of some organisms are consumed as delicacies, for example, turtle eggs and bird eggs.
Environment
• Climate change and chemicals can have negative effects on the different stages of life cycles and on pollinators
• Man can also destroy different stages of the life cycle of different organisms by destroying their habitats.
Technology
• Many technological devices can be used to study life cycles and pollinators.
• Different applications are used to study life cycles and pollinators and the movement of pollen.
TVET
• TVET plays a key role in equipping learners for the emerging green jobs that play a role in protecting organisms and the environment.
Agriculture
• Chemicals used in agriculture can have negative effects on different stages of the life cycle of animals or plants.
86
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Waves and Electromagnetic Radiation
Strand (Topic): Waves and Electromagnetic Radiation:
An understanding of the properties of waves helps Learners to account for natural phenomena including the behaviour of light and further establishes the
foundation for explaining interactions of matter based on an atomic theory.
Essential Learning Outcome: ELO 1: Use mathematical representations to describe a simple model for waves that includes how the amplitude of a
wave is related to the energy in a wave.
Clarification Statement: Emphasis is on describing waves with both qualitative and quantitative thinking.
Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include electromagnetic waves and is limited to standard repeating waves.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Examples of Waves Introductory Conversation
Learners give examples that show they know the “Learners tell me where you have seen waves?”
Knowledge difference between mechanical waves and (ocean, lakes, ponds. puddles, skipping rope, slinky®)
electromagnetic waves.
● Define the terms: In science we have categorized waves.
○ Wave Draw me a Wave Mechanical Waves and Electromagnetic Waves
○ Mechanical wave Learners have to draw a wave on graph paper based
○ Electromagnetic wave on teacher description. Mechanical waves are waves that require a
○ Energy Wave 1: Learners, the wave I am thinking of has an medium. This means that they have to have some
○ Amplitude amplitude of 2 units and a wavelength of 3 units. sort of matter to travel through. These waves travel
○ Wavelength Wave 2: The crest of this wave is 3 units high and when molecules in the medium collide with each
○ Frequency the wavelength is 4 units. other passing on energy. One example of a
○ Trough Wave 3: The trough of this wave is 2.5 units and the mechanical wave is sound. Sound can travel
○ Crest wavelength is 3 units through air, water, or solids, but it can't travel
○ Vibration through a vacuum. It needs the medium to help it
○ Longitudinal waves travel. Other examples include water waves, seismic
○ Transverse waves waves, and waves traveling through a spring.
○ SONAR
87
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
○ Ultrasound Recognizing Vocabulary Electromagnetic waves are waves that can travel
In the picture below, which labels show a crest and through a vacuum (empty space). They don't need a
● Explain the relationship between amplitude a trough? medium or matter. They travel through electrical
and energy of a wave and magnetic fields that are generated by charged
● Explain the mathematical formula that A) A and E particles. Examples of electromagnetic waves
relates amplitude to energy of a wave B) B and C include light, microwaves, radio waves, and X-rays.
C) D and E
D) A and B Retrieved verbatim from:
Skills https://www.ducksters.com/science/physics/wave
s.php
● Calculate the energy of a wave given its
amplitude, using an appropriate Drawing Game
mathematical formula The teacher asks student A to turn and face the wall
in the classroom while he/she secretly arranges a
● Interpret a graph of wave function, blue skipping rope on the floor in a perfect wave:
showing how energy is related to the
amplitude of a wave
● Predict how changes in amplitude will
affect the energy of a wave
What is the wavelength of the wave shown in the
diagram below??
The teacher then passes a red skipping rope and a
Attitudes/Values measuring stick (ruler) to student A
A) 20cm
● Learners will develop interest and curiosity B) 40cm The teacher asks student B to the front of the class
about wave behavior C) 10cm to observe the blue skipping rope and passes them
D) 80cm a measuring stick.
● Learners will value the importance of Student B is tasked with describing the blue
mathematical modeling in interpreting skipping rope configuration using measurements
and explanations such that student A (without
wave behavior
looking) can duplicate the blue skipping rope
appearance with their red skipping rope.
88
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Learners will demonstrate respect for peers Class Discussion:
during group work activities and Why might this be difficult to describe?
discussions • We don’t have terms to describe parts of
the wave.
● Learners will demonstrate the utility of • We are not sure which measurements to
waves in everyday technologies. make.
So class, it seems that having a “language” in
science, one that labels particular parts of objects,
could be very useful We see different types of
waves everyday in our world, with new terms we
can more easily describe them.
Complete Two Frayer Squares by placing the
following words in the center and completing the Learners will view the following video and record
quadrants. a) Transverse wave & b) Longitudinal definitions of the terms: wave, wavelength
wave ‘amplitude’, frequency, crest, trough, energy:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pXG8gmupZ
m8 (2.31 min)
Wave: A ripple/vibration that moves through a medium or
space. It carries energy from one place to another
Wave amplitude: This is how high or low the wave goes
from its resting position. It is the distance from the middle of
the wave to the top (crest) or bottom (trough)
Crest: The highest point on a transverse wave.
Trough: The lowest point on a transverse wave.
Frequency: How many waves go past a point in one
Distinguishing High & Low Frequency Waves second? Measured in hertz (Hz).
Have Learners draw a picture of a high frequency Energy: The capacity to do work.
wave and a low frequency wave to demonstrate
they know the difference.
Wave Amplitude & Energy poster
Learners will design a poster that explains how the
energy of an earthquake gets transferred into a giant
89
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
ocean wave (tsunami) and why they are so Teacher will use the following diagram to explain
dangerous to island nations. the concept of characteristics of a wave.
Rubric
● Accuracy- Poster accurately explains how
amplitude affects energy (5 marks)
● Clarity-Poster is visually clear and well
organized with appropriate
pictures/graphics (5 marks)
● Creativity-Poster demonstrates originality
(5 marks)
● Grammar & punctuation (2 marks)
Activity: Amplitude and energy using a balloon Retrieved from: https://ilp-
drum: Links to Mathematics media.wgbh.org/filer_public/e9/62/e962c2fb-
Instructions: Stretch a balloon over the top of a 1cdd-4fc3-881c-8c1fd2af5b91/buac20-img-
bowl or cup to create a drum surface. Secure with wavecharacteristics.png
tape or a rubber band as shown below.
Frequency: Another Property of Waves
How are the two waves below different?
Retrieved from: https://encrypted-
tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcQ340JG_
L-TyLK6AprI1ChzMgbkmMRdJgv9ug&s
90
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Place lightweight objects on the drum surface e.g. Retrieved from:
grains of rice. Hold a stick vertically, one centimetre https://byjus.com/physics/frequency-and-
above the centre of the drum and release to tap the wavelength/
drum creating a wave. Observe and record the (One wave with the shorter wavelength repeats itself more
amplitude (corresponding to the height of the tap) often in the same time)
and maximum distance the rice moves from its We would say that the shorter wavelength wave has
initial position (representing energy transferred). a higher frequency because it completes a cycle of
Repeat this exercise, holding the stick 2cm, 3cm, crest to trough more often in the same timeframe.
and 4 cm above the centre of the drum, each time
observing and recording the amplitude (height of Calculating Frequency of a Wave
the tap) and energy (movement of the rice).
Learners should then:
● Calculate the square of each amplitude
value (4 marks)
● Plot amplitude squared values against
energy. (4 marks)
● Draw a line of best fit which should
indicate a linear relationship between the
square of the amplitude and energy. (1
mark)
● Learners should discuss why the rice
moves more with higher amplitude taps Retrieved from:
and how the results show that energy is https://www.nagwa.com/en/videos/49814352636
directly proportional to the square of the 0/
amplitude.(6 marks) (Amplitude is the
maximum distance from the rest of a wave particle. Types of Mechanical Waves: Teacher demo
When a balloon drum is tapped from a greater Hello Learners I want to show you my new “slinky
height, the balloon surface stretches more, creating a ®” Let me show you two ways I can move the
higher amplitude wave. This greater movement slinky®.
causes the rice grains to move a further distance.
The movement of the rice serves as a visual
representation of energy transferred. When the
amplitude squared is plotted against the movement
of the rice, a linear relationship is observed,
91
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
indicating that as amplitude squared increases, the
energy increases proportionally)
● How does a change in amplitude affect the
sound energy produced by the drum?
(Higher amplitude vibrations result in an increase
in sound energy and therefore louder sounds)
Example of data recording table:
Retrieved from:
Tap Height Movement Amplitude https://faculty.wcas.northwestern.edu/infocom/Id
eas/waves.html
(cm) (cm) Squared
(cm²)
You can see there are two types of waves and they
have very specific characteristics and names.
1 0.5 1
● Longitudinal waves are a type of mechanical
2 2.0 4 wave that moves parallel (same direction) to the
medium they travel through, like sound waves in
3 4.5 9 air or spring waves in metal.
● Transversal waves are waves that oscillate
4 8.0 16 perpendicular to the direction of a wave's
advance. This means that the particles of the
The graph should show a linear relationship as medium vibrate up and down or side to side, while
shown below: the wave travels forward. Examples of transverse
waves include surface ripples on water and
electromagnetic waves such as radio and light.
Reinforcing Wave Types with Technology
Video:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7cDAYFTXq
3E (0:24 mins)
92
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Simulation:
https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/wave-on-a-
string/latest/wave-on-a-string_all.html
select >oscillate< & >fixed end<
Learners should observe what happens when they
move the sliders for >amplitude< & >frequency<
Guided discussion:
What causes vibrations that produce waves? (energy)
What did you notice when you adjusted the
Retrieved from: amplitude of the waves in the simulation? (With
https://www.elevise.co.uk/uploads/9/8/0/2/9802 increased amplitude the maximum distance from the rest
1560/published/screenshot-2020-05-28-at-16-25- point increases.)
52_4.png What do you think would happen to the amplitude
if more energy is used to generate the wave? (The
Instead of using rice, Learners could compare the amplitude would increase)
sound energy created with different amplitude taps Wave Observations at the Beach
using a decibel meter e.g. ‘sound meter’ Waves at the beach must originate from energy
also.
Questions:
Identifying Wave Properties (2 pts per answer)
1) If there is a breeze, we often see the waves
Retrieved from get larger. It is fun to play in the waves and
https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/topics/zcwkgdm/ feel them crash against our bodies. As the
articles/zkmrwsg#zjhk239 waves get larger from more wind, do we
feel more force of the waves on our body
or less? (more- If we feel more force, then there
must be more energy that is creating the wave)
The wavelength of the wave in the diagram above is
given by letter ______.
93
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Making Waves with a Rope: Linking Energy &
Amplitude
Activity: At the front of the class have two children
hold opposite ends of a skipping rope. Ask one
child to create a small wave using only a small
amount of energy.
Now ask the same child to create a bigger
wave by vibrating the rope. Ask children,
Which of the sound waves shown would be loud,
which of these two situations required
and which would be quiet?
more energy. (the second larger amplitude wave)
2) When a large wave is created in the ocean
Using Sound Waves to Identify Objects
from an earthquake (called a tsunami) it
crashes into the shoreline. It disrupts the
Sound waves can be used to determine the distance
shoreline and destroys buildings. We say
to an object. Have Learners do research and
that a wave has a very large amplitude. Ask
prepare a one-page paper response that responds to
Learners how the energy of that wave
the following questions(s).
compares to a typical day at the beach.
1) What does the word SONAR stand for? (much larger amplitude created with much more
2) How does sonar generate images of energy)
objects?
3) What animals use sonar for navigation? Waves and Energy
4) What are some examples of sonar being
used for a) fishing and b) treasure hunting
Retrieved from:
https://slideplayer.com/slide/6878579/
94
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Mathematicians have determined that there is a
relationship between the amplitude of the wave and
the energy it carries.
The amount of energy carried by a wave is related
to the amplitude of the wave. A high-energy wave
is characterized by a high amplitude; a low-energy
wave is characterized by a low amplitude.
The energy of the wave is directly proportional to
the square of the amplitude. (E α A2)
Amplitude (meters) Energy (joules)
proportional to
2 4
3 9
4 16
How Does Sound Travel?
Retrieved from:
https://oceanexplorer.noaa.gov/edu/materials/son
ar-pings-illustration.png Have one student knock on the side of a wooden
desk.
Teacher Resource: Let the second student place their ear close to the
https://oceanexplorer.noaa.gov/edu/materials/son desk on the other side and observe the sound
ar-fact-sheet.pdf heard.
Repeat but have the student place their ear directly
on the desk. The vibration can travel through the
Research Project: Ultrasound solid wood desk. A high energy strike against the
Learners should do research and generate a poster desk will sound the loudest.
that responds to the following questions: In fact, sound travels through any form of matter.
1) Use a description and picture to explain ➢ Sound is amplified the most (loudest)
how ultrasound technology works. (5
through solids as the particles are closest
marks)
together.
➢ When underwater objects vibrate, they
create sound-pressure waves that
95
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2) Explain how ultrasound is used in the alternately compress and decompress the
medical field to yield important water molecules as the sound wave travels
information. (5 marks) through the sea. Sound waves radiate in all
3) Proper grammar and punctuation (2 marks) directions away from the source like ripples
on the surface of a pond.
Teacher Resource:
➢ You may have heard someone try to speak
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_e_OTXuHp
after they have inhaled helium gas. Listen
nc&t=30s (3:06 mins)
here: https://whyy-
od.streamguys1.com/news/1106helium.m
p3 (5:23 mins)
It sounds different. Why? Usually, the
sound waves your vocal cords produce
travel through air in your voice box. But
when they go through the helium that
you've inhaled, they travel about three
times faster. That's because helium is so
much lighter than air. When sound
waves speed up but their frequency stays
the same, each wave stretches out
(retrieved verbatim from:
https://whyy.org/articles/why-exactly-
does-helium-make-your-voice-sound-like-
that/
Water Waves and Energy: Activity
Materials: Bowl of water, assorted pebbles
Ask Learners to carry out the following
experiments and draw conclusions:
1) Drop a large pebble and a small pebble
from the same height. What do you notice
about the waves created? (Large pebble higher
waves). What does this mean about the
energy of the falling pebble? (the larger pebble
96
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
has more energy and that is reflected in the
amplitude of the wave on impact with the water)
2) Drop the larger pebble from two different
heights (.5 meters and 1 metre). What do
you notice about the waves (higher drop
height causes bigger waves)? Which of the two
heights likely involves more energy? (the
higher pebble makes the bigger wave; I think it has
more energy)
Using Waves to Transmit Sound: A Simple
Phone We Can Build
Learners can design and build a simple amplifier
and state how the amplitude affects the quality of
the sound produced.
Materials:
● Two Styrofoam® cups
● A piece of string
● A pencil/pen
● Scissors
● Tape/glue
Instructions for making sound amplifier (as shown
in the picture below)
● Use a pencil to poke a small hole in the
center of the bottom of a Styrofoam® cup
● Cut a string to a length of about 1 meter
● Thread one end of the string through the
hole in the cup. Tie a knot on the inside of
the cup so that the string doesn’t fall back
out through the hole.
97
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Take a second cup and make a similar hole
through the center at the bottom.
● Pass the other end of the string through
the hole in the second cup and tie a knot to
secure it.
Retrieved from:
https://raisinglifelonglearners.com/wp-
content/uploads/2017/03/string-telephone-
explanation-5.jpg
● Hold the cups with the strings pulled taut
between them
● Have a student speak into one cup while
the other listens.
● Ask Learners to account for their
observations. Why does this apparatus act
as an amplifier? (When you speak into the cup,
your voice creates waves that travel through the
string to the second cup. The cups help the sound
waves to spread out and get louder when they reach
your ear.)
98
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● The first student will speak into the cup
with a whisper, then a speaking voice and
then a shout. A second student will note
observations.
● Discussion: Learners will explain what their
observations tell about the relationship
between amplitude and volume (Speaking
louder into the first cup increases the amplitude of
the sound waves produced. The louder sound heard
in the second cup is due to higher energy carried by
the sound waves. When the speaker speaks louder
the amplitude of the sound waves increases and the
energy transmitted through the string also increases)
Reviewing Connections Between Energy and
Wave Amplitude with Technology (Kahoot®)
Learners can do the following Kahoot® on wave
energy and amplitude
https://create.kahoot.it/details/8c50e83c-2ce2-
4257-9914-7be3d61d54ac
The Kahoot® includes the following questions:
1) What happens to the energy of a wave
when its amplitude is increased?
a) The energy decreases
b) The energy remains the same
c) The energy increases
proportionally to the amplitude
squared
d) The energy increases
proportionally to the amplitude
Ans-c
99
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2) If the amplitude of a wave is doubled, how
does the energy of the wave change?
a) The energy remains the same
b) The energy is doubled
c) The energy is halved
d) The energy is quadrupled
Ans-d
3) How is amplitude measured in a wave?
a) By the distance between two
consecutive waves
b) By the height of the wave from
the rest position
c) By the speed at which the wave
travels
d) By the frequency of the wave
Ans- b
4) Why does increasing the amplitude of a
sound wave make it louder?
a) It increases the frequency of the
sound wave
b) It decreases the speed of sound
c) It increases the energy of the
wave, leading to a louder sound
d) It decreases the wavelength of the
sound wave
Ans -c
5) In a graph showing the square of the wave
amplitude vs. energy, what shape should
the graph show?
a) A linear relationship
b) A circular relationship
100
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
c) No clear relationship
d) A disorganized relationship
Ans-a
Additional Resources and Materials.
Wave Quiz: https://www.teachengineering.org/content/clem_/lessons/clem_waves_lessons/clem_waves_lesson02_notes.pdf
Sound Amplifier Experiments: :https://team-cartwright.com/sound-science-activities
SONAR: Teacher Resource: https://oceanexplorer.noaa.gov/edu/materials/sonar-fact-sheet.pdf
Waves For Kids: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pXG8gmupZm8 (5:53 mins)
Energy & Amplitude: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-8wPRszSFH4 (5:51mins)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Waves Resources: https://www.ducksters.com/science/physics/waves.php
Ultra sound: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_e_OTXuHpnc&t=30s (3:06 mins)
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts: Include stories about increased energy generated by big ocean waves and a comparison with the destruction caused by these waves and smaller
waves
Mathematics: Calculate energy, given different amplitudes using formulas; plot graphs showing a directly proportional relationship
Social Studies: Explore communication technology and how sound waves can be amplified using various instruments
Elements that are integrated across subjects:
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
● Using traditional musical instruments (culture)
● Use of wave simulation software (technology)
● Designing and building a simple amplifier (TVET)
101
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: ELO 2: Develop and use a model to describe that waves are reflected, absorbed, or transmitted through various
materials.
Clarification Statement: Emphasis is on both light and mechanical waves. Examples of models could include drawings, simulations, and written descriptions.
Assessment Boundary: Assessment is limited to qualitative applications pertaining to light and mechanical waves.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Activity: Making Waves (small groups) Review of Wave Background Knowledge
Instructions: With the instrument provided, use a The teacher discusses the implications of waves and
Knowledge jingle to explain how sound waves are formed. their interactions in everyday life with Learners.
● Define the terms: shak shak, drum, harmonica, recorder, triangle,
o Wave guitar, Ask Learners if they have heard the word wave
o Mechanical wave Rubric: Discuss at the end of the presentation before. Yes. What are waves? (A wave is a
● The player gives energy by ripple/vibration that carries energy from one place to another.
o Electromagnetic wave
hitting/plucking/shaking - (1mark) It can travel through a medium (like air and water) or
o Wavelength
o Wave frequency ● A specific part of the instrument vibrates - through space. Particles of the medium may move back and
o Wave amplitude (1 mark) forth but do not travel along with the wave.)
● The vibrating part hits close by air
o Medium
Learners are to observe the following video of sea
molecules - (1 mark)
o Angle of incidence
waves:
● These molecules in turn hit other air
o Wave reflection https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vPhg6sc1Mk
o Wave absorption molecules-(1 mark) 4 (1.0 min)
● This vibration travels through the air - (1
o Wave transmission
mark)
o Wave refraction The teacher asks Learners: Why are these
considered waves? (There is a vibration through the
Activity: Light reflection
● Explain what a wave is water that carries energy. The water particles move up and
down and this movement makes the energy travel across the
● Distinguish between mechanical and Learners to work in pairs
water.)
electromagnetic waves
The teacher explains that there are many other
● Distinguish between transverse and Stand directly in front of a partner. Place a mirror
types of waves, some that we can’t see with the
longitudinal waves on the ground between you and your partner. Shine
naked eye. They all involve vibrations that carry
a flashlight directly to your partner.
energy.
Observe the image in the mirror.
102
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Explain the concepts of reflection, Draw what you see
absorption, and transmission of waves Write a short explanation of your findings. Explain What are some other types of waves?
why the image looks the way it does using the (microwaves, sound, light, seismic, radio waves)
● Identify examples of reflection, absorption,
concept of light reflection
and transmission of light and mechanical
How are some of those waves different from each
waves
Rubric other?
● Observation and drawing -Detailed and (Some waves such as water waves, sound, and seismic waves
Skills
accurate drawing, clearly showing require a medium for travel and are known as mechanical
● Create models or diagrams that show wave
knowledge of reflection-(4 marks) waves. Others, do not need a medium and can travel through
interactions with various substances
a vacuum. These are electromagnetic waves e.g. light, radio,
● Draw diagrams to show how light waves ● Explanation of findings - Through x-rays, microwaves)
are reflected, absorbed, or transmitted explanation with correct use of scientific
through various substances terms-(4 marks) Have we come across ways that other waves may
● Record observations on wave behavior affect us and ways that we use what we know about
● Teamwork and collaboration-worked well them to improve the quality of our lives?
from models and experiments
with partner, showing excellent (Waves are all around us and wave interactions can be
● Analyze data from observations and
collaboration and communication- (2 observed in everyday life: Sunglasses protect our eyes because
experiments to draw conclusions about
marks) they are made of a material that absorbs light waves, and
wave behavior
some buildings reduce noise because they are made of material
● Interpret graphs or pictures of wave In groups Learners are to create models describing that absorbs sound waves. Ultrasound machines used by
interactions how waves interact with various materials. Each doctors use sound waves to create images of the inside of the
group will be given a set of materials (e.g. body, we warm our food in a microwave oven when
Attitudes/Values flashlights, mirrors, gels of different colours, microwaves are absorbed by food causing molecules to vibrate
● Learners will develop interest and curiosity different fabrics, glass, water tanks, sand) and and produce heat. Many other examples exist.)
about wave behaviors by asking questions assigned a wave interaction to model (e.g.
and doing research reflection, absorption, and transmission. Each Let us Review the Characteristics of a Wave:
● Learners will demonstrate respect for peers group demonstrates their model to the class, Learners to observe this video and define the
during group work activities and explaining how it demonstrates wave behavior terms that follow:
discussions https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6h8JZ2SMrm
Rubric Q (2.58 min)
● Demonstration of understanding of wave
behavior- (5 marks) Wave: A ripple/vibration that moves through a medium or
space. It carries energy from one place to another
● Model clarity and accuracy- (5 marks)
103
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Wavelength: This is the length of one wave cycle. It is the
● Creativity- (5 marks) distance from one wave crest (top of the wave) to the next or
one wave trough (bottom of the wave) to the next
● Group collaboration- (3 marks) Wave amplitude: This is how high or low the wave goes
from its resting position. It is the distance from the middle of
Designing Your House the wave to the top (crest) or bottom (trough)
In groups Learners are to create a poster that shows Wave frequency: The number of wave cycles in a second
the design of house with different types of windows Period: The time for one complete wave cycle
(transparent, translucent and opaque) and responds The teacher will draw this diagram on the board for
to the following questions: Learners and label it explaining each point in the
1) Why did you choose particular window diagram.
types for different parts of the house? Note: In this diagram 1 cycle is the frequency of the wave.
2) How do does light interact with each type
of window?
Rubric:
● Demonstration of understanding of wave
behavior- 5 marks
Retrieved from:
● Clarity and accuracy- 5marks https://www.alanpedia.com/physics_waves/waves.
html
● Creativity- 5 marks
● Use of visuals (posters) Simulation of Waves & Energy Transfer
Learners are to do the following ‘wave on a string’’
● Storytelling quality (stories) simulation:
https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/wave-on-a-
Everyday Uses of Waves: The Microwave Oven string/latest/wave-on-a-string_all.html
During the simulation, Learners should adjust the
Learners to observe the following video (How Do frequency and amplitude of the waves.
Microwave Ovens Work?) and use it to explain how Guided discussion:
the reflection, absorption, and transmission of What did you notice when you adjusted the
microwaves help our food to cook. They will also frequency and amplitude of the waves in the
simulation? (With increased frequency the number of cycles
104
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
explain other applications of microwaves e.g. per second increases. With increased amplitude the
mobile phones, Wi-Fi, medical treatment maximum distance from the rest point increases.)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MqsDPmnP What has to happen for a wave to form?
KEk (3.16 min) (A vibrating source/disturbance)
Cooking food: What would cause the source to vibrate? (Energy
Reflection-Microwaves bounce around from the walls of the would be transferred to that source, e.g. from a person, wind)
microwave oven (2 marks) What happens because of this vibrating source?
Transmission-Microwaves pass through containers and outer (Vibrations are passed along.)
layers of food to penetrate to heat food evenly inside (2 What happens because these vibrations are passed
marks) along? (Energy is transferred.)
Absorption -food absorbs microwave energy and this is Do you always need matter/medium? (Not always:
converted to heat which warms the food (2 marks) Light waves from the sun travel through space to Earth.
Sound needs matter, water waves need water)
Other applications:
Mobile phones: Microwaves carry signals. These waves travel Using the Simulation to Investigate Properties
through the air to reach the person you’re calling or texting (2 of Waves
marks) The teacher can demonstrate the properties
WiFi- Uses microwaves to transmit internet signals showing the simulation on a projector or provide
wirelessly. (2 marks) clear directions (a worksheet question prompt) so
Medical treatments-Microwaves can be used to heat body that Learners can investigate on their own.
tissues to treat muscle pain and some cancers. (2 marks)
Learners to complete the following worksheet on
waves: Important Simulation notes for the teacher
• To observe reflection, observe what
happens to the wave when it reaches the
barrier at the end
• To change the medium that the wave is
traveling through, adjust the tension button
to simulate different mediums. The higher
the tension, the denser the medium.
• Also, increased damping relates to
increased absorption of the wave within a
medium
105
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• To observe what happens when a wave
approaches a barrier, note what happens
when it reaches a boundary or passes
through different substances.
Sound Waves Travel Through Air
Show Learners a drum with pieces of sand on the
skin. Strike the drum. Ask Learners if they can hear
it. (yes) Can you see the sand bouncing? (yes). That is
because the drum sound results from the drum
skin's vibration. If we could see the sound leaving
the drum it would appear as a wave. But how do we
hear that drum? (with our ears) But how does that
happen? (not sure)
Our ear also has a drum -called an eardrum. When
the waves enter the ear, they vibrate the eardrum,
and that signal goes to our brain. Some waves come
rapidly, other waves come slowly; this allows our
ear to distinguish different types of sound, for
example, high pitch versus low pitch.
106
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://people.emich.edu/blow/howto.html
Mechanical Waves are Affected When they
Travel Through a Medium
Does changing the medium affect wave speed? (yes,
waves travel at different speeds in different media)
Remind Learners of the property of refraction as
light travels from air to water and seems to bend
the pencil!
Retrieved from:
https://timesofindia.i
ndiatimes.com
What happens to a wave when it encounters a
barrier?
(When a wave encounters a barrier different phenomena can
be observed, depending on the nature of the wave and the
nature of the barrier:
Learners, tell me what happens when sunlight
encounters the following barriers:
1) A mirror? (It bounces back into our eyes so we
can see our reflection.)
2) A glass window? (It passes through the window.
We can see street lights through the window in our
house)
3) A black car? (the car gets warmer inside because
Worksheet retrieved from: the black color absorbs all wavelengths of light and
file:///C:/Users/Admin/Downloads/transmission heats up)
-absorption-and-reflection-how-waves-interact-
with-materials.pdf Let us formalize our definitions of these
properties.
107
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
(Completed worksheet) 1) Reflection when the wave bounces off the
barrier and moves off in the opposite direction.
2) Transmission when the wave passes through
the substance and continues moving in the same
direction. This occurs when the barrier allows the
wave to pass without obstructing or absorbing it
e.g. light waves through clear glass.
3) Absorption is when the barrier absorbs the
wave's energy, reducing its (the wave’s) intensity.
The absorbed energy is converted into another form
of energy such as heat e.g. sunlight being absorbed
by a dark colored bottle
Reinforcing the Concepts
Dim the lights in the classroom and use a flashlight
to shine a light on different objects e.g. a mirror,
transparent plastic, and black paper. Learners will
explain their observations. They will also explain
how these activities demonstrate reflection,
absorption, and transmission of light.
Observations:
1. Mirror-Bright flashlight beam and their reflections
are observed. This is because the mirror has a
smooth, shiny surface which causes light to be
bounced back or be reflected.
2. Transparent plastic-Objects behind the plastic
become illuminated and can be seen. This is
because the plastic is transparent, allowing most
light to pass through or be transmitted.
3. Black paper-The paper appears dark and nothing
behind it can be seen. After a while the paper may
feel warm This is because the dark surface absorbs
108
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
most of the light, converting it to heat, and very
little is reflected to the observer
How Can We Use the Reflection Property?
Ask Learners if they have ever heard of a periscope.
Periscopes are used in submarines so that you can
see far above the surface of the water without the
submarine being above the water line. This is in
part a defense against ships that might see the
submarine in wartime and attack.
Worksheet questions and answers:
1. Explain why sound waves are
mechanical waves rather than
electromagnetic waves.
Sound waves are mechanical waves because they Retrieved from:
require a medium (such as air, water, or solid https://www.dreamstime.com/cartoon-submarine-
materials) to travel through. They are created by periscope-window-vector-cartoon-submarine-
vibrations that cause particles in the medium to periscope-window-vector-illustration-
move and transfer energy. In contrast, image127034571
electromagnetic waves (like light and radio waves) But how does a periscope work? Let us do some
do not require a medium and can travel through a activities to investigate.
vacuum.
2. Cathy yells in a tunnel and hears her Activity: How Does Light Travel?
voice echo. Is this an example of
transmission, absorption, or reflection?
Explain.
This is an example of reflection. The sound
waves produced by Cathy's yell bounce off the walls
109
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
of the tunnel and return to her ears, creating an
echo.
3. When Gordon jumps into the pool, he
creates waves that travel from one end
of the pool to the other. Is this an
example of transmission, absorption, or
reflection? Explain.
This is an example of transmission. The waves
Cover a comb with black paper except for the
generated by Gordon's jump travel through the
central slit
water from one end of the pool to the other. The
Place the comb perpendicular to a white manilla
energy of the waves is carried through the water.
sheet
4. Justin has a brother named Nick.
Shine a searchlight through the opening
Nick’s bedroom is directly above
Adjust until the beam is seen on the paper
Justin’s bedroom. Before Nick had
Place a mirror in its path and see what happens to
carpet installed in his bedroom, Justin
the beam of light
could hear the sound of Nick singing
as he practiced for chorus class each
Key Points to ask Learners about as they
night. Once Nick’s room was carpeted,
observe
Justin could no longer hear Nick
● Light travels in straight lines
singing. Why?
The carpet in Nick's room absorbs the sound ● When light hits a mirror it bounces off.
waves. Before the carpet was installed, sound waves ● Light can be reflected (bounced off
traveled easily through the floor, allowing Justin to surfaces).
hear Nick singing. The carpet material absorbs the ● The reflection of light allows us to see
sound energy, reducing the amount of sound that objects and images by bouncing light into
passes through the floor to Justin's room. our eyes
5. Justin also shares a bedroom wall with
his sister Jennifer. From his bedroom, Show Learners the diagram of the periscope and
he can hear that Jennifer is playing the ask them to explain how it might work.
guitar, but the sound is muffled.
Describe the interactions occurring
between the sound waves and the wall.
The sound waves from Jennifer's guitar are
partially transmitted through the wall but are also
110
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
absorbed and reflected by the wall. The wall
material absorbs some of the sound energy, reducing
the volume and clarity of the sound that reaches
Justin's room, resulting in a muffled sound.
6. There is a giant oak tree in Justin’s
backyard. On a sunny day, the leaves of
the tree look green. Describe the
interactions occurring between the light
waves and the leaves of the tree.
The green color of the leaves is due to the (light above the water enters and reflects
absorption and reflection of light waves. off one mirror at “a” to direct it downward
The leaves contain chlorophyll, which absorbs most and then reflects again at a second mirror to
wavelengths of light (such as red and blue) and enter the eye of the observer at c)
reflects green wavelengths. This reflected green light Retrieved from:
is what makes the leaves appear green to our eyes. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Periscope
7. Justin’s bedroom window is divided Learners are to observe the following pictures and
into four parts. In the afternoon, he state why there seems to be a picture of the
notices that the sunlight creates a mountain in the lake:
pattern of light and dark areas on the
wall. Describe the interactions
occurring between the light waves and
the window.
The pattern of light and dark areas is caused by
transmission and shadow formation.
The parts of the window that allow light to pass
through create bright areas on the wall, while the
frames or dividers block the light, creating shadows
or dark areas. The light waves that pass through
the glass are transmitted, while the parts of the
window that do not allow light through create the
pattern of light and dark areas on the wall. Sunlight bounces off the mountain and travels to the lake.
Some of the light bounces off (reflects off) the lake, like light
reflecting off a mirror. The reflected light travels to your eye
111
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
and your brain creates an upside-down image just like a
mirror
How Do Water Waves Behave?
The Learners are to observe the following video
and indicate what happens when the water waves
hit the wall:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oKsiXdcgYH
s (0.20 mins)
When the ocean meets the shore or encounters a
barrier the “water wave” gets reflected and bounces
off in another direction to which it approaches the
structure. This may cause chaotic or irregular wave
patterns. Next time you visit the beach look out for
reflection and notice the pattern in the water at the
shoreline.
Retrieved from:
https://www.gcsescience.com/pwav41.htm
112
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
How Does Reflection Change Depending on
the Barrier?
Retrieved from: https://www.twinkl.ca/teaching-
wiki/opaque
Can Sound Waves be Reflected?
Set up the apparatus below:
If we take two tubes and position them against a
wall, as shown in the figure above, upon placing a
speaker or any other source of sound near one end
of the tube, we receive the sound at the end of the
other tube. This activity proves that the surface of
wall reflects the sound wave.
113
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://byjus.com/physics/sound-
reflection/
Absorption of Sunlight Waves
Ask Learners if they have ever noticed a difference
in the inside temperature of cars on hot days?
As an experiment, paint one 2L plastic pop bottle
with white paint and one 2L bottle with black paint.
After the painted bottles have dried, fill them both
with water. Place the two bottles in direct sunlight
for 2 hours. Use a thermometer to take the
temperature of the two bottles. Ask Learners which
bottle is the warmest. (They will find the black bottle is
warmest) Ask them why it is the warmest. (The black
color absorbs sun rays while the white bottle reflects them
therefore the water in the black bottle will be warmer.)
Ask Learners: In the absence of air conditioning,
which color car will be the cooler car in the hot
sun? (white car will reflect sunlight and stay cool; black car
will get hot inside)
Transmission of waves: Transparent versus
Translucent Windows
Learners will observe the following window and
explain the difference in what they observe between
the top and bottom, and the reason for their
explanations:
114
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://encrypted-
tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcRgCnJsV
acs9f-ieMEQMF3EuymKwFEcV1A7-
ejysS4RszoQcHvxllHU_kQPjzz6_jLdgHs&usqp=
CAU
Many windows in a house will allow light to pass
freely and therefore we can easily see through them.
These are said to be transparent (The top part of
the window). Glass and some plastic may be
transparent
Some windows are said to be translucent because
they diffuse (reflect in different directions) most of
the light. Materials like frosted glass and some
plastics are called translucent. They only a small
amount of light pass through so that you don’t see
easily through the window (the bottom part of the
window).
What is different with this window?
115
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://us.images.westend61.de/0000067224pw/fr
ance-alsace-closed-window-shutters-
WWF00859.jpg
Opaque objects like the window above block light
from traveling through them. Most of the light is
either reflected by the object or absorbed and
converted to thermal energy. Materials such as
wood, stone, and metals are opaque to visible light.
116
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://www.sciencebuddies.org/teacher-
resources/lesson-plans/light-transparent-
translucent-opaque
What does sound need in order to be
transferred as a wave?
We have already seen that sound readily transfers
through air (to our ears) and water ((whale talk- see:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WabT1L-nN-
E (2:57 mins))
Have Learners watch the following video and
explain why they can’t hear the sound?
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jMEgzsmJdm
Q&feature=youtu.be (1:01 mins)
(When air is removed from a system to generate a vacuum,
the sound wave has no wave medium in which to travel
so we don’t hear anything.)
What would you predict would happen if you
pass a light through a vacuum chamber? (it
would shine through)
In fact, light will easily pass through a vacuum. This
is because light sometimes acts like a wave but also
acts as a particle and with nothing in its way it can
pass through the vacuum. Think of the analogy of a
spaceship as a discrete particle. Once it is given
enough velocity to leave the Earth, it readily passes
through space which is the biggest vacuum!
Have Learners watch the following video and
then explain why sound travels faster in water
compared with air.
117
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AxNdr0Bcx2
0 (6:22 mins)
An explanation: the relay race
Sound travels by particles bumping into each other
as they vibrate. It is a little like a relay race – each
runner holds a little bit of information (the baton),
and when they make contact with the next runner,
they pass the information on.
In the case of sound, the runners are particles and
the information (baton) they are passing along is
energy of vibration. In a sound wave, a particle
picks up some energy and keeps it until it bumps
into a neighbouring particle. The next particle will
then pick up the energy and transfer it to the next
one in the chain. This happens extremely fast and is
detected as a wave of pressure.
Sound won’t travel in a vacuum because there are
no particles to bump together to transmit the
vibration.
Quoted verbatim from:
https://www.sciencelearn.org.nz/resources/572-
sound-on-the-move
Additional Resources and Materials.
Make a Periscope: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bnjn5e4LTmE (5:00 mins)
Refraction and Spear fishing: https://www.sciencelearn.org.nz/images/59-refraction-and-spearfishing
Mirrors and photocopiers: https://www.bu.edu/simulation/classes/505classnotes/PhotoCopier.pdf
Reflection in Convex an concave mirrors: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/concave-and-convex-mirrors/
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Light properties: https://letstalkscience.ca/educational-resources/backgrounders/light-and-its-properties
118
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Sound properties: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-_xZZt99MzY (5:15 mins)
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics:
● Learners to graph a wave and identify the frequency, amplitude and wavelength
● Solar panel installation and best angles for maximum absorption for sunlight: https://www.energysage.com/solar/solar-panel-performance-orientation-
angle/
Social Studies: Do new wave technologies have detrimental impacts on human health?
Language Arts:
• Research and poster construction (communications)
● Write a story involving waves
● Read a story or paragraph involving waves and interpret the terms involved
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Local culture
● Learners discuss how traditional instruments create sound waves
● Technology-Learners to use online wave simulation tools, Learners to discuss how microwaves help with cooking, medical imaging & treatment and
WiFi & cellular communication
● Learners to explore the effect of waves on the environment e.g. ocean waves, seismic waves
119
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Forces and Interactions
Strand (Topic): Forces and Interactions
Force and motion are important parts of everyday life. As Learners study this unit, they will learn how these physical factors impact their lives and work. The
lessons and activities will help Learners become aware of factors like friction, gravity, and magnetic force.
Essential Learning Outcome: ELO 1: Apply Newton’s Third Law to design a solution to a problem involving the motion of two colliding objects.
Clarification Statement: Examples of practical problems could include the impact of collisions between two cars, between a car and stationary objects, and
between a meteor and a space vehicle.
Assessment Boundary: Assessment is limited to vertical or horizontal interactions in one dimension.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Review & Comprehension: Multiple Choice Recognizing Forces That Move Us
Learners, I am sure you have all gone for a swim in a pool or
Knowledge A person is standing on a bus. When the bus starts the ocean before. How do you move forward? (By cupping our
• Define the terms: moving forward suddenly hands and pushing against the water). Did you realize that the
• Force reason you actually move ahead is because the water is pushing
A. The person moves backwards-X
back on your hands in the opposite direction? Today we are
• Magnitude B. The person does not move
going to introduce some ideas about motion we probably have
• Free-body diagram C. The person moves front
never thought about before; mostly because we live them
• Action D. none of the option
everyday and don’t really consider their importance! I am
• Reaction This is an example of Newtons First Law-objects going to introduce to you a man named Isaac Newton. He was
• Collision in motion remain in motion a scientist and mathematician who was very important for
A swimmer pushes against the water with hands & explaining gravity and laws of motion.
• Define Newton’s Third Law of feet, while the water pushes the swimmer
Motion. Newton was a scientist who developed important laws of
A. forward-X motion based on his experiments: he suggested:
B. back
120
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Identify action and reaction C. down In the first law, an object will not change its motion unless
forces in everyday life D. none of the option a force acts on it.
This is an example of Newtons Third Law-where
we have equal & opposite forces. In the second law, the force on an object is equal to its
• Describe the effects of action
mass times its acceleration.
and reaction forces on colliding Newton’s third law of motion is associated with
objects A. density
In the third law, when two objects interact, they apply
B. forces-X
forces to each other of equal magnitude and opposite
• Explain how we can apply C. constant speed direction.
Newton’s Third Law of Motion D. loss of massa
to car safety
When a moving bus suddenly stops, a person sitting
will
Skills
A. The person does not move
• Observe that Newton’s third B. Falls forward-X
law describes an equal and
C. Falls backward
D. none of the option
opposite force acting on two
This is an example of Newtons First Law-objects
objects.
in motion remain in motion
• Create a balloon rocket model Comprehension: True & False
to test Newton’s third law that • When swimming, we push the water back,
Retrieved from: https://geniebook.com/tuition/secondary-
for every reaction there is an making our body move forward. (T)
3/physics/how-newtons-laws-motion-impact-real-life-
equal and opposite reaction. exploring-fun-and-engaging-examples
• Birds push down the air with their wings
causing them to rise because the air pushes
• Design and build a unique toy back upward. (T) Today we are going to focus on his third law.
car to test how we can absorb
an equal and opposite force • In space, the lack of gravity makes no
difference in how astronauts accomplish
acting on colliding objects.
simple force-related tasks. (F)
• Draw free-body diagrams to • As rockets expel gases on lift off the
represent opposing forces opposing force to their thrust is gravity (F)
121
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Attitudes/Values • When you walk, you push down and
backward on the street; i.e., you apply an
action force on the street’s ground, and the
• To develop interest and reaction force moves you upward and
curiosity in motion and the laws forward. (T)
which govern it
• When someone fires a gun, the action force
of exploding gun powder pushing the bullet
• To develop an interest and forward is opposed by the force of recoil
curiosity in how Newton’s laws pushing the gun backwards the gun
are applied to practical backwards. (T)
problems such as car safety.
• Design of vehicles to absorb collision
Retrieved from: https://stickmanphysics.com/stickman-
forces involves more than just new types of
• To persist in problem-solving physics-home/forces/newtons-third-law-of-motion-action-
bumpers. (T)
of practical experiments despite reaction-pairs/
failure Can You Pick Out the Opposing Forces?
• When conducting practical and The above is called a free-body diagram, Free-body diagrams
group work, display sensitivity are diagrams used to show the relative magnitude and direction
and help peers who may have of all forces acting upon an object in a given situation. For
physical or learning challenges. Newton’s 3rd Law we can draw opposing forces “action and
reaction” forces.
• Participate actively in classroom See also:
https://www.physicsclassroom.com/class/newtlaws/Lesson-
discussions.
2/Drawing-Free-Body-Diagrams
• Consider a career in the
Identifying the Opposing Forces
automotive design field.
Retrieved from: Learners I wonder if you can help me understand something
https://www.examples.com/physics/newtons- that happen to my friend. He was bringing his boat into the
third-law-of-motion.html wharf and stopped his motor and drifted. But he wasn’t quite
close enough, so he stretched out his leg towards the wharf
and pushed off from the boat. Much to his surprise, as soon as
he pushed to reach the wharf with his foot, the boat moved
122
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
backwards in the opposite direction! You know what
Example Initial Opposing happened next! He fell in the water.
Force Force
Rocket I wonder if we can use Newton’s 3rd law to explain what
Rowboat happened. Maybe this diagram might help you?
Bounce ball
Swimming
Shoot gun
Walking
Push wall
Hitting Ball
Example Initial Opposing
Force Force
(As the person pushes forward there is an equal and opposite force
Rocket Thrust downward Earth pushing
backward so the boat moved out from under the man)
upward
Retrieved from: https://www.wired.com/2013/10/a-closer-
Row Boat Oar pushing back Water pushing
look-at-newtons-third-law/
forward
Bounce ball Ball falls Earth pushes
Teacher Demonstration
downward upward
Swimming Hand pushes back Water pushes Place a pair of children 1 meter apart in the classroom and ask
forward them to hold their position facing each other without moving
Shoot gun Explosion forward Un recoils back their feet.
Walking Foot directs Earh pushes
downward/back upward/forward Pass student 1 a heavy ball. Ask them to toss the ball to the
Push wall Hands push Wall pushes other student 2. After student 2 catches the ball ask the
against wall against hands Learners in the class questions:
Hitting Ball Bat hits ball Ball pushes back
1) What did you notice about student 1’s stance as they
threw the ball towards student 2? (As they threw the ball,
Designing a Balloon Rocket: Capitalizing on
their own body moved backwards) So they exerted a force
Action and Reaction Forces
to move the ball forward but the ball pushed them
back in the opposite direction
Newton’s Third Law (for every action there is a
reaction) provides a basic explanation for how a
123
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
rocket engine works. The air trapped inside the 2) What did you notice about the stance that student 2
balloon pushes out the open end, providing an took as they received the ball (student 2 seemed to lean
“action”. The balloon’s resulting motion is the towards student 1 as if they were expecting the ball to hit them
“reaction”. with force)
3) Student 2, what did you do to catch the ball without
moving your feet? (I exerted a force in the direction of
student 1 so the impact of the ball would not make me move my
feet) In order to keep their feet from moving,
student 2 had to push forward as they received
the ball because of its incoming force at point of
contact.
Maybe this diagram will provide a good review of this
demonstration.
Retrieved from:
https://facts.net/lifestyle/entertainment/10-
unbelievable-facts-about-balloon-rocket-
experiment/
In this experiment, Learners will use a balloon
rocket to test Newton’s third law:
Materials:
● Balloons
● Balloon pump
● String (fishing line) about 15 m long (35-40
feet) Retrieved from:
● Bag clip https://slideplayer.com/slide/7808115/#google_vignette
● Drinking straw
● Cloth measuring tape
● Scissors
124
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Another example…
Instructions
● Find an area where you can stretch out a It is probably difficult to imagine, but when you push off the
string to a length of 10-15 meters. Hook ground with your foot to propel your skateboard forward, you
one end of the string around a solid are putting force on the ground and Newton’s 3d Law says
support. A member of your team will hold that the ground is pushing back with an equal force.
the other end tight when you are ready to
launch your balloon.
● Partially inflate the balloon and tape a short
piece of string from the nozzle to the
centre spot on the bottom side. Draw a
straight line following the string
● Find the largest circumference and mark a
straight line
● Cut the straw in half and pull the loose end
of the string through it.
● Mark a starting point with a piece of tape,
close to the end of the string from which
you will launch your balloon rocket. Retrieved from: https://study.com/academy/lesson/action-
● Attach the balloon to the drinking straw and-reaction-forces-law-examples-quiz.html
with tape, following the guide marks you
drew before. The balloon should hang Action & Reaction: Collisions
below the string.
● When you are ready, countdown and What happens when we apply Newton’s third law to colliding
launch your balloon objects? When a car hits a wall or another vehicle there is an
equal and opposite force pushing back! That force is often felt
Write a sentence or two to summarize the findings by the bumper and is reflected in great damage and loss of
of your experiment in terms of Newton’s Third energy through friction and heat generated.
Law, in your own words.
Rubric
Demonstration of understanding- 5 marks
model accuracy: 5 marks
Creativity- 5 marks
125
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Group collaboration - 5 marks Retrieved from: https://www.sciencebuddies.org/teacher-
Protecting the Egg: An Engineering Challenge resources/lesson-plans/engineering-car-crash-safety-newton-
third-law
In groups of 4-5, Learners will plan, design, build
and test cars that can minimize the damage of How can we use Newton’s third law to make cars safer?
collision. We need design features in cars that absorb the force of
impact. Learners, identify some things that have been
Materials: incorporated in cars that provide the opposing force to the
● Wheels: round objects like bottle caps or impact of a collision.
CDs, or you can cut your wheels from (foam bumpers, collapsable metal, air bags, seat belts)
foam board
● Axles: straws, pencils, wooden skewers, Here is a picture of some new car features.
paper rolled into tubes, etc.
● Chassis (body): plastic bottles, cardboard
boxes, Styrofoam, cardboard, etc.
● Other construction supplies: scissors, tape,
glue, rubber bands, paper clips, etc.
You will also need materials to build a ramp to roll
the cars down:
● Wooden board, large piece of corrugated
cardboard, or foam core board, at least 1
foot wide and 3 feet long
● A small box or stack of books to prop up
one end of the ramp, at least 1 foot tall
Retrieved from:
Learners will create and build a toy car large enough https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/guides/zgn82hv/revision/11
to hold an egg.
Using a wooden box and books Learners will create Establishing background knowledge
an inclined plane/ramp. Pose this scenario to Learners:
A brick or hard object should be placed at the end If you hold a metal rod very firmly and strike it on a rock,
of the ramp and Learners will be allowed to roll the what will it feel like on your hands?
car down the ramp and strike the wall. (the metal will vibrate and hurt my hands)
Using duct tape or glue, Learners can place any Then ask, “If you wear gloves or wrap the handle-end of the
material in their car to form a bumper. Each group rod in a cloth, how will that change the experience?”
126
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
must choose a different material to test which one is (It won’t hurt so much because the layer between my hand and the rod
best to protect the egg from breaking. offers a cushion).
Learners should note that the bumper is used to
absorb the equal and opposite force exerted by the Explain to Learners…
wall. In the old days, cars were designed with heavy metal bumpers
Rubric to avoid damage upon a collision. What do we see now? (plastic
Demonstration of understanding- 5 marks and foam bumpers)
model accuracy: 5 marks
Creativity- 5 marks Learners, why do you think they have changed the bumper
Group collaboration - 5 marks style? (the foam and plastic cushion the car and driver instead of
absorbing all the force of the collision)
Teacher Resource: Egg cars
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nxRHKtexGv Cars are now designed entirely so that the equal and opposite
U&t=205s (5:28 mins) force of a collision is absorbed.
Ask Learners what happens if they are the driver of a car and
they abruptly collide with another car or a pole or wall. (you are
thrown forward very quickly).
Then ask them “How is the car designed to help you from
getting injured as the force of the wall and car coming together
is distributed to you moving forward? (Airbags inflate to cushion,
and a seat belt restricts your motion forward)
Explain to Learners that even more consideration is given to
the design of cars.
127
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/guides/zgn82hv/revision/11
#:~:text=When%20the%20car%20crashes%2C%20there,cont
rolled%20deceleration%20of%20the%20person
Can you identify Opposing Forces?
(formative assessment within class)
In the following two pictures, I want you to identify the
opposing forces
1) A bird stays airborne by flapping their wings
Retrieved from:
https://stock.adobe.com/search?k=%22bird+flapping+wings
%22
A bird flies through the air by flapping its wings and pushing
the air downwards.
According to Newton’s third law, for every action, there is an
equal and opposite reaction. Do you think the air has an equal
force acting on the bird? In what direction is this force acting?
(The size of the force on the air equals the size of the force on the bird; the
direction of the force on the air (downwards) is opposite the direction of the
force on the bird (upwards))
128
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2) While driving down the road, a firefly strikes the
windshield of a bus and makes an obvious mess in
front of the face of the driver
Retrieved from: https://slideplayer.com/slide/15063990/
While driving down the road, a firefly strikes the windshield of
a bus and makes a quite obvious mess in front of the face of
the driver. This is a clear case of Newton's third law of
motion. The firefly hit the bus and the bus hit the firefly.
Which of the two forces is greater: the force on the firefly or
the force on the bus? (Each force is the same size.)
Newton’s 3d Law of Motion and Space
Retrieved from: https://edu.gcfglobal.org/en/newtons-laws-
of-motion/newtons-third-law/1/
Discussion
Newton’s third law states that for every action, there is an
equal and opposite reaction. In space there is no gravity so
astronauts tend to float around in the spaceship.
129
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1) Do you think the 3rd law applies to astronauts in
space?
Yes it does, astronauts struggle with the law because there is no gravity in
space and thus, their every action has greater opposite reactions. For
example, if an astronaut pushes on a surface they are propelled in the
opposite direction. In outer space, astronauts use backpack jet packs that
expel a gas. Without friction the astronaut moves easily in the opposite
direction.
2) Simple tasks on earth such as moving boxes and using
a screwdriver are much harder for an astronaut in
space where there is no gravity. What do you think
would happen to an astronaut trying to use a
screwdriver in space?
(due to the lack of gravity and Newton’s third law, the astronaut would
find himself turning or twisting if he is not anchored to a wall)
3) Describe what you think would happen to an
astronaut freely floating in space and pushing a small
box away from himself.
(Despite having different masses, the astronaut and the box would both
apply an equal and opposite force onto each other and move in opposite
directions. Since there is no gravity and no ground to push against; both
objects would simply float away. The box would move much faster since it
has a smaller mass). The picture below shows what is likely to
happen in terms of forces.
130
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://link.springer.com/referenceworkentry/10.1007/978-
3-319-55065-7_1081
Let's visualise this space concept using a video:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZkVU-bj9bDk (3:07
mins) Think about the following questions as you watch.
1. What did you observe once the astronaut applied a
force to the basketball in microgravity? (due to the
difference in masses, the basketball accelerated much faster than
the astronaut although an equal and opposite force was applied)
2. What did you observe once the astronaut applied a
force to an astronaut of a similar mass? (both astronauts
accelerated in opposite directions)
Reviewing and Supplementing Concepts with Video
Ask Learners to watch video and write down answers to the
following questions as they watch.
131
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a-wh3fJRdjo (4:25
mins)
1. State Newton’s third law (for every action, there is an equal
and opposite reaction)
2. Describe the action and reaction forces of a rocket
being launched (the rocket exhaust moves downwards while
the rocket moves upwards)
3. Describe the action and reaction forces of a cannon
being fired (the cannon's backward movement is the reaction
to the action of shooting a cannonball)
4. What did Newton observe about the magnitude of
action and reaction forces? (action and reaction forces are
always equal)
5. What is the magnitude of the reaction force if a skater
pushes off the ground with 15 Newtons of force? (the
ground pushes back with a reaction force of 15N)
6. Describe the effect of friction on a moving body
(frictional forces would move in the opposite direction of the
moving body causing more energy to be used)
7. Describe three examples of action and reaction forces
which you may encounter in your everyday life.
Additional Resources and Materials.
Newton's Third Law: Rocket Races (https://www.nasa.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/stemonstrations_newtons-third-law.pdf?emrc=54ad83)
Newton's Third Law Worksheet - (Action-Reaction)
(https://www.mayfieldschools.org/Downloads/Newtons%203rd%20Law%20Wkst%20side%202%20and%20KEY.pdf).
Allow Learners to go on field trips to engineering sites
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
https://youtu.be/EF6Cd8_OBRk
https://www.teachengineering.org/lessons/view/ucd_newton_lesson03
https://calaero.edu/aeronautics/principles-of-flight/newtons-third-law-in-aviation/
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics: use of force diagrams, additive forces, motion equations, graphing motion
132
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Language Arts: research, reading and writing about collisions and safety
Social Studies: Laws with respect to car safety
Items of Inspiration
Allow Learners to write a project on the application of Newton’s third law of motion.
https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/guides/zgn82hv/revision/6
133
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: ELO 2: Plan an investigation to provide evidence that the change in an object’s motion depends on the sum of the
forces on the object and the mass of the object.
Clarification Statement: Emphasis is on balanced (Newton’s First Law) and unbalanced forces in a system, qualitative comparisons of forces, mass and
changes in motion (Newton’s Second Law), frame of reference, and specification of units.
Assessment Boundary: Assessment is limited to forces and changes in motion in one-dimension in an inertial reference frame and to change in one variable at
a time. Assessment does not include the use of trigonometry.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Objects at Rest and in Motion Introductory Activity
Good morning class, you have learned about forces
Knowledge before. They can be a push or a pull. Today we will
● Define the terms: look at how forces can interact. Let us start with a
● force familiar game, tug of war.
● balanced / unbalanced force
● mass Tug of War and Forces
● Newton (N)
● pull/push Learners, have you ever chosen teams for a tug of
● speed/velocity war game with a rope?
● inertia If you want to choose a winning team, what
● motion characteristics would you look for in your team?
● friction (strong pullers, many pullers and pullers with large mass that
● gravity might be hard to move)
Retrieved from
● momentum
https://www.crestolympiads.com/topic/class-5-
● acceleration Since we are trying to move the rope to our team’s
force-and-its-types
● elastic collision side, we are looking to have the greater force
● inelastic collision pulling. As far as the rope is concerned, we would
● direction/position call this an unbalanced force on the rope overall.
Effects of forces on objects at rest.
● net force Another example would be the unbalanced force in
● Newton’s laws the seesaw below. The seesaw is not parallel with
the ground; instead one person is lower because
134
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are presented with the diagram above gravity is acting on their greater mass to apply a
● Demonstrate that an object in motion stays depicting the effects of forces on objects at rest. greater force.
in motion and an object at rest remains at They will answer the following questions.
rest with the same speed and same 1. What did the cyclist do to get the bicycle to
direction unless acted upon by a force. move? (He had to use force to pedal the bicycles.)
2. How did the lawnmower get the machine to
● Compare how the mass and speed of move? (He had to push it forward.)
objects upon impact will determine in what 3. How did the boy get the stationary ball to move?
direction they will move. (The stationary ball moved after the boy had kicked it.)
4. How did the baker get the desired shape he Retrieved from:
● Explain that a bigger and heavier object wanted using the dough? (he applied force by kneading https://www.archiexpo.com/prod/kompan/produ
has greater inertia and requires more force it) ct-51344-421183.html
to move it
Forces Vocabulary If I were to ask you how you might balance the
● Distinguish elastic and inelastic collisions Learners can practice vocabulary by completing this teams so the rope didn’t actually move one side to
qualitatively (bouncy vs. sticky) drag and drop quiz at the following site: the other but stayed more or less in the
https://wordwall.net/resource/10259205/forcesvo center…how would you choose teams?
Skills cabularyhttps://wordwall.net/resource/10259205/ (equal number of people, equal ability to pull, equal mass of
forces-vocabulary people)
● Predict the outcome of collisions.
That would be difficult to arrange but… we would
● Calculate net force for simple aligned or say that this configuration should result in a
opposing forces. balanced force on the rope.
● Observe the mass of objects, the speed at What would a balanced force look like on a seesaw?
(The two people would be directly across from each other and
which they move and direction these
the seesaw would be parallel with the ground.)
objects end up after a collision.
As a review, let me show a picture of what we have
● Infer what will happen if two objects of the
been talking about. Balanced force top picture-
same mass, moving at same speed in
unbalanced bottom picture.
opposite directions collide.
135
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Predict the direction an object will go with
different mass, velocity and moving in the
opposite direction upon collision.
Answers
● Carry out experiments to develop an
intuition that both the mass and the speed
will impact where the joined mass will end
up after they collide.
● Collect data from experiments. Record,
Retrieved from:
analyse and interpret the data to make
https://theory.labster.com/balanced-and-
predictions on balanced and unbalanced
unbalanced-forces/
forces.
Let us pick out some other unbalanced forces in the
Attitudes/Values following picture.
● Develop curiosity and persistency for Net Force
science facts in recognizing the importance The net force of an interaction is the overall force
of forces in our everyday life. that is felt when forces are combined.
● Work collaboratively/cooperatively with Combine the following forces appropriately to
peers on classroom activities and generate a net force.
1) A car is moving East with a force of 40 N.
discussions on balanced/ unbalanced
A truck, also moving east, with a force of
forces.
70 N collides with the rear of the car.
Assuming an inelastic collision, what is the
● When conducting practical and group
net force? (110 Newtons in the easterly
work, display sensitivity and help peers
direction)
who may have physical or learning
2) A car is moving East with a force of 20 N
challenges.
when it collides head-on with a truck
moving West with a force of 30 N.
Assuming an inelastic collision, what is the
net force? (10 Newtons West)
136
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● When conducting practical and group
work, display respect and practice safety
precautions.
Billiards
Ask Learners to use their simulation to explain
what should happen in the following scenario.
When a blue billiard ball is shot directly at a
stationary red ball, what should happen to both
balls?
The red ball moves on impact at the same speed as the
incoming blue ball and the blue ball stops. The balls are both
the same mass, so the momentum of the incoming blue ball is
transferred to the red ball and it travels in the same direction.
Retrieved from:
https://blogs.scarsdaleschools.org/cboyer/2019/1
Cricket
0/10/balanced-and-unbalanced-forces/
Cricket Bats typically weigh from 2 lb 7 oz to 3 lb
(1.2 to 1.4 kg) though there is no standard.
Teacher Note: If you have access to technology,
Ask Learners which bat would be able to hit the
you may reinforce the concepts above using the
ball further if they were both swung at the same
following video for review:
speed by the same person?
http://youtube.com/watch?v=q6NRmrknPh0&fea
They can use their experience and simulations to
ture=shared (5:17 mins)
answer the question.
(The heavier bat will transfer more momentum to the ball so
it should go further). Effects of Forces
Interpreting an Accident
The following is a report of an accident between a 1. Moving a stationary object: When a force is
motorcycle and a bus in St. Kitts. applied to an object that is not moving, it can make
137
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Ask Learners to read it, and, in a one-page the object start moving. For instance, pushing a car
explanation (including a picture) explain why the that is not moving can make it start rolling.
motorcycle and driver are most likely to sustain the 2. Stopping a moving object: Force can also be
most injury in such a collision? used to stop an object that is already in motion.
Imagine applying brakes to a bicycle or a car to
slow it down and bring it to a stop.
3. Changing the speed of a moving object:
When a force is applied to an object that is already
moving, it can either make it go faster or slow it
down. For example, pushing a swing can make it
move faster while using the brakes on a bicycle can
make it slow down.
4. Changing the direction of a moving object: If
a force is applied to an object at an angle to its
current path, it can cause the object to change its
The mass of the bus is much larger than the motorcycle, so direction. Think of kicking a soccer ball to make it
even if the bus is traveling slower than the motorcycle, the go in a different direction.
momentum it has will cause great damage to the motorcycle 5. Changing the shape and size of an object:
and driver. Learners can check this with the online Forces can also cause objects to change their shape
simulation. or size. For instance, if you squeeze a soft ball, it
will temporarily change its shape.
Rubric: explanation 5 marks/ drawing 5 marks/
grammar and punctuation 5 marks Newton was a scientist who suggested that motion
that occurred as a result of a force followed a
The teacher may choose to engage a discussion of particular equation. Newton said that
the dangers of riding motorcycles in the company Force = Mass x Acceleration (F=MA)
of bigger vehicles on the road. We see from the equation that forces have a strong
and direct relationship to mass of the object. From
Newtons Laws in Space: An Essay earlier studies we know that acceleration is the
The lack of gravity in the space station orbiting change in speed.
earth provides for opportunities for astronauts to ➢ Supporting resource:
test Newtons Laws of Motion. Learners should https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EJkP
review the following websites and write a one-page F21tORE (5:44 mins)
138
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
review of Newton’s Laws in space. The questions In simple language, Newton said an object will
to be answered in their essay: accelerate in the direction that a net force is
A) What are Newton’s Laws acting on it. This is no surprise to us because
B) What aspect of the nature of life on the when we push or pull, we expect the object to
space station make it different from move in the desired direction!
applying the laws on earth?
Collisions are a Unique Example of Forces
C) What precautions do astronauts need to
Interacting
take while living in this environment?
Ask Learners to give you words that might be used
See: to describe a collision. (Crash, impact, loud, smash,
https://artsandculture.google.com/story/newton% thud, creak, bend etc.). Then, ask them for a definition
E2%80%99s-laws-of-motion-in-space- that includes any objects not just vehicles. In
nasa/LQVBeOIYpBmaBQ?hl=en creating that definition, ask them to reflect on past
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human lessons, the idea that objects don’t move unless a
_and_Robotic_Exploration/Astronauts/Learning_t force is applied to them.
o_live_with_the_laws_of_motion. A collision is the event in which two or more
bodies exert forces on each other in about a
In order for a space rocket to leave the earth’s orbit relatively short time.
it must expend vast amounts of fuel to escape Ask Learners if they have ever seen a collision
earth’s force of gravity (25000 miles per hour). This between cars or trucks.
is called the escape velocity. Once in space beyond Looking for background knowledge, ask them a
the strongest effects of earth’s gravitational force, few focusing questions:
the apparent lack of particles within the vacuum of • How large were the vehicles?
space would suggest that a rocket in motion will • Did they move after they collided?
remain in motion forever with no loss of speed.
• Where did they end up relative to the
There is however, small amounts of hydrogen in
collision?
space that potentially could minimally change
• How fast do you think they were going?
rocket speed and direction.
• Were they going the same speed?
• Was it a head-on collision or from the side?
139
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://orlandoautobody.com/car-
accidents/statistics-and-costs-of-a-car-accident/
Explain that the car engine provides the force for
the car to move. When the car collides with another
car with its own force that the motion that happens
on impact depends on the initial forces of the cars.
It is important to note that there are two types of
collisions: An elastic, or 'bouncy' collision is one
where kinetic energy is conserved, KE is the same
before and after a collision- the objects bounce off
each other like billiard balls colliding By contrast, in
an inelastic, or 'sticky' collision, kinetic energy is
NOT conserved; instead some energy is absorbed
by the surroundings (example bending metal, heat).
In a perfectly inelastic collision both objects stick
together and move forward as one.
Retrieved, in part from:
https://study.com/learn/lesson/elastic-vs-
inelastic-collision-theories-examples.html
NOTE: There are examples of collisions where the
colliding objects don’t stick together but are still
considered inelastic.
Simulating an Inelastic Collision in the
Classroom
After they have shared their prior knowledge, ask
them to think about what factors might affect
where the vehicles might end up after a head on
collision (i.e. relative to where they impacted).
(speed of vehicles, mass of vehicles, direction of vehicles)
140
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Explain that when we talk about an object of mass
M moving at a velocity V we say it has
momentum. If a heavy ball is thrown to you to
catch, it has momentum which you feel when you
catch it as a result of the velocity it is traveling and
the mass that it has.
The teacher will clear off a large smooth desk at the
front of the classroom. The teacher will choose in
advance a heavy textbook and 2 noticeably lighter
textbooks. For best results, the teacher should place
two-sided tape or Velcro® on the spine of the
books.
Pairs of Learners will come to the front of the class
and stand at opposite ends of the table each taking
one of the books. The teacher will instruct the
Learners that each of these books represents a
vehicle. They will then each give a single push of
the books across the table directly at each other
with the book spines pointed at each other, so they
stick together on contact. Learners in the class will
observe the results.
The key focus question is where do joined books
end up relative to the impact location and why?
This simulation will be used to help Learners
answer questions about the following scenario.
NOTE: possible variations to classroom sim
1) teachers may also have access to toy cars
that can accomplish the same simulation
2) the following web-based electronic
simulation will allow Learners to manage
variables(http://www.mrmont.com/games
/carcollision.html)
3) https://www.physicsclassroom.com/Physi
cs-Interactives/Momentum-and-
141
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Collisions/Collision-Carts/Collision-Carts-
Interactive
NOTE: Assume inelastic collisions are selected in
these electronic simulations.
Some suggestions:
• Change masses of vehicles;
• Set bumpers to clay so that cars stick
together on impact;
• Set velocities as positive and negative such
that cars will collide.
Use one of these simulations above to have
Learners discuss what will happen to the two
vehicles under the following inelastic
conditions:
Learners should predict the result before
simulating the scenario.
a) Heavy white truck and light red truck
travelling same speed opposite directions
(to the right of the impact site)
b) Heavy white truck traveling slow and light
red truck traveling fast in opposite
direction (perhaps close to the impact site)
c) Light white truck traveling fast and light
red truck traveling slow in opposite
direction (to the right of the impact site)
d) Light white truck traveling slow and light
red truck traveling slow in opposite
direction (perhaps close to the impact site)
142
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The idea is that Learners develop an intuition that
both the mass and the speed will impact where the
joined mass will end up after they collide.
Teacher Note:
In future grades they will calculate resultant
position and velocity using the conservation of
momentum concept but for now an intuition about
the collision is most important. In other words,
they come to know that mass and velocity are the
controlling predictors of what will happen.
Elastic Collisions
You have perhaps seen Newton’s cradle.
Retrieved from:
https://science.howstuffworks.com/innovation/in
ventions/newtons-cradle.htm
The energy of the collision is passed on to the next
ball as they swing downward. However, the loss of
energy to heat (friction) eventually brings the balls
to a stop so this is not a purely elastic collision.
143
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
See one in motion here:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newton%27s_cradle
Additional Resources and Materials.
Forces worksheets: https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/science/
Forces and Motion - Vocabulary List
Balanced & unbalanced forces:
➢ https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Q1tw_QWy-8 (2:35 mins)
➢ https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Rjid6hQuww (5:17 mins)
Forces & Newton’s Laws
➢ https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l-6ERzL9QsE (9:40 mins)
➢ https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EJkPF21tORE (5:44 mins)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Conservation of momentum: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w2zQJ8JMlBA (9:33 mins)
Elastic & inelastic collisions:
➢ https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M2xnGcaaAi4 (5:13 mins)
➢ https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8ko3qy9vgLQ (6:10 mins)
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts: (Vocabulary Development ) words related to forces and their meanings
Comprehension - Answer questions from scenarios on balanced and unbalanced forces.
Mathematics: Calculate the differences in the force of objects.
TVET: Design, prototyping, testing
144
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: ELO 3: Ask questions about data to determine the factors that affect the strength of electric and magnetic forces
Clarification Statement: Examples of devices that use electric and magnetic forces could include electromagnets, electric motors, or generators. Examples of
data could include the effect of the number of turns of wire on the strength of an electromagnet, or the effect of increasing the number or strength of magnets
on the speed of an electric motor.
Assessment Boundary: Assessment about questions that require quantitative answers is limited to proportional reasoning and algebraic thinking.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Comprehension Invisible Force
An electromagnet is different form a regular magnet. In Pupils are presented with the picture below
Knowledge a one-page paper, explain, with a diagram, how an (Floating Magnets) and are asked why do you think
electromagnet works.
● Define the terms: these magnets are floating in the air?
○ magnetic forces (the poles of the magnets are aligned to repel each
True or False?
○ electromagnet other and there is enough force to keep them suspended in
1. An electromagnet can generate a stronger
○ attraction air)
magnetic field than a regular magnet. (T)
○ repulsion
2. I would expect the electromagnet’s
○ electric current
○ magnetic poles strength to depend on the size (voltage) of
○ magnetic field the battery because of the current flow
○ compass generated. (T)
3. The number of windings on the nail had
no impact on the magnetic attraction of
● Differentiate/Compare permanent magnets the paper clips. (F)
and electromagnets.
4. Electromagnets at junk yards require low
Retrieved from:
https://www.sciencebuddies.org/Y5App22-
voltages to lift heavy items like cars. (F)
● Explain how electromagnets work. p0GkaMmptLk_xeR9EfE=/569x520/-
5. Electromagnets are very useful because
/https/www.sciencebuddies.org/cdn/Files/16779/
they can be turned on and off. (T)
● Identify uses of electromagnets. 4/magnetism-stem-floating-magnet.png
Now show the Learners this picture of a carne
Major Project: Applications of
● Determine the factors that affect the lifting a car engine. Learners how do you think this
Electromagnetism
strength of an electromagnet. crane is able to lift this heavy engine?
Learners can choose to do research on one of two
applications of electromagnets.
145
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Skills 1. Electric motors
Primary source:
● Design or engineer an electromagnet https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CW
prototype. ulQ1ZSE3c (10:03 mins)
● Create a data table to show how the 2. Maglev trains
addition of turns of wire on a nail affects Primary Source:
the magnetic field's strength. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8os4
A4li674 (5:39 mins)
● Observe and describe ways in which the
A poster should be created that includes a diagram
strength of an electromagnet can be altered.
and explanation of the application of Retrieved from:
electromagnets to make a useful technology. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2EooyeAvP
● Collect data from experiments . They will
OM (1:34 mins)
record , analyse and interpret the data to
Rubric: Perhaps you thought it was a clamp or wire but
make predictions on the strength of
➢ Clear labelled diagram (5 marks) here is another example of crane lifting a car. The
electromagnets. ➢ Logical and clear explanation of how end of the crane seems to be flat on top.
electromagnetism is applied. (5 marks)
● Plot graphs of electromagnetic strength
➢ Timeline of technological development (3
marks)
● Interpret & extrapolate an electromagnetic
➢ Utility of the technology to humans (2
strength graph
marks)
● Research and communicate an example of ➢ Grammar & punctuation (5 marks)
an advanced application of electromagnets.
Retrieved from:
Attitudes/Values
https://mammothmemory.net/images/user/base/Physi
cs/Electromagnetism/uses-of-electromagnetism-
● Appreciate the wide-spread importance of
62.9252f33.jpg
electromagnetism applications to solve real
human problems of adaptation.
Well in both cases the engine and the car are made
of steel so you might have guessed it was a magnet
● Work collaboratively/cooperatively with attracting the metal.
peers on classroom activities.
146
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners, can you give me some examples of
● Learners will develop interest and curiosity magnets around you that attract metal? (fridge magnet,
about electromagnetism by asking questions horse shoe magnet, cupboard door magnet, flashlight magnet)
and conducting experiments. Teacher Demonstration: if we put two magnets
together does it increase the strength of attraction
● When conducting practical and group work, and repulsion? Let us try with two identical magnets
display sensitivity and help peers who may together and an iron nail. Yes, the attraction of the
have physical or learning challenges. nail is greater with multiple magnets. There are also
very strong magnets called rare earth magnets
● When conducting practical and group work, made from special elements. These are common for
embedding in cupboard doors to complete their
display respect and practice safety
closing
precautions.
Learners, do you think regular magnets and rare
earth magnets are strong enough to lift large objects
● Participate actively in classroom
like engines and cars? (No, probably not). No, they are
discussions.
not. The crane magnets are special magnets where
the magnetic field is created by electric current
● Consider careers that build upon ideas
flow. That is why they are called electromagnets.
developed in study of electromagnets.
Because the magnetic attraction is generated by
electricity, the magnet can be turned on and off-
that is how the crane drops the metal when it has
moved it to a new location.
How Can we Generate a Magnetic Attraction?
Teacher demonstration
Materials:
• Compass
• Nail
• Wire
• Batteries (1.5 V and 9V)
• Switch (optional)
The teacher can make an electromagnet in advance
and show how the magnetic field of the
147
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
electromagnet deflects a compass needle by
connecting and disconnecting the wire.
Retrieved from: https://www.electronics-
tutorials.ws/wpcontent/uploads/2018/05/electro
magnetism-mag33.gif
This is an electromagnet, and it creates what we call
a magnetic field around the nail when we add
electric current to wrapped wire using a battery.
Retrieved from:
https://science.howstuffworks.com/electromagnet.
htm
Teacher note: You can place a piece of paper with
iron filings above the nail and show the magnetic
field!
148
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Testing The Electromagnet
Each student group will make an electromagnet with the
available materials.
Learners are expected to create a formal report from the
findings of their electromagnet experiment. It should include a
diagram (5 marks, experimental data (5 marks),
graph (5 marks) and
answers to experimental questions (5 marks) (see below)
NOTE: To begin, the teacher can assist them to create an
electromagnet with 10 turns of wire on their nail.
Ask the Learners to configure their electromagnet
so the number of turns of wire around the nail
corresponds to the table below. For each new
electromagnet they make, have them record how
many paper clips the magnet can lift at one time.
They should add these results to the table
Ask them what they can conclude about the
number of windings around the nail, the number of
paper clips lifted and the strength of the magnetic
foiled?
(more windings lift more clips, therefore a stronger
electromagnet)
# of turns of # of paper clips
wire picked up
in the coil
10
20
30
40
149
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
This is called a controlled experiment because all
variables (nail, battery, wire type, paper clips) are
staying the same except the number of turns of
wire. In that way, you can attribute the differences
to only the wire turns.
a. Ask Learners to plot a graph of paper
clips (y axis) vs. # turns (x axis)
b. From the graph ask them to extrapolate
by extending the trend line in the graph to
predict how many clips might 100 turns
lift?
Ask them to predict what might happen if they use
a bigger battery and explain why?
Note: (If the teacher has access to a bigger battery
or more batteries in series- try it and see!)
(more voltage from the battery(s) will increase current flow
and therefore the electromagnet will be stronger)
Testing Design:
If the battery is hooked up to the coil in the
opposite direction, does it affect the strength of
the magnet? Have Learners test this with their
electromagnet and paper clips. (the current is
reversed but the amount of current doesn’t change-should
be the same magnetic strength)
Possible experimental extension
If the nail is changed from steel to galvanized
steel to copper does it affect the magnet
strength? Have Learners test this and report
back which is the strongest magnet.
150
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
A typical junkyard magnet operates on 250
volts.
Ask Learners how many 1.5 volt batteries is that
equivalent to? (250/1.5 = 167 batteries)
How many 9 volt batteries is that equivalent to?
(250/9= 28 batteries)
Uses of electromagnets
Learners, as you watch the following video, I want
you to identify at least 5 uses of electromagnets.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4fGSmpoV9
CE (1:00 mins)
● Generators, motors, and transformers.
● Electric buzzers and bells.
● Headphones and loudspeakers
● Relays and valves
● Data storage devices like VCRs, tape
recorders, hard discs, etc.
● Used in transportation (movement of
trains)
● MRI scanning devices. - It is used in the
hospitals to scan inside the body of
humans and detect most fractures and
other issues
151
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials.
How to Make an Electromagnet https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wm9_DqQKmd0 (2:10 mins)
What is an Electromagnetic Field? https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=viJZvx1U2AU (1:36 mins)
Electromagnetism Khan Academy: https://youtu.be/E77NeY5Zmk8 (4:13 mins)
Video of electromagnet at the junk yard: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2EooyeAvPOM (1:37 mins)
https://www.tutoringhour.com/files/magnetism/magnetic-field-large-preview.png
Pupils view the video and then complete the worksheet below:
Permanent magnets vs Electromagnets (youtube.com) (7:30)
Pupils complete an online worksheet . see below.
Magnets and electromagnets worksheet | Live Worksheets
Retrieved from: https://d1uvxqwmcz8fl1.cloudfront.net/tes/resources/11651310/7054f858-b27e-447b-86ae-
d1e84fa38f55/image?width=500&height=500&version=1519314428025
152
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
and https://misssugarscience.weebly.com/uploads/9/7/0/3/97036086/magnets_and_electromagnets_worksheets.pdf
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
How do electric motors use electromagnetism? https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NvQSEU0CDSo (5:43 mins)
Electromagnets: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tHIchO1pbFA (3:59 mins)
How do MRI machines use electromagnetism? https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nFkBhUYynUw (3:10 mins)
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics: Data collection and graphing, extrapolation
Language Arts: Researching electromagnetic applications and communicating findings
TVET: applications of electromagnetism, testing and measurement
153
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Matter and Energy in Organisms and Ecosystems
Strand (Topic): Matter and Energy in Organisms and Ecosystems
Understanding how ecosystems rely on the exchange of matter and energy, helps humans to better care for the environment including the constituent plants and
animals.
Essential Learning Outcome: ELO 1: Analyse and interpret data to provide evidence for the effects of resource availability on organisms and
populations of organisms in an ecosystem
Clarification Statement: Emphasis is on cause-and-effect relationships between resources and growth of individual organisms and the numbers of organisms
in ecosystems during periods of abundant and scarce resources.
Grade Level Expectation: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Activity One Introductory Activity:
Learners, do you remember the definition of a food web?
Knowledge (A food web shows the feeding relationship between living things. It is
made up of food chains connected together).
● Define the terms:
o species Today we will study the drawing of the food web below.
o population The teacher will use the guiding questions below to engage
o over-population Learners in a large group discussion.
o under-population
o death rate
o birth rate
o ecosystem
o cause and effect
o scarce
o abundant Retrieved from https://blog.littlelives.com/explain-
to-kids-food-chains-c34731760728
● Identify animals competing for
Use the food web to answer the questions below
food in a food web.
1. Name two predators in the food web.
154
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Explain competition among (sparrow, owl, fox)
living organisms in an 2. Name two prey animals from the food web.
environment. (grasshopper, mouse, rabbit)
● Identify and describe the 3. Which animals are competing to eat the
impact of under- and over- grasshopper? (sparrow and owl)
population of organisms in an (Sparrow feeds on the grasshopper or the owl feeds on
environment. the grasshopper).
● Demonstrate they understand 4. What would happen to the population of
the concept of cause and effect sparrows if all the grasshoppers died out? (the
relationships in ecosystems. population of sparrows would decrease)
● Identify the impact of abundant
and scarce resources on the Activity Two
Source: OECS Curriculum harmonization Primary Science and
growth of individual organisms
Technology K-6. Ecosystem. Teacher’s Guide. 2007
and the numbers of organisms
in ecosystems.
Sample Questions
● List some factors that can affect
1. Identify the producers and consumers in the food webs.
population growth.
2. Analyze a food web and make predictions about outcomes,
● Estimate the population
if there is a breakdown at any stage in the food web.
number of a given organism in
3. Suggest what would happen to the organisms in the food
a small habitat.
web if:
● Identify factors that may (a) All the insect larvae died out.
disrupt the balance of nature. (b) Human overharvest the large fishes
● State the consequences of (c) Rapid increase in water beetles.
disrupting the balance of
nature. In a food web the predator and prey relationship can be
affected.
Skills In what way can the predator prey relationship be affected in
a food web?
● Infer that food webs help to (If there are more predators there will be less prey).
keep nature in balance.
● Communicate effectively with Let us now examine this graph which shows the relationship
peers between the population of hawks and field mice on a farm.
● Hypothesize the effect on an
ecosystem if one or more
155
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
organisms are removed from Hawks are predators. One of their sources of food are
the food web. mice. This graph gives two population curves that show the
● Hypothesize the effect of population of hawks and field mice on a farm.
resource scarcity on the
ecosystem due to natural or
man-made disasters.
● construct graphs depicting the
number of organisms in an
ecosystems
● Apply knowledge of cause and
effect relationships to predict
the impact of resource
availability on ecosystems.
● Analyze real-life examples of
cause and effect relationships in
ecosystems.
● Estimate the population
number of a given organism in
a small habitat. Teacher will then engage Learners in a class discussion with
the following questions.
1. What happens to the population of hawks when the
Attitudes/Values population of field mice increases? (The population of
the hawks increases.)
2. Why do you think this happens? (There is more food for
● Show respect for living things
the hawks.)
3. What happens to the population of field mice when
by making an effort to conserve
the population of hawks increases? (When the
resources. Retrieved from
population of hawks increases the population of the mice
● When conducting practical and https://www.superteacherworksheets.com/food-
decreases.)
group work, display sensitivity chains/food-web-worksheet_WQRQM.pdf
4. How would you describe the relationship between
and offer assistance to peers
these two populations? (An increase of the hawk
who may have physical or
population has a negative effect on the population of mice.
learning challenges
156
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Participate actively in classroom Activity Three The mice population decreases when there is an increase in the
discussions. population of hawks on a farm.)
● Participate in class discussions Source: Caribbean Primary Science Level 6 (2024) Contributors
in an orderly manner. Karen Morrison, Lorraine DeAllie, Lisa Greenstein,
● Respect each other's opinions Catherine Jones. Hodder Education Page 71.
when engaging in class
discussions. What are some of the things animals compete for? (food, space,
mates)
Let us look at the picture below.
1. What are the two birds competing for? (bread -
food)
2. Which bird in the picture has the advantage? why?(
the pigeon because it is bigger)
3. What else do animals compete for? ( animals often
compete for food but also compete for space,
water, mate, shelter)
Now, you will engage in some research. Here are some
organisms that live in a marine environment. In pairs or
groups, discuss whether each one is a producer or
consumer. You can also do some research on the internet to
find out what each one eats.
157
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1. For each of the examples shown, suggest what the
animals or plants are competing for. (Sea snail and the
clown fish both compete for the plankton).
2. Think of two more examples of living things
(animals or plants) competing for resources.
Source: Caribbean Primary Science Level 6 (2024) Contributors
Karen Morrison, Lorraine DeAllie, Lisa Greenstein,
Catherine Jones. Hodder Education Page 70
Let us study the food web of a garden ecosystem.
There is a feeding relationship among living things in an
ecosystem. This relationship can be represented using a food
web. A food web not only shows the feeding relationship, it
also shows animals that compete with each other for food.
Let us examine the food web below.
Notes for the teacher
Use the food web to show Learners the feeding relationship
Retrieved from
among organisms and competition.
https://www.thesimplehomeschooler.com/food-
chain-worksheets/
158
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Activity Four
Observing Competition
1. Make a bird feeder station by hanging up
seeds. Sprinkle different bird seeds onto the
tray on the ground.
2. Record the number of birds that visit the
feeding station. Do this for ten minutes in
the morning, ten minutes at midday and ten
minutes in the afternoon.
3. Analyse your results.
(a) Did some birds only take one type
of food?
(b) Did you see any competition for Retrieved from
food? https://www.freepik.com/free-vector/education-poster-
biology-food-chains-
Source: Primary Science for the Caribbean Mission Science diagram_12321374.htm#query=food%20chain&position=2
Learners’ Book 6 4&from_view=keyword&track=ais_user&uuid=772bf54c-
Authors Terry Hudson and Debbie Roberts 1160-4d64-a772-9e96ac998949
Macmillan Education
1. Which animals are competing to eat the grasshopper?
(bird, owl)
Activity Five These animals both eat the grasshopper. Therefore, they are
competing for the same source of food.
Draw and describe an animal adapted to compete for
food. 2. What do you notice about the arrows when animals are
competing in a food web?
(Competition is shown in a food web when the arrows point from a
food source to more than one consumer.)
Let us further discuss competition in ecosystems.
Do you have a brother or sister? Do you both try to get
attention from your parents or grandparents? If so, you
159
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Resources: compete for attention. In this instance, both of you are
https://www.twinkl.ca/teaching-wiki/animals- working against each other to try to get what you want.
adapted-to-the-rainforest Just like humans, animals also compete in nature for
https://www.stcuthberts.com/media/5352/competit resources.
ion.pdf What resources do you think animals compete for? (Food,
water, oxygen, mates).
Activity Six
How does competition occur in nature? In any ecosystem,
Teachers can present Learners with various scenarios organisms and populations with similar requirements for
which they can complete in groups or individually. food, water, oxygen, or other resources may compete with
each other for limited resources, which consequently limits
For Example: their growth and reproduction.
Retrieved from
https://slideplayer.com/slide/15234209/
In nature, there are many instances of competition.
Sometimes competition occurs between members of the
1. Predict the population of rabbits in 2012. Modify same species.
the model to include your prediction.
What happens when animals compete for the same
2. Suggest and explain a factor that may cause the resources? (the stronger animal survives, survival of the fittest)
drop-in population of grass and rabbits. For example, both sharks and dolphins eat fish. Both need
food to survive. If one eats enough fish to survive but there
160
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3. Suggest an organism that shares the same niche as is not enough fish for the other, the one that does not get its
the rabbit and explain how its introduction into the necessary food may die. Other sea organisms may eat the
ecosystem would impact the rabbit population. fish as well, making competition even fiercer.
Source:https://docs.google.com/document/d/1RG19rk5ksM
5dRjZXVffZ4P8Rh0yP7ibQ-
1TDbMte22w/template/preview
Activity Seven
Retrieved from:
https://slideplayer.com/slide/15234209/
Some organisms are better able to survive because they have
paired up with another organism and they help each other to
survive. Here the egret below essentially helps the cow by
removing pesky insects, while at the same time getting food.
This type of interaction represents mutualism. In such cases
both organisms benefit.
Retrieved from:
161
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Answers: https://www.istockphoto.com/photo/cattle-egret-and-a-
cow-gm92193729-7800055
1. Season of heavy rains flood an area and
create new ponds - algae begin to grow What happens when animals do not have little or no food to
rapidly at the surface of the water, eat? (They can starve to death and even die).
2. A hurricane brings salt water from the ocean
into rivers and streams. - The larger fish What happens when there is an abundance of food? (The
begin to fight among themselves for smaller animals have lots to eat and are healthy).
prey.
3. Humans cut down many trees in a forest - Let us examine some situations and discuss.
ferns and grasses reach outward into the
open sunshine. What do you notice about the animal in pictures (a)
4. A fire moves through a grassland ecosystem. and (b) below?
- Prairie dog burrows are inhabited by other
savanna mammals. Picture (a)
retrieved from:
https://www.othelloschools.org/cms/lib/WA022155
24/Centricity/Domain/213/7th%20Week%202%20
ELA.pdf
Activity Eight
Reading and Comprehension
Retrieved from: https://www.shutterstock.com/video/clip-
802744-cow-eats-grass
Picture (b)
162
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from https://nation.africa/kenya/news/move-to-
shield-kenyan-farmers-from-dry-spell--754048
Learners should make the link between abundance/scarcity
of grass and the appearance of the cattle. When they do, ask
questions to bring out the cause-and-effect relationship
between the abundance/ scarcity of grass and the
appearance of the cattle.
The cow in picture a) eats more grass therefore it is fatter
and looks healthier than the cow in picture b) which has less
grass to each and hence is not as fat or healthy looking.
Cause: An abundance of grass
Effect: Cow eats more and gets fat and looks healthy.
Cause: Very little grass
Effect: Cow eats less and is thin and looks unhealthy.
The cause-and-effect relationship is a relationship in
which one event (the cause) makes another event (the effect)
happen.
Cause is the reason for a situation or change; why
something happens.
The effect is the result or the consequent; the outcome or
conclusion- what happened. The cause happens before the
effect.
163
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
retrieved from: https://www.k12reader.com/reading- There is an abundance of grass in picture (a) so the cow eats
comprehension/Gr3_Wk13_Competing_for_Resources.pdf more grass and gets fat.
There is a scarcity of grass in picture (b) so the cow eats less
Leveraging Simulations for Learning grass and is skinny.
If the teacher has access to technology, they may
want to set up a classroom computer station with the Let the Learners discuss the pictures below with the person
following free website/software loaded. If Learners next to them.
have access to a lab or personal computer, they can
download the software for home/school use
themselves.
Population Explosion
The first resource involves looking at a population
explosion and the teacher should give instructions to
Learners to open the “introduction” link first after
going to the following URL:
https://authoring.concord.org/activities/1013/single
_page/c21e786f-c627-4cdd-87eb-18edf03a3f84 Retrieved from https://treeamigosvictoria.com.au/tag/tree-
health/
The online activity will pose a series of questions for
Learners to investigate as they progress through the
tutorial.
Manipulating Variables: NETLOGO:
The following free software can be downloaded
which hosts a whole series of science simulations.
https://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/
Retrieved from https://blog.irontreeservice.com/what-to-
do-about-a-dying-tree-2/
164
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
When the software has been downloaded and
Ask Learners what they need to grow in order to be healthy?
installed, the teacher can open >File< >Models
(food, water, exercise, sunshine) Learners should make the link
Library< >Biology< >wolf sheep predation<
between the appearance of the trees and the resources
needed by plants such as rain and land fertility.
After a teacher demonstration of how the tabs and
sliders change variable values + Play, (SETUP & GO)
Ask questions during the discussion to elicit the meaning of
a series of questions can be posed e.g.
scarcity and abundance.
➢ What happens if we change the initial
number of sheep?
Note the following terms:
➢ What happens if we change the initial
number of wolves?
1. Scarcity: not enough of something
➢ What happens if we change the amount of
2. Abundance: having more than enough of
grass available?
something.
➢ What about reproduction rates?
➢ What about the gain in animals based on
their food intake?
NOTE: Each time a variable(s) is changed,
pressing >GO< will run the simulation again and
show a graph.
For each of these questions, the student would need
to report on how the graph reflected the results.
Retrieved from: https://slideplayer.com/slide/15234209/
Resource availability affects growth, competition, and rate of
reproduction. How resources become available in an
ecosystem directly affects several factors within and among
populations of organisms. Let us have a look.
165
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Population changes: Changes in the amount and
availability of a given resource (e.g.: less food) may result in
changes or limits in the population growth of an organism
(e.g.: less food results in fewer organisms).
● Individual organism changes: Changes in the amount
or availability of a resource (e.g.: more food) may result in
changes in the growth of individual organisms (e.g.: more
food results in faster growth).
● Competition: Resource availability drives competition
among organisms, both within a population and between
populations.
● Rate of reproduction: Resource availability also affects a
population’s rate of reproduction
Retrieved from:
https://www.independent.co.uk/climate-
change/news/ethiopia-drought-hungry-monkeys-attack-
children-b2101088.html
In many countries, harsh conditions often result in
unavailability of food and resources for animals in the
ecosystem. Animals usually travel to other areas in search of
166
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
food. Farmers who care for their goats, sheep and cows
obtain grass for their animals which they rear in other
regions where the conditions are better.
Learners, what do you think is happening in the photograph
above? (The cows have no water or food. The cows are suffering from
heat stroke. There are limited resources available for the cows’ survival)
State the consequences of disrupting the balance of nature.
Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DYDsJUnilPA (1:01
mins)
What Does The Graph Tell us?
The following scenario has wolves, sheep and grass
cohabitating in an ecosystem.
Observe the graph above and answer the following
questions:
167
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1) How do the numbers of sheep and wolves compare in the
beginning? (They look to be near equal)
2) What happens to the number sheep in the beginning
when there is an abundance of grass? (The sheep population
initially increases rapidly)
3) What happens to the grass and sheep population as time
progresses? (The two level out at an average range)
4) What can we say about the wolf population over time?
(The wolves have enough food to maintain a steady population.)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
➢ Food webs: https://slideplayer.com/slide/14168938/
➢ Relationships between living things: https://slideplayer.com/slide/6429208/
Additional Resources and Materials
Teacher Resource on Cause and Effect: https://thewonderofscience.com/videos/2017/12/10/ccc2-cause-and-effect
168
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Retrieved from: https://www.k12reader.com/worksheet/habitat-destruction/view/
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Language Arts - Writing an expository composition explaining the effect of factors such as natural disasters on food webs.
Writing a descriptive paragraph describing an animal adapted to compete for food successfully.
Science and Technology - Creating food webs. Carrying out research on various animals or plants on ways they are adapted to compete for food in given ecosystems.
Mathematics - Construct bar graphs to show the number of organisms in a given ecosystem.
Interpret data from graphs.
Art and Craft - Research on an animal and produce showing how they have adapted to reduce competition by seeking out different prey.
Social Studies: Resource management/overpopulation/ Competition for food
169
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Learners can carry out investigations on animals in their area or country and find out reasons for an increase or decrease in the population of these animals.
Items of Inspiration:
Carry out research on an ecosystem in their country or community to identify factors that may have caused changes in these ecosystems for a period of time.
Example tourism, natural disasters, urban development, deforestation. Also, the effects these changes may have had on the biotic factors.
170
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems
Strand (Topic): Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems
All living things grow, survive, and reproduce because they exist with other living and non-things that help provide the food and other resources that sustain
them. These are interdependent relationships. No living thing can exist without these interdependent relationships, hence the necessity to study these complex
interactions.
Essential Learning Outcome: ELO 1: Construct an explanation that predicts patterns of interactions among organisms across multiple
ecosystems.
Clarification Statement: Emphasis is on predicting consistent patterns of interactions in different ecosystems in terms of the relationships among and between
organisms and abiotic components of ecosystems. Examples of types of interactions could include competitive, predatory, and mutually beneficial.
Grade Level Expectation: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: After the Learners complete this worksheet, the class Biotic and Abiotic Factors
will identify and discuss the factor shown in each
Knowledge picture, their general importance in an ecosystem and
their classification as biotic or abiotic
● Define the terms:
● abiotic
● ecosystems
● prey
● predator
● parasitism
● host
● symbiosis Retrieved from: https://rainforestadventure.com/st-
● mutualism lucia-travel-tour/
171
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● commensalism
Let us look at this picture taken from a rainforest in the
● Identify some ways in which an Caribbean.
ecosystem can change. Have you seen a rainforest before? (Yes/No)
Have you ever been to a rainforest? (Yes/No)
● List factors that can bring about
Share your experiences with the class.
changes to ecosystems.
What do you think the persons in the picture are doing? (bird
● Identify and describe different watching/ using binoculars to watch the living things) Why? (Lots of
types of interactions in plants and animals are found in the rainforest)
ecosystems.
What are some of the things you would find in a rainforest
● List examples of parasitism,
or saw in a rainforest you visited? (The teacher writes down the
commensalism and mutualism
student responses given based on prior knowledge and experiences)
● Describe the relationships
between organisms and abiotic Now, let us watch a video to learn more about rainforests.
components in ecosystems. Observe and write down some of the things you see in the
● Give examples of interactions
various rainforests.
among biotic factors in an Retrieved from
ecosystem. https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/science/214
2500#google_vignette
● Predict consistent patterns of
interactions in different
ecosystems.
● Explain competition among
living organisms in an
environment.
● Explain the difference between
the different types of feeding Retrieved from:
relationships between animals. https://youtu.be/3vijLre760w?si=U56ITrxf9TUgPY7M
(3:40 mins)
[Alternatively, Learners can visit a rainforest in the country to
observe the living things and learn about the importance of
rainforests and the interaction found in a rainforest]
172
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Skills
Questions based on video:
● Classify animals based on their ● What are some of the things you saw in the
feeding relationships rainforest? (trees/plants, smoke, frogs, snakes, ants, birds,
● Design charts depicting feeding tigers, monkeys, alligators, water/rain, soil, stones, etc.)
relationships among animals in Different living things are found in rainforests in
various ecosystems. various parts of the world. Temperate rainforests
● Observe the interactions of are different from tropical rainforests because of
living things in different the differences in the climate.
ecosystems ● How are rainforests beneficial to us?
○ Habitat of more than half of the world’s plant and
● Interpret data on the
animal species
populations of interacting
○ Source of food for living things
organisms in ecosystems
○ Regulate global temperature by absorbing the sun’s
radiation.
Attitudes/Values
○ Plants absorb carbon dioxide and convert it to
● Participate actively in class
oxygen creating about 40% of the planet’s
discussions
breathable air.
● What activities have affected the health of
● Assist peers with learning Activity
rainforests? (Economic inequality, deforestation, human
challenges as you work
development, and demand for natural resources have increased
collaboratively Directions: Read each of the relationship scenarios
deforestation)
below. Identify the two organisms involved in the
● Appreciate the fragile nature of
boxes labeled ‘Organism 1’ and ‘Organism 2’, and
The teacher should have a list of things found in an
identify whether they benefit, are harmed, or are
ecosystems
ecosystem based on Learners' prior knowledge, class
neutral in the relationship. Lastly, classify what type
discussion, and the video.
of symbiosis each example is in the third column.
● Demonstrate curiosity about
different types of interactions in
The Learners in pairs will be asked to sort the items found
ecosystems.
in the rainforest into two groups using a graphic organizer.
Each pair will give each category/group a name. Learners
● Show consideration for the
share their categories/groups and the reason behind their
detrimental impact of invasive
choices. [Most Learners would separate into living and non-living
species on complex
things]
interdependencies in
ecosystems
173
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
How do living things interact with the non-living things in
the rainforest? (Non-living things used to create habitats, raw
materials for biological processes such as oxygen needed for respiration
and carbon dioxide needed by plants for photosynthesis, nutrients in
soil for making proteins and other food molecules, etc.)
Sample graphic
Retrieved from
https://bookcreator.com/graphic_organizers/sort/ and
modified
Retrieved from: A rainforest is an example of an ecosystem. What is an
https://www.shawsheentech.org/cms/lib/MA50000 ecosystem? What are some other examples of ecosystems
170/Centricity/Domain/49/5011June1.pdf that you know? Student share.
174
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Answer sheet
Retrieved from https://slideplayer.com/slide/4287887/
Any ecosystem has two distinct factors or components.
Worksheet
Abiotic components are non-living, including things like
rocks, weather patterns, or bodies of water.
Learners label their non-living category in their graphic
organizer ‘Abiotic’.
Biotic components are living, including trees, mushrooms,
and leopards. Living components must adapt to each other
and the abiotic components in their environment; this is the
fuel for change. Failure to do so spells extinction, meaning
the species no longer exists.
Learners label their non-living category in their graphic
organizer ‘Biotic’.
175
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/natural-
Retrieved from
science/1898514
https://kids.britannica.com/Learners/assembly/view/2353
62
Answer Sheet
Let’s look at an aquatic ecosystem. What are the biotic and
abiotic factors found in this ecosystem?
Retrieved from:
https://www.istockphoto.com/illustrations/aquatic-
ecosystem
176
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Abiotic factors: water, sun, air, rocks, soil/dirt
Biotic Factors: insects, birds, frogs, lily pads. fish, plants,
ducks
Interactions among living things in an Ecosystem
Think
Learners will be given five minutes to write down
Retrieved from:
relationships they are part of at home, school, and
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/natural-
community. It can be with a person, animal, or thing. The
science/1898514
relationships may be good for them or not so good. The
Learners should say the role of each person in the
relationship. For example: I have a relationship with my
coach. He teaches me how to play cricket and I learn how to
Use the following words to fill the blanks.
play the sport well
prey parasitism mutualism
Pair.
symbiosis predator predator/prey
1. A relationship between two organisms in which Learners will then pair up and share the relationships they are
one is harmed and the other benefits is called part of with their classmates. Each pair will place the (+) sign
______________. next to the person or thing benefiting from the relationship,
and a (-) sign next to the one being harmed. If the person or
2. A relationship in which two different organisms thing is neither benefitting nor being harmed, label it as (0).
Using a graphic organizer, Learners will classify their
live together is called ______________.
relationships.
Sample graphic organizer:
177
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3. Relationship where one organism hunting, killing
and eating another organism is called __________.
4. A relationship between two organisms in which
both organisms benefit is called ________.
5. When an animal is hunted and killed for food it is
called the _________.
6. When an animal is the hunter and kills for food it
is called the ___________. Retrieved from and modified:
https://www.teacherspayteachers.com/browse/free?search
=classify%20and%20categorize%20graphic%20organizer
1. Parasitism 2. Symbiosis 3. Predator/Prey
Share:
4. Mutualism 5. Prey 6. Predator
Student pairs share their relationships with the class. The
teacher will place a three-column aid/arrange the board into
Retrieved from
three columns to record examples of each of the three
https://www.slideserve.com/airell/use-the-
categories of relationships (as shown in the sample graphic
following-words-to-fill-in-the-blanks-a-prey-c-
organizer). [Please note that these are examples of mutualism,
parasitism-e-mutualism
commensalism, and parasitism. The teacher will not
introduce these words as yet]
https://quizlet.com/272791034/mutualism-
The teacher will explain to the Learners:
commensalism-parasitism-predator-prey-competition-
Interaction is a necessity for any living being to survive. Like
and-species-interaction-test-flash-cards/
human relationships, ecological interactions involving
animals, plants, microbes, etc., also have negative and positive
Reading and Comprehension
interactions. These biotic interactions might be intra-specific
(interactions between the same species) or inter-specific
(including interactions between distinct species).
178
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The teacher will then inform Learners that they will be
investigating to find out about the different relationships that
exist within ecosystems.
The teacher introduces symbiotic relationships using a video
or pictures:
A symbiotic relationship is a relationship between two or
more organisms living together closely.
Guiding question: What are the three types of symbiotic
relationships? What are examples of each?
https://youtu.be/QHSHrunOvMo?si=gUM6Hl25mCrS90d
f (5:42 mins)
[Recommendation: pause after each type of symbiotic relationship to
generate discussion]
Mutualism:
The teacher refers to the graphic organizer to identify
mutualistic relationships in the Learners' everyday lives and
then the examples seen in the video
Mutualism: aphids and ants, red-billed oxpeckers and herd
animals, anemones and clownfish, lichen (fungi and algae).
Mutualism: Here, the living beings benefit from each other’s
company. This is a positive, friendly relationship. A
mutualistic interaction comprises two species of organisms
that work together, each benefiting from the relationship. A
classic example of Mutualism is pollination, as the hungry bee
gets its nectar from the flower, and in return, the flower is
pollinated by the bee so it can reproduce.
179
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://widget-
club.com/i/a32d4cf8848d4d91a17a
Learners add examples of mutualisms to their graphic
organizer. Learners may give other examples that they know
from previous experiences.
Commensalism:
The teacher refers to the graphic organizer to identify
commensalism relationships in the Learners' everyday life and
then the examples seen in the video (algae and manatee,
bromeliad plants and large trees).
Commensalism: It is a one-sided beneficial relationship
between two living organisms, where one organism reaps
benefits like food or shelter from the other organism without
benefiting or harming it. The partners that profit from such a
kind of association are commensal, while the latter organism
is the host species. Example: Cattle egrets eat the insects
stirred up by cattle when they are grazing. The cattle are
unaffected, while the birds gain food.
180
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Answer sheet
Retrieved from:
https://rushingoutdoors.net/2021/06/16/cattle-egrets-the-
not-bad-not-natives/
Learners add examples of commensalism to their graphic
organizer. Learners may give other examples that they know
from previous experiences.
Parasitism:
The teacher refers to the graphic organizer to identify
parasitic relationships in the Learners' everyday life and then
the examples seen in the video (ticks and animal fur, cuckoo
birds and other
birds' nests, cordyceps and insects, parasites: tapeworms,
fleas)
Parasitism: It is an interaction in which one organism, the
parasite, benefits or profits while the other organism, the
host, is harmed. In such an association, the parasite is found
to live within or upon the host's body. Depending on the type
181
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: of parasite involved, the parasitism may be termed
https://www.softschools.com/language_arts/reading ecto-parasitism or endo-parasitism. Example: Ticks present
_comprehension/science/69/symbiosis/ on the fur of dogs. Harmful ticks reside on the dog’s fur and
obtain shelter from the fur. The ticks harm the dog by lavishly
feeding on its blood and causing it to itch. In some cases,
How Can Invasive Species Upset Interdependent
these ticks are a source of the carrier of diseases, infecting the
Relationships? One Page Response Paper
animals they live on.
Learners should research an invasive species in their
country and use an essay and diagram to show how
interdependencies (developed in these lessons) may
be impacted.
Rubric:
• Coverage of examples of types of
interactions could include competitive,
predatory, and mutually beneficial .- 5 marks
• Useful graphic organizer of interactions
impacted- 5 marks
• Cohesive & clear argument/communication-
5 marks
Retrieved from: https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Tick-
• Grammar & punctuation- 5 marks
infestation-in-a-dog-before-the-application-of-collar-Day-0-
Tick-abundance-was_fig1_250918823
Predation and Competition
The teacher will set up workstations around the classroom
where Learners will view videos, pictures, or simulations of
various ecosystems to identify some of the relationships that
exist within these ecosystems. Relationships that should
emerge from the viewing of videos or pictures and classroom
discussion:
● Predator-prey
● Competition for food
182
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Symbiotic: mutualism, commensalism, and
parasitism
The Learners will prepare a food web for each type of
ecosystem. A key and markers or crayons can be used to
identify the types of relationships that exist in the ecosystem
from the living things identified in the food web.
Sample Resources:
Teacher Note: If you do not have access to technology
for viewing the videos referred to in the workstations
below, you may consider preparing a card deck at each
station which captures the pictures included below and
poses some guiding questions about implied
interactions/dependencies.
Workstation 1: Pond
● https://youtu.be/5ERP-
Pv_mM8?si=4_sVlUxpoT1X25tc (8:10 mins)
Retrieved from:
https://stock.adobe.com/images/ecosystem-of-pond-with-
different-animals-birds-insects-reptiles-fishes-amphibians-
protozoa-in-their-natural-habitat-schema-of-pond-
ecosystem-structure-for-biology-lessons/503896443
183
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Living things: pond weeds, frogs, small fish such as tilapia,
etc. Retrieved from:
https://youtu.be/H8EMn_21T4o?si=uw99gbsUAxcUDJ4b
Turtles retrieved from
https://youtu.be/H8EMn_21T4o?si=uw99gbsUAxcUDJ4b
184
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Predator-Prey (Grey heron - fish) Retrieved from:
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/306667055870486162/
Workstation 2: Rainforest
● https://youtu.be/3uzucyoUe6Q?si=xWsiG81iYXb
6UP6I (25:54 mins) [Documentary on the Amazon
rainforest]
● https://youtu.be/JEsV5rqbVNQ?si=ss1PHnqkyX
XWPoAA (9:13 mins)[Virtual field trip through the
Amazon Rainforest]
● https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eh-csShVn30
(10:49 mins)
185
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from https://www.activewild.com/rainforest-
animals-list/
Retrieved from
https://youtu.be/dUXQCdCoMCM?si=d5JEbQRJHDGL
X1Ny
186
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from
https://youtu.be/dUXQCdCoMCM?si=d5JEbQRJHDGL
X1Ny
Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eh-
csShVn30
187
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Workstation 3: Desert
● https://youtu.be/n4crvs-
KTBw?si=iqMGsPrLpqzLqStW (3:52 mins)
[Introduces Deserts]
● https://youtu.be/3XF42x_72Xs?si=L8pJ0wzQVR
3akvWk (3:47mins)
Retrieved from: https://www.vecteezy.com/free-
vector/desert-habitat
Desert rattlesnake
188
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://youtu.be/SgFbEQp_muo?si=Wtb36qmuizlOPT31
(26:00 mins)
Camels Retrieved from:
https://youtu.be/SgFbEQp_muo?si=Wtb36qmuizlOPT31
(26:00 mins)
Desert lizard:
189
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Bobcat (predator) tortoise (prey) Retrieved from:
https://youtu.be/SgFbEQp_muo?si=Wtb36qmuizlOPT31
(26 :00 mins)
Scorpion (predator) Retrieved
from:https://desertbiomeswag.weebly.com/keystone-
species-and-predation.html
Workstation 4: Coral Reef
● https://youtu.be/oSP8uoWHZGg?si=8ZpDSKO1
3i4k1Y9W (3:35 mins)
190
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
\
Retrieved from:
https://kids.britannica.com/Learners/article/coral-
reef/633865
lion fish (predator) Retrieved from:
https://www.researchgate.net/figure/The-Lionfish-a-top-
predator-in-many-coral-reef-environments-MJA-
Vermeij_fig7_266190879
191
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Clownfish and Sean anemone
Retrieved from:
https://www.barrierreef.org/news/news/the-great-8-
animals-of-the-great-barrier-reef
Retrieved from: https://www.animalspot.net/coral-reef-
animals
192
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Predation: It is an ecological interaction in which one
organism kills and feeds on the other. The hunter organism
in this interaction is called the predator, and the unfortunate
organism that serves as the food is called the prey. Example:
wild animals like tigers, lions attacking the zebra, deer, cattle,
etc.
Retrieved from:
https://ambergriscaye.com/photogallery/060430.html
Competition: When two different species fight or compete
with each other for the same resource, this form of
interaction is termed competition. The animals could
compete for resources like food, support, shelter, space, etc.
Organisms are compelled to follow this type of ecological
interaction for their survival or existence. Such ecological
interaction could either lead to the extinction of one of the
parties or the extinction of both parties. Therefore, this
193
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
ecological interaction allows only the best competitor to
survive and pass this trait to their offspring, thus, maintaining
the community structure. For example, competition for a
berry will be fierce if only two species of birds from different
species eat it.
To wrap up this section, we will now watch a short video.
Retrieved from :
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FnHkkHI3K1c (4:11
mins)
Class Activity
Based on the information we learnt in this lesson, we will
now engage in a guided discussion, where a scenario will be
given and you will determine the type of relationship
(mutualism, parasitism, commensalism, predation or
competition) being described, and briefly explain your
reasoning.
a) A bee feeds off the nectar of a sunflower. While
feeding, pollen from the sunflower clings to the legs
and body of the bee. When the bee lands on a
194
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
different sunflower, the pollen is left behind and
new pollen picked up. _______________
b) A cat is carrying a dead mouse as a hawk swoops
down to grab it. They both pull on the mouse but
the flapping wings of the hawk against the face of
the cat are strong enough to make the cat drop the
mouse. ________
c) Polar bears wander the ice looking for signs of
seals. Once they find a seal they will attack and eat
it.
Follow-Up Activity
The Learners in groups can write a blog on the types of
relationships in one of the ecosystems explored in the lesson
and their importance.
Factors that cause changes in an Ecosystem
We might think of ecosystems as something constant but in
reality, ecosystems are subject to change, just like everything
else on this planet. Let's discuss the different changes to
ecosystems, and the natural and human causes behind those
changes.
If you've ever seen a fallen tree lying in the road the
morning after a thunderstorm, you probably already have
some idea of how natural events can cause changes in
ecosystems.
A natural disaster is a weather-related event that causes
widespread damage to an area. Natural disasters are not
caused by humans.
● Wildfire/forest fire
● Flooding
195
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Drought
● Earthquake
● Volcanic eruption
● Tornado
● Tsunami
● Cyclone
● Disease
Natural disasters can fundamentally change an ecosystem.
Entire forests can be burned down by a wildfire or uprooted
by an earthquake, leading to deforestation. An area can be
completely flooded, drowning all of the plants. A disease
like rabies can spread through an area, killing large numbers
of animals.
Many natural disasters only cause temporary changes to
ecosystems. Once the event has passed, the area slowly
recovers: trees grow back, animals return, and the original
ecosystem is largely restored. However, natural causes of
changes to ecosystems can be permanent. This usually has to
do with long-term changes to climate or physical geography.
For example, if an area faces drought for too long, it may
become more desert-like. Or, if an area remains permanently
flooded after a hurricane or tsunami, it may become an
aquatic ecosystem. In both cases, the original wildlife will
likely never return, and the ecosystem will be forever altered.
Human causes of changes to ecosystems are almost always
permanent because human activity often results in land-use
change. This means that we humans will repurpose land
that was once part of a wild ecosystem. We may cut down
trees to make way for farmland; we may pave over part of a
196
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
grassland to create a road. These activities change the way
wildlife interact with each other and their environment, as it
introduces new, artificial elements to a natural ecosystem.
For example, animals that attempt to cross busy roads in
search of more food will be at risk of being hit by a car.
If an area becomes urbanized enough, the original natural
ecosystem may functionally cease to exist, and any animals
and plants that remain in an area will be forced to adapt to
human infrastructure.
Besides land-use change, human management can play a
role in ecosystems. You can think of human management of
ecosystems as intentionally or unintentionally 'tinkering' with
the natural function of an ecosystem. Human management
includes:
● Pollution from agriculture or industry
● Manipulating pre-existing physical geography
● Hunting, fishing, or poaching
● Introducing new animals to an area (more on this
below)
Dams and wind turbines, which we depend on for
renewable, sustainable energy, can disrupt the natural swim
patterns of fish or flight patterns of birds, respectively.
Pesticides or fertilizers from agriculture can wind up in
rivers and streams, altering the acidity of water, and in the
most egregious cases, causing bizarre mutations or death.
197
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Activity
Learners will research and present the factors that affected
the specific desert, marine, pond, and coral
ecosystems/habitats e.g. Amazon rainforest, and the Sahara
desert. Their research presentation can include:
● names of plants and animals that live in the specific
habitat and the food they typically eat in the
environment
● Food web
● Living things that compete with each other for food
and living space
● The human and non-human factors that have and
are currently affecting the ecosystem. What changes
have occurred because of these factors?
The Learners can create a video, blog, or paper that they will
present to the class.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher: (any additional knowledge that the writers believe would be helpful for the teacher such as reading material at a lower
or higher grade level, links to curriculum documents for other grades)
Different types of ecosystems: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=alU4hASej3c
https://www.generationgenius.com/wp-content/uploads/reading-material/symbiosis-reading-material-grades-6-8.pdf
https://keslerscience.com/symbiosis-lesson-plan-a-complete-science-lesson-using-the-5e-method-of-instruction
In some feeding relationships, both organisms benefit; this is called symbiosis. There are some relationships where only one organism benefits; this is
commensalism. In the feeding relationship called parasitism, the animal that is fed on is called the host while the organism that feeds is called a parasite.
The parasite has a negative effect on the host and can make it sick.
198
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
The balance in nature can be affected by natural processes such as hurricanes, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, droughts and floods, and also by
activities of humans. Pollution of air and water resources, deforestation and excavations of portions of the earth are some of the ways in which humans
destroy the balance of nature.
Additional Resources and Materials
https://www.generationgenius.com/wp-content/uploads/reading-material/symbiosis-reading-material-grades-6-8.pdf
https://www.ck12.org/book/cbse_biology_book_class_xii/section/17.2/
https://www.sel.k12.oh.us/Downloads/symbiosis2%20slides.pdf
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
• Mathematics - Collecting data showing the examples of the various feeding relationships in a community or ecosystem.
o Representing data collected in tables or graphs.
• Art and Craft - Designing posters, charts depicting the various feeding relationships.
• Language Arts - Writing an expository piece about the different kinds of feeding relationships - parasitism, commensalism, mutualism.
• Describing one type of feeding relationship.
• Health and Family - Writing about healthy habits one should engage in to prevent and treat various parasitic diseases.
• Social Studies: how do invasive species and human interactions upset the balance of interdependence in ecosystems?
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
● Researching local examples of the different kinds of feeding relationships- example the cattle and egret.
● Researching ways technology has helped improve the lives of living things example treatment of various parasites like medicines.
● Learners can create a scrapbook of local herbs that were used or are still used to treat ailments caused by parasites. (They can research with the older
persons in their community to find out about these medicinal herbs or plants.)
● Learners can engage in field trip to different types of ecosystems to study the various abiotic and biotic factors as well as the persons of various
occupations.
Items of Inspiration (teaching tips, inspirational passages, connections to educational research):
● Researching symbiosis and commensalism locally.
Carry out a survey of your local area. Look for examples of symbiosis and commensalism.
● 1. Take photographs or draw examples. 2. Compare your examples with those of other Learners in your class.. 3. Decide whether each organism in
the relationship does or does not benefit. Represent the relationship with smiley/straight faces as shown. 4. Display your results in the classroom.
Source Primary Science for the Caribbean Mission: Science. Student’s Book 6. Terry Hudson and Debbie Roberts. 2017. Macmillan Education.
● Researching ways humans treated diseases caused by parasites long ago and now. Example the use of herbal medicines, use of pesticides to improve
agricultural produce.
199
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Energy
Strand (Topic): Energy
The study of energy is most relevant given the increasing demands humans put on natural resources to power our technological needs. The knowledge of
potential energy sources and how we interconvert energy positions our Learners to be innovative as they look to a comfortable sustainable future.
Essential Learning Outcome: ELO 1: Construct and interpret graphical displays of data to describe the relationships of kinetic energy to the mass
of an object and to the speed of an object.
Clarification Statement: Emphasis is on descriptive relationships between kinetic energy and mass separately from kinetic energy and speed. Examples could
include riding a bicycle at different speeds, rolling different sizes of rocks downhill, and getting hit by a whiffle ball versus a tennis ball.
Grade Level Expectation: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Access prior knowledge using a KWL chart on Introductory Activity: A Classroom
kinetic energy: Demonstration/Group Activity
Knowledge
● Define the terms: To access prior knowledge, have Learners complete Materials needed
o Work a KWL chart on potential energy: Marble, dense rubber ball (or any two balls of
o Potential different masses but the same or similar in
o Potential Energy volume), table top, bucket half filled with water.
o Mass
o Kinetic Energy Activity:
o Speed Place the two balls of different masses on the top
o Joules of the table top.
o Directly Proportional
● Account for changes in kinetic energy
when the mass and speed of an object are
varied and vice versa.
200
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Explain how changes in kinetic energy
can affect the mass and speed of an
object.
● Distinguish between energy, speed and
the mass of an object
● Describe the relationship between kinetic
energy and the mass of an object
● Describe the relationship between kinetic
energy and the speed of an object
Skills
● Make careful observations and record
then using scientific terms
● Infer the relationship between kinetic
Retrieved from http://vancecountyfair.com/kwl- Figure 1: Drawing of two balls of masses placed
energy and the mass of an object
chart-template-word-document/kwl-strategy-chart- on table just above bucket of water.
● Infer the relationship between kinetic
sarah-sanderson-science-in-kwl-chart-template-
energy and the speed of an object
word-document/ Learners, I am going to roll the balls off the edge
● Measure distance, speed, and time using
At the end of the lesson, Learners will state what of the table so that they fall into the bucket. What
instruments
they’ve learnt in the lesson. will happen when the balls hit the water (make a
● Hypothesize the relationship between
splash)? Why do the balls even fall downward?
kinetic energy and speed and the
Worksheet on the relationship between Mass, (Gravity pulls them to the ground.) So objects get pulled
relationship between kinetic energy and
Speed and Kinetic Energy to the ground by a gravitational force. If I hold a
mass
heavy rock above a wooden stake placed in the
● Design an experiment to test a hypothesis
ground and release the rock. What Is likely to
● Communicate the results of scientific happen to the stake? (it will be driven into the ground)
investigations in various ways So the rock does work as it pushes the stake into
● Predict the possible products of reactions the ground. We would say that the rock has the
● Construct charts and graphs to present potential to do work and therefore holding the
scientific data rock above the ground gives the rock potential
● Calculate distance and speed from energy. If you wanted to drive the stake as deep as
scientific data possible into the ground by releasing a rock, would
● Analyse scientific data to draw you choose a bigger rock or a smaller rock? (bigger
conclusions rock)
201
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Graph data from scientific investigations
in a variety of ways
● Interpret scientific data from tables and
graphs
Attitudes/Values
● Demonstrate persistence in testing their
hypotheses and changing variables
● Engage in scientific inquiry to establish
relationships between variables
● Demonstrate respect for evidence
gathered through scientific investigations
Let’s make a conclusion statement here: So
● Work collaboratively in small groups
Learners, you are telling me the rock with the
● Stewardship/Respect for Living Things
bigger mass will have more potential energy to do
● Obey safety rules when conducting
work on the stake. Potential energy must
scientific investigations
depend on the mass of the object falling.
● When conducting practical and group
work, display sensitivity and offer
Back to the balls and the water bucket…We
assistance to peers who may have physical
can see another measure of the potential energy.
or learning challenges
● Participate actively in classroom When I roll the balls off the edge of the table and
discussions into the water bucket…Learners, which do you
think will make the biggest splash? (The larger ball).
Why? (The larger ball has more mass)
Let’s make a conclusion statement here: So
Learners, the balls as they fall, hit the water and do
work on the surface of the water. They must have
potential energy just like the rock. The size of the
splash shows us how much energy was being
transferred to the water. Let us try the experiment
and see if the bigger ball really does make a bigger
splash!
202
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
We also know that as the ball falls, the potential
energy gets converted to energy of motion called
kinetic energy. When do you think the kinetic
energy is the highest? (Near the bottom just as the ball
hits the water.)
Where does the energy go after that?
(water get energy of motion as it moves)
Do you think all of the energy goes into moving
the water? (maybe yes)
Actually, any time we have a collision of two
objects (in this case, a ball and water) some energy is
lost in the form of heat given up to the water. Try
clapping your hands rapidly. After a few moments
of those collisions, you will feel your hands get
warmer as they absorb some of the kinetic energy
from that collision!
Demonstration: What About the Speed of the
Ball?
I want John to come to front of the class. Now let
us have him turn around so he is facing away from
me. I have a ping pong ball that I am going to toss
at John’s back. John did you feel the ball striking
your back? (yes but only gently) So John, you could
feel the energy as it impacted your back but it was
very small, correct? (Yes teacher).
John, what will it feel like if I throw the ping pong
ball at your back as hard as I can? (It wouldn’t hurt
because it so small but the impact would be much
greater than when you tossed the ping pong ball.
You wouldn’t want me to throw a cricket ball at
your back would you John? (no teacher) Why? John?
203
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Solutions: (Because that ball would be heavier and it would certainly
hurt- I would feel much more energy!)
John has helped us learned two important things
about energy today and I want you to remember
this demonstration, so these findings make sense to
you!
1: the energy transferred from the balls depends on
the mass of balls
2: the energy transferred from the balls depends on
the speed of the balls.
Technology Helps Us Understand
Investigating how mass affects kinetic energy using
Computer simulation:
Teacher note:
Using electronic devices (phone, tablet, laptop, PC)
Learners access the simulation: “Energy Skate
Park” using the following URL:
https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/energy-
skate-park/latest/energy-skate-park_all.html
Select the Graphs simulation shown below:
204
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from PhET Colorado:
https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/energy-
skate-park/latest/energy-skate-park_all.html
Once the simulation is loaded, Learners should
uncheck the “thermal” and “total” in the top left of
the display.
Ask Learners about the energy changes that would
take place from the top of the skate track to the
lowest point and back to the top.
Learners can now drag the skater to the top left of
the skate track.
Lab Report or Project Portfolio
Ask Learners to observe the graph plotted and
For each experiment/Investigation:
answer the following questions:
205
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Require Learners to submit a detailed report 1) How are the potential energy and kinetic
or portfolio that includes: energy related? (they exchange one for the other
○ Introduction and hypothesis but the total remains the same) Explain what
○ Detailed diagrams of set-up. you see in the graph (as one type of energy goes
○ Step-by-step procedure with photos down the other goes up)
or sketches 2) When is the kinetic energy the highest? (At
○ Collected data the bottom of the hill). How does the graph
○ Analysis and interpretation of show this? (when the skate boarder is at the
results bottom of the hill, the graph shows a maximum
○ Reflection on the process and value of kinetic energy)
suggestions for improvement or 3) When is the potential energy the highest?
future research. (At the top of the hill). (when the skate boarder is
Rubric at the top of the hill, the graph shows a maximum
Clarity & coherence -5 marks value of potential energy)
Depth of analysis -5 marks 4) Why doesn’t the boarder move to the top
Reflection.- 5 marks of the hill on the left after they descend
Grammar & punctuation- 5 marks down the hill on the right? (Some of the total
energy is lost to friction of the wheels on the ramp
(heat) and air resistance of the boarder’s body (an
opposing force).
Reading and Comprehension
Diagram of skate park with graph generated by
simulated skater. Retrieved from:
https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/energy-
skate-park/latest/energy-skate-park_all.html
206
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Restart the simulation (press at the bottom right of
the screen).
Adjust the mass of the skater to 30 kg. This can
be done by sliding the scale which says “Mass” to
the right of the screen, just above the avatars.
207
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Answer Key
Diagram of toolbar of Energy Skate Park
simulation. Retrieved from
https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/energy-
Retrieved skate-park/latest/energy-skate-park_all.html
from:https://www.easyteacherworksheets.com/scie
nce/kineticpotential.html
208
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Which of the following graphs represents the Questions:
relationship between:
1. Kinetic energy and mass (Ans: B) 1) What do you notice about the kinetic
energy of the skater now that the mass has
decreased? (It has decreased by a half).
2) By adjusting the mass, what can we
conclude about how mass affects the
Kinetic energy of the skater?
Concluding statements from Activities:
1. Kinetic energy is the energy of objects that
are in motion.
2. Potential energy is stored energy, ready to
be converted into another form
2. Kinetic energy and velocity (Ans: A) 3. As the mass of an object increases, the
kinetic energy of the object increases.
4. As the speed of an object increases, the
kinetic energy of the object increases.
5. Mass and kinetic energy have a direct or
proportional relationship.
One More Example: A Scenario
Which is heavier (has more mass) a cricket ball or a
basketball? (basketball)
When someone throws a cricket ball to you and
you catch it, it takes very little force from you in
the opposite direction to keep you from falling
over. If someone then throws you a basketball, it
requires more force from you in the opposite
direction to maintain your stance.
209
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
What if someone then threw a concrete block to
you?
Describe how it would feel? (I would steady myself for
the impact of the block and exert significant force in the
opposite direction. I may not have enough force, and may
fall over.)
So, the kinetic energy that something possesses as
it moves, depends on two things: the mass of
the object and the speed with which it is
moving toward you. In both cases the kinetic
energy is said to be directly related to the mass and
directly related to the speed.
Equation for Kinetic Energy:
Kinetic Energy can be found by using the formula:
1
𝐾𝐸 = 𝑚𝑣2
2
Where KE represents the Kinetic Energy; m
represents the mass of the object possessing kinetic
energy; v represents the speed or velocity of the
object and needs to be squared (multiplied by itself)
in the formula.
Example:
Consider a boy/girl rolling down a hill on his
bicycle. Together, they have a mass of 50 kg. Near
the bottom of the hill, the boy/girl has a speed or
velocity of 10 m/s. To calculate the Kinetic energy
at the bottom of the hill,
210
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1 1
1. multiply his mass (m) by : 50 ✕ = 25
2 2
2. square the speed/velocity (v): 102 = 100
3. Multiply the answers in 1 and 2 to get the
Kinetic Energy of the boy/girl on a bicycle
going down the hill:
KE = 25 ✕ 100 = 2500 Joules
[Joule (J) is the Standard Unit of Energy]
An online calculator can be found in the following
link and can be used to complete the tables below:
211
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from
https://www.calculatorsoup.com/calculators/phys
ics/kinetic.php
Using the formula above, complete the following
table:
Table 1: Table showing kinetic energy of different
masses travelling with the same speed.
Mass of Speed (velocity) of Kinetic
object (kg) object (m/s) Energy (J)
25 10 Ans: 1250
50 10 2500
100 10 Ans: 5000
150 10 Ans: 7500
200 10 Ans: 10000
Questions:
What if the mass of the boy/girl on the bicycle was
doubled (100 kg) and travelling at the same speed.
What is the Kinetic Energy of the system? (5000
Joules)
What if the mass of the boy/girl on the bicycle was
halved (25 kg) and travelling at the same speed?
What is the Kinetic energy of the system? (1250 J)
212
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
How does an object’s mass relate to its kinetic
energy? (As the mass increases, so does the kinetic energy
or The mass is directly proportional to the Kinetic Energy.)
Kinetic Energy and Speed
What if the velocity of the boy/girl on the bicycle
was doubled (20 m/s) What do you think happens
to Kinetic Energy? Possible responses: Nothing, doubled,
quadrupled. Allow Learners to calculate it.
Use the Kinetic Energy Formula to complete the
Kinetic Energy Column in the table below.
Table 2: Table showing kinetic energy of the same
mass with different speeds.
Mass of Speed (velocity) of Kinetic
object (kg) object (m/s) Energy (kJ)
20 5 Ans: 250
20 10 1 000
20 20 Ans: 4 000
20 30 Ans: 9 000
20 40 Ans: 16 000
20 50 Ans: 25 000
20 60 Ans: 36 000
*Teachers may use other values using the calculator
to create the table.
213
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
What is the mathematical relationship between
speed and Kinetic energy? (Kinetic energy is related to the
speed of an object. More advanced: Kinetic energy is directly
proportional to the square of its speed.)
Interpreting Kinetic Energy and Graphs
Provide Learners with a graph sheet or grid paper
with an already drawn scale.
For Table 1, Learners should plot a graph of
Kinetic Energy against mass. After plotting the
points Learners should connect the points with a
straight line (Learners should use a ruler to draw
the line).
214
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Graph drawn with Microsoft Excel
Alternatively, the teacher can display the graph from
a projector or on a white board. Learners will then
describe the shape of the graph. ( A straight line)
215
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
We will now discuss the trend. When the mass
increases, the kinetic energy also increases by the
same factor - a constant that is multiplied by the
quantity to cause the increase or decrease. This type
of relationship is called direct proportion. When one
quantity increases, the other quantity increases.
Conversely, when one quantity decreases, the other
quantity also decreases.
Ask Learners to determine the amount of kinetic
energy possessed by objects of specific masses,
travelling at the same speed, using the graph. For
instance, what is the kinetic energy of an object of
mass 60 kg? (Learners should draw a line from 60 kg up
to the trendline and then read the horizontal axis (kinetic
energy) See picture below :)
216
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Answer: 3000 J
Ask Learners to predict what happens when the
mass is doubled (120 kg), tripled (180 J). They will
then use the graph to verify.
217
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Ask Learners for the kinetic energy of a mass that is
not on the graph. Example: What is the kinetic
energy possessed by an object of mass 300 J? Ans:
15 000J. Learners may determine the kinetic energy of 150
J and multiply by 2, OR others may recognize that 300 kg is
5 times 60 kg, hence the kinetic energy will be 5 times 3000
J which is 15 000 J.
For Table 2, Learners should be guided to plot the
graph of kinetic energy against speed. After plotting
as Learners whether a straight line connects the
points. No. Instead the graph forms a curve.
Learners should then try to connect the points by
forming a smooth curve. Teacher may demonstrate.
Graph generated with Geogebra.com
Ask Learners to compare the relationship between
kinetic energy and speed with the relationship
between kinetic energy and mass with respect to
218
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
the graphs. Kinetic energy increases at a faster rate than
the speed increases. However, kinetic energy increases at the
same rate as the mass of the object increases. The shape is
different because when the speed increases by multiplying by a
constant, the kinetic energy increases by multiplying the
previous value by the square of that constant! The same
applies for division.
A similar exercise can be done with Learners on
this graph. Ask Learners to predict values and
verify on the graph. Then extend to values that are
related to the trend of the graph, but are not points
plotted on the graph.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Definition of terms (source - britannica.com/science):
Mass: Mass is the amount of matter in an object. Its SI unit is the kilogram, but it is also measured in grams, pounds and tonnes. Another definition is an
object’s resistance to a change in position or speed in response to a force. This resistance is called inertia.
𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒
Speed: Speed is defined as the rate of change of position of an object in any direction. Speed has the formula: 𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑒𝑑 = . If distance is measured in
𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒
metres and time in seconds, then the unit of speed is metres per second (m/s). If distance is measured in kilometres and time measured in hours, then the unit
of speed after calculation is kilometres per hour (km/h).
Energy: Energy is the capacity of an object to do work. Work in this definition refers to a physical quantity which is the measure of energy transfer that occurs
when an object is moved over a distance by an external force.
Kinetic energy: Kinetic Energy is the form of energy that an object or particle has by reason of its motion. It is a property of a moving object or particle and it
is dependent on an object’s speed and mass.
Potential energy: Potential energy is stored energy that depends upon the relative position of various parts of the system. Example: A spring will have more
potential energy when compressed or stretched; a mango will have more potential energy the higher it is in the tree. Potential energy can also be considered
as energy that is ready to be converted into another form.
219
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
GCSE Physics- Kinetic Energy #2: https://youtu.be/WrFCHt21kVA?feature=shared
Illinois Open Educational Resources: Energy_Stats_Prob_Gr7.pdf (ilsharedlearning.org)
https://ioer.ilsharedlearning.org/ContentDocs/Personal/1492/Energy_Stats_Prob_Gr7.pdf
PE & KE: https://www.knoxschools.org/cms/lib/TN01917079/Centricity/domain/12078/summer/KCSathomeFourth_Science_Act1.pdf
Proportionality graphs
https://thirdspacelearning.com/gcse-maths/ratio-and-proportion/directly-proportional-graph/
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
• Mathematics:
○ Plotting points on graphs (same skill used when drawing line graphs in statistics), and analyzing data on graphs.
○ Algebra: Substituting numbers into formulas: Learners apply this when calculating energy
○ Statistics: Analyze data sets for trends and patterns.
● Literacy:
○ Vocabulary
○ Report writing
○ Reflective writing in journals/portfolios
○ Writing, speaking, listening when presenting and analysing data from experiments.
● Visual Arts:
○ Infographics: Have Learners create visually appealing infographics that explain the relationship between kinetic energy, mass, and speed.
○ Visualization Techniques: Principles of design and aesthetics to enhance the clarity and impact of data visualizations.
● Information Technology:
○ Use of graphing tools (like Excel)to create and interpret graphical displays of data
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Technology: Use of simulations to collect data and form conclusions. Phet Interactive simulations from the University of Colorado. PhET: Free
online physics, chemistry, biology, earth science and math simulations (colorado.edu)
Local Culture and Environment: Most Caribbean islands are mountainous and hence, roads have significant elevations. Learners can apply the lessons learnt
to explain why truck drivers apply more breaks when travelling downhill, or a filled bus will apply less brakes when going downhill compared to an empty bus.
The Caribbean has a high potential for renewable energy sources like solar and wind power. Understanding kinetic energy can help Learners appreciate how
wind turbines convert wind energy into electricity. This knowledge can inspire innovations in sustainable energy solutions tailored to the region.
220
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: ELO 2: Develop a model to describe that when the arrangement of objects interacting at a distance changes,
different amounts of potential energy are stored in the system.
Clarification Statement: Emphasis is on relative amounts of potential energy, not on calculations of potential energy. Examples of objects within systems
interacting at varying distances could include: the Earth and either a roller coaster cart at varying positions on a hill or objects at varying heights on shelves,
changing the direction/orientation of a magnet, and a balloon with static electrical charge being brought closer to a classmate’s hair. Examples of models could
include representations, diagrams, pictures, and written descriptions of systems.
Assessment Boundary: Assessment is limited to two objects and electric, magnetic, and gravitational interactions.
Grade Level Expectation: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: True or false? Introductory Activity: Increasing Potential
1) A ball at rest at the top of a ramp has more Energy
Knowledge kinetic energy than potential energy. (F)
● Define the terms: 2) As an object falls it converts potential Set up an inclined plane with books and a piece of
o energy energy to kinetic energy. (T) cardboard or wood. Place a marble or ball at the
o gravitational potential energy 3) In a roller coaster the total amount of PE top of the ramp. Before letting the ball go engage a
o elastic potential energy and KE remains almost the same because discussion.
o compression of springs they are interconverted. (T)
o stretching springs 4) Roller coaster cars have air resistance and
o Newton’s Cradle wheel friction that causes loss of some of
o kinetic energy the total energy. (T)
o inclined plane
o distance How is Energy Lost?
Retrieved from
o height As the ball in “Newton’s Cradle” is released, it
https://tinybop.com/blog/experiment-with-
collides with the other balls and it seems like the
simple-machines-make-an-inclined-plane and
● Compare potential energy values based total amount of KE and PE will remain constant.
modified
on the reference points between objects But in fact the balls will stop moving eventually.
at different heights/distances. How do you think the total energy (KE + PE) is lost
Learners, when I release the ball, what will happen?
● Explain how an object’s potential energy in this system? (heat from the collision)
(It will roll down the ramp). What causes it to roll
changes to kinetic energy when it falls.
down? (We learned already about gravity as a force pulling
Skills
things down). We have seen in previous lessons that
221
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Infer that the amount of gravitational objects at a height above the ground have the
energy possessed by an object depends on potential to do work as they fall. You will
its height from the Earth’s surface remember we called this potential energy.
● Measure height and distance using As the ball rolls down the ramp what will happen
appropriate instruments Retrieved from: to its speed? (It will probably go faster for awhile).
● Construct hypotheses to guide scientific https://science.howstuffworks.com/innovation/inv We know from our prior lessons that the potential
investigations involving energy entions/newtons-cradle.htm energy gets converted to energy of motion called
kinetic energy.
● Graph data collected from scientific
Changes in Energy: Graphing the Change
investigations
Types of Potential Energy
● Interpret data from tables to identify
When we talk about the potential to do work, there
patterns and trends
are actually a few types of potential energy we
● Predict best designs for a water tower
should clarify.
● Research uses of springs
Gravitational potential energy is the energy
Attitudes/Values
stored in an object as the result of its vertical
position or height (like our ball/marble). The
● Express enthusiasm by actively engaging
energy is stored as the result of the gravitational
in hands-on activities and experiments
attraction of the Earth for the object.
● Demonstrate persistence in testing
hypotheses and changing variables.
Elastic potential energy is the energy stored in
● Demonstrate curiosity by asking elastic materials as the result of their stretching or
thoughtful questions during the lesson. compressing. Elastic potential energy can be stored
● Demonstrate respect for evidence by in rubber bands, bungee chords, trampolines,
using data to support their conclusions springs, an arrow drawn into a bow, etc.
and arguments
● Work collaboratively in small groups How Does the Height of the Ramp Make a
● Stewardship/Respect for Living Things Difference in How Far the Car Travels?
● Obey safety rules when conducting
scientific investigations Learners, we are going to set up three ramps with
● When conducting practical and group books.
work, display sensitivity and offer The ramps will be increasing heights. If I roll the
assistance to peers who may have physical same toy car down the ramps, in which case do you
or learning challenges think the car will travel the furthest as it reaches the
222
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Participate actively in classroom bottom? (The highest ramp). Which ramp will have
discussions. the car travel the fastest as it goes down the ramp?
(the highest ramp) Let us try it and see what happens.
It is important that, when we do experimental trials
that we design a controlled experiment. That
means we maintain all the variables in the
experiment the same except the variable we want to
measure. What do you think the controls will be
for this experiment? Let me give you a hint…we
Retrieved from: will use the same car, the same ramp length &
https://thewonderofscience.com/msps32 materials- what do you think other controls might
be? (same books, measure distance from the same point,
same release point)
Labelling Energy Transitions: Roller Coaster
Materials: 6 identical books, three pieces of hard
Use this drawing and put in the correct explanations. cardboard or wood to create a plank the same size,
three identical toy cars, a measuring stick, tape or
ruler, chalk)
Approach: Have Learners release the cars from
the same point at the top of the ramps. Ask them
which ramp appeared to have given the car the
greatest speed? (The tallest ramp). Since speed is a
measure of distance-the ramp length-per unit
time…how could they measure that speed of those
cars? (By timing the car over the distance from the top of the
ramp to the bottom.)
Ask Learners to use chalk to mark the distance
from the bottom of the ramp to the car’s resting
place. They can enter the distance in cm in the
table below. Based on those measures, which ramp
had the car traveling the furthest from the bottom
of the ramp? (the tallest ramp)
223
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from
https://tinybop.com/blog/experiment-with-
simple-machines-make-an-inclined-plane and
modified
What variables are changing in our experiment?
(height of the ramp) What are we measuring? (distance
travelled)
Sample Observation Table
224
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Comprehension: Learning from Reading
Passage The following graphic organizer can be used to
guide the Learners through the scientific process. it
also highlights the cyclical nature of the scientific
process.
Retrieved from:
https://resources.pepsicorecyclerally.com/resource
s/use-this-free-scientific-method-printable-in-your-
science-lessons/
What can we conclude about the height of the
inclined plane and the distance the car travelled by
looking at our data? (The taller the inclined plane, the
steeper the ramp, the further the car travels)
225
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Closure
Make the connection with Learners that the height
of the plane determines the potential energy. The
increase in height of the inclined plane increases
the potential energy and the cars move faster and
further.
Another Example of Height Dependence
Using A Video
Look at the video below which converts potential
energy to kinetic energy. (view from 1:06 minutes)
Retrieved from
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=99ng-
D8BZDw (2:16 mins)
Questions:
1. What type of energy does the wheel
possess before it is released?(potential energy)
2. What type of energy does the wheel
possess as it rolls down?(kinetic energy)
3. Does the wheel move at the same speed if
it is released from halfway point? Give a
reason for your answer ( No, the potential
energy of the wheel is less since the height is
reduced).
226
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Designing a Water Tower
Retrieved from:
https://goroundrock.com/attractions/koughan-
memorial-water-tower-park-2/
If we were to build a water tower to supply good
water pressure at the bottom of the tower for our
community, does it make a difference how high the
water is suspended in the air?
Retrieved from:
https://www.easyteacherworksheets.com/science/ki Allow Learners to discuss whether it would and
neticpotential.html why they believe it would (or would not). The
Learners develop a hypothesis.
Magnets Store Potential Energy
Have Learners explain how the strength of magnetic To test the hypothesis, a simple experiment can be
attraction depends on distance. done in the classroom (Falling Water, Teach
How is magnetic potential energy used for closing Engineering, Retrieved from Falling Water -
cupboard doors? (the rare earth magnets in the door will Activity - TeachEngineering:
engage/attract when the door is near closed)
See: Materials needed:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c5G90XNtap ● transparent plastic drinking straw
Y&t=54s 2:26 mins)
227
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Vocabulary: Fill in the Blanks ● cup or glass
● metre rule
● pencil or pen
● marking pens
● 12-16 sheets of blank paper (per team)
● water coloured with food colouring
Each student will be provided with a “Falling
Water Worksheet” to complete.
https://www.teachengineering.org/content/cub_/
activities/cub_energy2/cub_energy2_lesson08_acti
vity1_worksheet.pdf
Answers
228
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/science/16
14850
Applications of Potential Energy of Springs
A spring can be used to store potential energy. The
distance the spring moves either by compression or
extension is a directly related to how much potential
it stores
Learners should do research and suggest examples
for each of these two uses for springs.
Worksheet retrieved from
https://www.teachengineering.org/activities/view
/cub_energy2_lesson08_activity1
Instructions:
1. Divide the class into teams of three or four
Learners each.
2. Show the Learners how to use a straw like
a water dropper: Stick the straw in a glass
of water. Place a finger on the top of the
straw. Pull the straw out of the glass, while
229
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: still holding your finger over the top. Hold
https://energyeducation.ca/encyclopedia/Elastic_p the straw over a piece of paper and
otential_energy remove your finger.
3. Ask the Learners how they can all be sure
1) A compressed spring has potential to do to use the same amount of water for each
work trial. (Answer: By marking a line on the
Examples: straw and always refilling it to that point.)
• suspension in vehicles 4. Discuss with Learners’ methods for
• suspension in mountain bikes measuring the diameter of a splash. Have
the Learners agree on a standard class
• mattresses
method for determining the diameter of a
• clickable ball point pens
splash. Have Learners use a pencil or pen
• toys like pogo sticks
to outline the splash, and label it with their
name, the drop height, and the splash
diameter.
2) A stretched spring has the potential to do
5. Have student teams describe on the
work.
worksheet what they predict will happen to
Examples:
the splash as it is dropped from increasing
• garage doors heights. Do they expect the size of the
• screen doors on a home splash to increase or decrease with higher
• vice grips and other tools drop heights?
• carburetors 6. Have the class agree on four heights from
• washing machines which to drop the water, such as 30 cm, 60
cm, 90 cm and 1 m (note this on the
worksheet). Teams measure the diameter
of the water splash for all four heights.
Each team member drops the water once
from each height. Thus, teams with three
members have 12 data points and teams
with four members have 16 data points.
7. Learners take turns doing each part of the
activity. One student holds the meter stick.
One student drops the water using the
230
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
straw. A third student measures the splash
diameter.
8. Hold the bottom of the straw at the height
by first placing it next to the correct height
on the meter stick and then moving it
several centimeters away, being careful to
keep the straw at the same height. On the
paper, write the height, diameter and team
member name, and record the data on the
worksheet.
9. After one person drops the water, the
team members switch places and repeat
the process. The student measuring the
diameter of the splash moves the paper so
the water falls on a dry piece.
10. After teams have finished their drops, have
them complete the worksheet by
calculating averages and creating a graph
of their average data.
11. Conclude with a class-wide comparison of
each team's results (table data and graphs)
and a concluding discussion, as described
in the Assessment section.
Source: Falling Water - Activity -
TeachEngineering
https://www.teachengineering.org/activities/view
/cub_energy2_lesson08_activity1
A video for the activity can also be found here:
https://youtu.be/p4etl1WFaYY (1:49 mins)
231
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Areas of Focus in activity:
1. As the distance from the surface increases,
the gravitational potential energy of the
liquid increases.
2. This increase in potential energy is directly
related to the distance the particles move
when they hit the surface (splash
diameter).
3. The potential energy is converted to
kinetic energy according to the principle of
conservation of energy.
How Roller Coasters Use Energy.
The following video can be shown to Learners to
explain energy changes that occur on a rollercoaster
ride, due to the initial height of the roller coaster.
https://youtu.be/jSyz_U79iQ0?si=HamqneyGlFF
8ZaUA (8:03 mins)
Alternatively, the teacher can use the following
simulation
232
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://contrib.pbslearningmedia.org/WGBH/con
v16/conv16-int-rollercoaster/index.html
A roller coaster ride is a thrilling experience which
involves a wealth of science. The ride often begins
as a chain and motor (or other mechanical device)
exerts a force on the train of cars to lift the train to
the top of a very tall hill building the potential
energy as the height increases. The steeper the
gradient the faster the roller coaster moves. The
roller coaster track is designed so that the potential
energy from a high height is converted to kinetic
energy of motion as the car descends but as it rises
again it begins to gain potential energy once again.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
An object can store energy as the result of its position. For example, the heavy ball of a demolition machine stores energy when it is held at an elevated position.
This stored energy of position is referred to as potential energy. Similarly, a drawn bow can store energy as a result of its position. When assuming its usual
position (i.e., when not drawn), there is no energy stored in the bow. Yet when its position is altered from its usual equilibrium position, the bow can store energy
due to its position. This stored energy of position is referred to as potential energy. Potential energy is the stored energy of position possessed by an object.
Retrieved from https://eschooltoday.com/learn/the-inclined-plane/
Additional Resources and Materials
Potential energy & effect of distance
https://www.physicsclassroom.com/class/energy/Lesson-1/Potential-Energy
https://teaching.betterlesson.com/browse/common_core/standard/2206/ngss-ms-ps3-2-develop-a-model-to-describe-that-when-the-arrangement-of-objects-
interacting-at-a-distance-changes-different-amoun?from=standard_level1
233
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics:
● Draw graphs of the distance of the inclined plane and distance travelled by cars.
● Calculate the overall speed of the toy cars by dividing the distance by the time.
TVET: Create a device to measure the angle of the inclined plane using everyday materials.
Art and Craft - Draw various drawings illustrating energy changes, for example potential to kinetic energy.
234
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: ELO 3: Apply scientific principles to design, construct, and test a device that either minimizes or maximizes
thermal energy transfer.
Clarification Statement: Examples of devices could include an insulated box, a solar cooker, and a Styrofoam cup.
Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include calculating the total amount of thermal energy transferred.
Grade Level Expectation: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: New Vocabulary Help Me Explain This Problem!
Good morning Learners, I want to tell you a story
Knowledge The student should create a Frayer model for each and see if you can explain what might have
● Define the terms: of three heat transfer modes by placing conduction, happened.
o thermal energy convection and radiation in the centre of the My friend was making a delicious soup and the
o heat diagram and completing the square. phone rang. She left the kitchen to take the call and
o temperature forgot to remove the metal stirring spoon from the
o conduction soup pot. When the call was finished, she returned
o convection to the kitchen and reached for the spoon to
o radiation continue stirring the soup. When she grabbed the
o thermal conductors spoon, she screamed in pain. That is right, she
o thermal insulators burned her hand on the metal spoon!
o vacuum Why do you think that happened? (The heat from the
o greenhouse effect soup pot was heated the spoon too). How did the heat get
● Explain the different modes of thermal to the spoon from the soup pot though? Well, we
energy transfer: conduction, convection, know that particles that make up matter move very
radiation. quickly when they get heated up and that energy
● Identify the conditions needed for each can be passed along each and every particle. When
mode of thermal energy transfer to take the heat is transferred like that we call it
place. conduction. Sometimes conduction is useful if we
want the heat to be transferred (like throughout a
● Identify materials and their properties
pot) but other times like the spoon it can be
related to thermal conductivity and
harmful. What do we often do with kitchen tools
insulation
that we don’t want to conduct heat? Let me give
you a hint, what do you often see on the lid of pot?
235
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Distinguish between the three modes of Research Project (a wooden, plastic or rubber handle). We call those
energy transfer. Learners should submit a one page response paper materials that reduce heat transfer insulators.
● Identify the properties of materials which that responds to the following question:
make them good absorbers, emitters and How are radiant heating systems used to heat homes Demonstration of Conduction:
reflectors of radiant heat energy. in the parts of the world where temperatures fall
● Identify the properties of materials which below freezing.
make them poor absorbers, emitters and Description-5 marks
reflectors of radiant heat energy. Diagrams-5 marks
Grammar & punctuation-5 marks
● Identify the method of heat transfer in
different real-life situations.
Lab Report or Project Portfolio
Skills
For each experiment:
● Develop a testing procedure to measure Figure of apparatus for experiment. Retrieved
the efficiency of thermal energy transfer from
● Require Learners to submit a detailed report
in a device. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9yjApqj-jdA
or portfolio that includes:
● Conduct experiments to collect data on
○ Introduction and hypothesis
thermal energy transfer, using proper
○ Detailed design plan with diagrams
tools and techniques. Materials Needed:
○ Step-by-step procedure with photos
● Formulate a hypothesis on how specific ● Metal rod or metal spoon
or sketches
● Candle or heat source (like a hot plate)
materials and designs will affect thermal
○ Collected data
energy transfer ● Butter or wax
○ Analysis and interpretation of
● Paper clips or small metal objects
● Select appropriate materials based on
results
● Stopwatch or timer
their thermal properties and the design
○ Reflection on the process and
● Tongs or heat-resistant gloves
plan of the device.
suggestions for improvement or
● Safety goggles
● Construct a device according to the
future research.
Procedure:
design specifications, ensuring accuracy
● Assess the report for:
● Cut small pieces of butter or wax and stick
and precision.
○ Clarity & coherence- 5marks
them at regular intervals along the length
● Interpret and analyze collected data to ○ Depth of analysis- 5 marks
of the metal rod or spoon.
determine the effectiveness of the device ○ Reflection- 5 marks
● Attach a paper clip or small metal object to
in minimizing (or maximizing) thermal
each piece of butter or wax. This will help
energy transfer
visualize the melting process.
● Communicate the construction process,
experimental results, and analysis to peers
and instructors.
236
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Graph results obtained from Methods of Heat Transfer Worksheet: Ask Learners to predict what will happen to the
measurements in an organized and logical butter or wax when only one end of the metal rod
format. is heated. (Record predictions).
● Hold the metal rod or spoon with tongs or
Attitudes/Values heat-resistant gloves.
● Place one end of the metal rod or spoon
● Persistence into the flame of the candle or on the hot
o Demonstrate perseverance plate.
through challenging tasks. ● Start the stopwatch as soon as the metal
o Learn from failures and viewing rod or spoon is placed in the heat source.
them as opportunities for ● Observe the butter or wax pieces and note
improvement. the time it takes for each piece to start
● Interest/Curiosity melting and the paper clips to fall off.
o be eager to explore new concepts ● Record the time for each interval.
and ideas ● Have Learners record their observations
o Maintain an open mind to and measurements in a table.
different approaches and
solutions. Discussion Questions:
"What did you observe when the end of the metal
● Respect for Scientific Process
rod was heated?"
o value the importance of the
(After some time the paper clips fell off the rod, one at a
scientific method in problem
time.)
solving
"Why did the butter or wax melt, and the paper
o use materials and resources
clips fall off?"
wisely and ethically, considering
(Heat was conducted (flow through) the metal rid and melted
environmental impacts
the wax.)
● Collaboration & Cooperation
Learners, this demonstration is meant to show the
o Value the input and perspectives
results of the process of conduction.
of team members.
o Work cooperatively to achieve
Teachers with access to technology:
common goals.
Experiment can be seen in the following video:
● Conduct experiments involving heat
safely by using heat resistant equipment
237
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
and not handling hot apparatus with bare
hands.
● When conducting practical and group
work, display sensitivity and offer
assistance to peers who may have physical
or learning challenges
● Participate actively in classroom
discussions.
● The environment is greatly impacted by
the greenhouse effect and Learners have a
role in promoting less dependence on
fossil fuels for public and industrial
consumption.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9yjApqj-jdA
(1:22 mins)
Review Discussion: Thermal conductors and
insulators
Question: Pots and pans are made from what
material? (Metals.)
Question: Why do you think they are made with
this material? (Metals conduct heat well)
Question: What material is used to make the
handle of the pan? (Plastic/wood)
Question: Why do you think the handles are made
from plastic? (They are not good conductors of heat.)
Thermal conductors are materials that easily
conduct heat energy. Thermal insulators are
poor conductors of heat energy. Metals are good
conductors of heat energy. Gases, plastic, wood,
cloth are all poor conductors of thermal insulators.
What Rate Does Heat Transfer in Different
Materials?
238
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Illustration of materials used for activity. Retrieved
from
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rnnadk7b3V
Y
Materials Needed:
● wooden spoon
● plastic spoon
● metal spoon
● three cups/beakers (plastic or glass)
● Butter or wax
● Stopwatch or timer
● Tongs or heat-resistant gloves
● Safety goggles
Procedure
● Cut small pieces of butter or wax and stick
them at the same height near the top of
each spoon.
● Place each spoon into a cup or beaker with
the butter or wax above the rim of the cup.
Ask Learners to predict what will happen to the
butter or wax when the spoons are placed in hot
water.
Record their predictions.
● Fill the three cups or beakers with hot
water to the same level, ensuring the
handles of the spoons are sticking out and
239
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
the butter or wax is not in contact with the
water.
● Place each spoon (metal, wooden, plastic)
into a separate cup or beaker.
● Start the stopwatch as soon as the spoons
are placed in the hot water.
● Observe the butter or wax and note the
time it takes for each piece to start melting
on each spoon.
● Record the time for each spoon.
● Have Learners record their observations
and measurements in a table, noting which
spoon's butter or wax melts first.
Discussion Questions:
"What did you observe when the spoons were
placed in the hot water?" (The butter stayed on the
spoons initially)
"Which spoon's butter or wax melted first? Why do
you think this happened?" (The metal spoon)
"How does this demonstrate the process of
conduction?" (The butter or wax on the metal spoon
melted first since the metal was a good conductor of heat
whereas the others were insulators.)
Applying What You Know
A wooden spoon and a metal spoon are placed on
a counter. They are both at room temperature.
Why does the metal spoon feel colder than the
Retrieved from https://ngss-k-5- wooden spoon when you touch it? Let me give you
ausd.weebly.com/uploads/2/9/4/0/29401113/wee a hint…your sense of touch would detect a change
k_4-_reading.pdf in temperature of your finger. Why would your
finger seem cooler?
240
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Methods of Heat Transfer (The metal spoon is a good conductor of heat. When
touched, it conducts the heat from your finger, causing a drop
in temperature in your finger.)
1. Convection:
Allow Learners to observe a pan of boiling water
and how the water circulates.
Question: ‘Why does the water in a pan boil from
the bottom and then circulate to the top?”
Learners. I want you to show me with your fists,
what happens to particles when they are heated.
That is correct, they move more quickly and
further apart. Because they are further apart they
are less dense. We know from our previous science
experiments, that things that have more air
between particles tend to float on top of things that
are more densely packed (e.g. a cork or Styrofoam
in water). So now- can you tell me why would the
hot liquid particles rise in the pot? This process by
the way is called convection.
(This movement is called convection. It happens in fluids
(liquids and gases) where warmer, less dense areas rise, and
cooler, denser areas sink.)
Demonstrating Convection: If the teacher has
the materials conduct this demo for Learners and
alternatively, if technology is available “show” the
experiment.
241
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Convection Current Experiment =- Lynda
Williams.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TB_Dlq57O
LQ (2:14 mins)
Materials Needed:
● A clear glass or plastic container (large
enough to see convection currents, like a
fish tank or a large beaker)
● Hot water in a cup
● Cold water
● Food coloring (two different colors)
● Ice cubes
● Small plastic or glass jars
● A dropper or pipette
Procedure:
● Fill the clear container with cold water.
● Prepare hot (near boiling)water in a
separate container
● Add one drop of food colouring to the
bottom center of the clear container (red).
Place one drop of the other food colouring
(blue) to the left and another drop of the
same colour on the right bottom of the
clear container.
Ask Learners to predict what will happen in the
clear container if it was heated near the center..
242
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Record their predictions.
● Carefully place the hot water in a cup and
place directly beneath the center drop of
the food coloring.
● Observe how the center food colouring
drop (red) rises and the side food coloring
(blue) sinks, creating visible convection
currents.
● Ask Learners to describe what they see
happening in the container.
Explanation: Convection occurs because the water
near the heat source heats up. Hot water is less
dense than cold water so the water around the red
food colouring rises, while the cold water around
the blue food coloring sinks. This creates a circular
movement of fluid, known as convection current.
Examples of Convection currents:
Water boiling on a stove:
Retrieved from
https://www.birdvilleschools.net/cms/lib2/TX010
00797/Centricity/Domain/3089/Conduction%20C
onvection%20or%20Radiation%20Worksheet.pdf
Question on Maximizing Energy Thermal
Energy Transfer
Solar water heaters are common in the Caribbean.
How does a solar water heater maximize the radiant
heat from the sun to heat up water flowing in pipes?
243
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Use the diagram to identify the properties of the Retrieved from
heater that apply the methods of heat transfer. https://letstalkscience.ca/educational-
resources/backgrounders/introduction-heat-
transfer
Convection Currents: Land and Sea Breezes:
Sea breezes occur on summer days because land
heats up faster than the sea.
Warm air rises as it is less dense than cooler air. As
the warm air rises, cooler air from over the ocean
moves over land to take its place. It is this
Diagram retrieved from CXC CSEC Physics Jan
movement of warm and cool air that creates a sea
2012. breeze!
1. How does the design maximize heat transfer The opposite happens at night when the surface of
by: land cools faster than the surface of water. The
a. Conduction? copper tubing warmer air over the ocean rises and cooler land air
b. Convection? Cold water at the bottom flows out to sea to replace it.
of the collector, hot water at the top.
c. Radiation? Black surface at the bottom
of the collector and tubes are enclosed in
glass (greenhouse effect).
2. Why is the cold water tap placed at the
bottom of the tank? Cold water is denser than
hot water. The top of the tank will have the
warmest water and we do not want the cold water to
cool it down in the storage tank.
3. Why is the hot water tap placed at the top
of the tank? Hot water is less dense that cold
water so the hottest water will always rise to the top
of the tank.
4. What is the BEST colour you think the Hot-
water tank should be painted and why?
Black, because it is best at absorbing heat.
244
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from https://www.science-
sparks.com/what-is-a-sea-breeze/
Other examples: ocean currents, wind patterns, and
the movement of magma inside the Earth
2. Radiation
“Why does wearing dark clothing make you feel
warmer in the sun than light-colored clothing?”
(By experiment, scientists know that black objects absorb all
wavelengths of light and convert them to heat. Conversely,
245
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
white objects reflect all wavelengths and therefore here is no
conversion to heat)
Learners may develop a hypothesis and use the
following experiment to test it.
Retrieved from
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DIfzIXmGth
0 (2:00 mins)
Experiment: Black coloured objects absorbs and
loose more radiant heat than a white object
● Black colour object absorbs and loses more
radiant heat than a white object.
● Take two metal containers A and B.
● Paint container A with black colour and
container B with white.
● Fill both the container with equal amount
of water
● To measure the temperature, fix two
thermometers in the container
● Note the thermometer reading
● Place the two container in the sun for about
15 to 20 minutes
246
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Again note the thermometer readings.
You will find that the temperature of water placed
in the black container (A) rises more than that of the
water in container white (B).
This happens because black object absorbs more
radiant heat than a white object.
● Now place both the container A and B in
the shade.
You will observe that the temperature of water in
black colour container cools down faster.
Therefore we conclude that black coloured objects
absorb and radiate heat more as compared to white
objects in the same time period.
Application of this is real life: A black car sitting in
the sun at the same time with a white car, will feel
hotter inside because the black colour absorbs heat
more than the white. When standing close to these
two vehicles outside in the sun, you will feel more
heat from the black car than the white.
Shiny bright surfaces are good reflectors of heat but
poor absorbers. Examples of this property for
reflection of heat can be seen in the shiny reflective
surfaces of cars, so that heat from the sun is
reflected instead of absorbed into the car, shiny
galvanized roofs in the Caribbean.
Objects that are good absorbers of radiant heat are
also good emitters of heat. They give off heat energy
through radiation.
247
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Light colored shiny objects are poor absorbers and
therefore good reflectors of radiant heat.
Radiation is a method of heat transfer that does not
require particles to carry heat energy. Heat is
transferred in infrared waves (a type of
electromagnetic wave or radiation) from hot objects
in all directions. Unlike conduction and convection,
particles are not required for heat transfer through
radiation.
Learners can view the following video about heat
transfer: radiation.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OYW7lR-
XuJA (1:46 mins)
Greenhouse Effect: A Problem of Heat
Transfer
Learners, what is a greenhouse? (A place to grow
vegetables). Why is it a useful technology? (We can
grow things in a warm environment). Have you ever
walked in a greenhouse? What does it feel like?
248
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
(Steamy, war, wet). How does it stay so warm; are
they pumping warm air in? (No, hot air isn’t added, the
sun shines through the glass or plastic and the heat gets
trapped inside).
The greenhouse effect on earth is very similar.
When we burn hydrocarbon fuels like wood, diesel,
oil etc. one of the products is carbon dioxide.
There are other gases produced by industrial
processes that contain nitrogen and sulfur. If we
burn too much the carbon dioxide as well as other
industrial byproducts makes a blanket over the
earth. The sun shines through and warms the earth
but the reflected heat can’t escape because the
gaseous blanket holds the heat in. We therefore
have elevated temperatures at the surface; just like a
greenhouse! This has many detrimental effects!
249
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://www.shalom-
education.com/courses/gcsechemistry/lessons/ear
ths-and-atmospheric-science/topic/the-
greenhouse-effect/
Supplemental Video Resource: Greenhouse
Effect
As Learners watch the following video
(https://youtu.be/SN5-DnOHQmE (2:29 mins)
) they should make notes that allow them to answer
the following questions:
● Is the greenhouse effect useful or harmful?
Why?
● What would happen if there were too
many greenhouse gases in the atmosphere?
● What would happen if there were no
greenhouse gases?
● What ways can we reduce the number of
greenhouse gases in our atmosphere?
Heat Transfer Summary
Learners may be shown the following video which
summarizes all three methods of heat transfer, with
real life applications.
250
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HpCvWuvC
UoA (3:16 mins)
Minimizing energy transfer: The Vacuum
Flask
A vacuum flask is designed to keep food or
beverages warm or cold. It does this by
minimizing the transfer of thermal energy from
outside to inside the flask and vice - versa.
Ask Learners:
What is a vacuum? (A vacuum is any space that has no
matter. This means that there are no particles.)
Show Learners a diagram of the parts of a vacuum
flask and discuss how each element of the design
minimizes the transfer of thermal energy. Discuss
the specific method of heat transfer being
minimized.
251
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from:
https://feed.theskepticsguide.org/images/podcast
_images/Thermos.jpg
In this diagram, the flask is keeping the tea inside
hot. What is the role of each of the labelled parts
in keeping this tea hot?
Leading questions:
Can you identify the insulators?
How do you think heat transfer by radiation is
reduced?
Why do you think there is a vacuum?
252
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Answers:
Plastic Stoppers and corks serve as insulators to
avoid heat transfer by conduction.
A vacuum has no particles, hence heat cannot be
transferred by conduction and convection.
The silvered surface is shiny and therefore reflects
heat back into the flask instead of outward. The
walls are thin hence limiting heat transfer through
conduction.
Thermos Engineering Project
Now that Learners know the three methods of heat
transfer, they will now explore methods of
minimizing heat transfer and use it to construct a
device.
In this activity Learners will apply scientific
principles to design, construct and test a device that
minimizes energy transfer.
Look at the following video for instructions:
253
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kfBcqhsaVJ0
(2:08 mins)
Learners are expected to test different materials
and come up with the best insulation to put around
their cup as well as the lid.
Two plastic cups are required: a smaller cup that
fits inside a larger one. It is intended for the
insulating material to fit in between the two cups.
Consideration for the lid design is also important.
Other materials:
● thermometer
● beaker
● Petri dish
● hot plate
● water
Examples of insulating materials Learners may use
include cotton, aluminum foil, cardboard, cloth.
Learners will test each materials’ insulation
property by placing it between a beaker of water
and a hot plate and heating the water for a specific
amount of time. The time for heating should be
the same for each material. Also ensure that the
water never reaches boiling.
254
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kfBcqhsaVJ0
Learners should make note of the temperature of
the water at the end of the heating period (5
minutes) for each object in the table:
Material Initial Final Change in
temperatur temperatur Temperature
e of water e of water (℃)
(℃) (℃)
No
insulatio
n
A bar graph can be constructed to determine the
best insulating material.
255
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners will create their insulation around their
cup from each material to determine which one
best minimizes heat transfer
They will place some water in the cup and note the
temperature after heating, with each design,
Learners should record results in a table and may
construct graphs to display their findings. These
results should help determine the best design.
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Notes on Methods of heat Transfer:
http://alkisites.vansd.org/dgray/Assignments/conduction_convection_radiation_reading.pdf
Definition of terms using in this ELO:
Thermal energy: Thermal energy is the energy due to the motion of atoms and molecules in a substance. Thermal energy can also be thought of a type of
energy since it involves movement of molecules. An increase in thermal energy of an object is directly related to an increase in temperature (ScienceFacts.net).
Heat: Heat refers to the flow of thermal energy. This flow of thermal energy occurs when there is a difference in temperature in a substance. Heat flows from
a higher temperature to a lower temperature. However, the term heat energy can be used interchangeably with thermal energy (ScienceFacts.net).
Temperature: Temperature is a measure of the kinetic energy of particles of matter, which can be measured by using a thermometer (Sciencenotes.org).
Conduction (Heat): Conduction is the heat transfer directly between neighboring atoms or molecules. Usually, it is heat transfer through solids
(sciencenotes.org).
Convection: Convection is the heat transfer via the movement of a fluid (liquid or gas) (Sciencenotes.org)
Thermal Radiation: Thermal radiation is the emission of electromagnetic radiation (infra-red rays). Heat transfer through radiation can occur through a
medium (particles) but it is not required.
256
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Vacuum: A vacuum is a volume which contains little or no matter (sciencenotes.org).
Retrieved from What Is a Vacuum in Science? Definition and Examples (sciencenotes.org)
Greenhouse Effect: The following page gives more information about the greenhouse effect and its consequences to living things on Earth.
Greenhouse effect - Understanding Global Change (berkeley.edu)
https://ugc.berkeley.edu/background-content/greenhouse-effect/
Additional Resources and Materials
Teacher resource to understanding heat transfer:
Heat Transfer – Conduction, Convection and Radiation
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Me60Ti0E_rY (2:09 mins)
257
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Mathematics: graphing and interpreting graphs
Social Studies: the dilemma of reliance on fossil fuels
Language Arts: Debates on fossil fuels using the following as a framework:
https://www.calacademy.org/sites/default/files/assets/docs/pdf/flipsideenergy_fossilfuels_sciencetextswdiagrams.pdf
TVET: Design of insulators: https://www.teachengineering.org/activities/view/uoh_insulation_activity1
Elements from Local Culture, Technology, TVET, Environment that are integrated:
Solar energy is very popular in the Caribbean. It provides an alternative source of energy and helps reduce the region’s dependence on fossil fuels. Applying
heat transfer principles to solar water heaters helps Learners gain knowledge of how solar panels can be used as an alternative to electric water heaters.
In February of 2017, the UN launched the #CleanSeas Campaign with the aim of engaging various governments, the public and private sectors in the fight
against marine plastic. Sixty countries worldwide have responded including Caribbean territories. There has been a ban on the import of Styrofoam as well as
plastic products in this country. Hence, the activity where Learners provide insulation to disposable cups may prove useful, since Styrofoam cups, which served
as an insulated container for warm beverages are no longer sold in our supermarkets.
258
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Space Systems
Strand (Topic): Space Systems
Understanding the nature of our universe and the privileged place that earth holds, builds responsibility to care for our environment.
Essential Learning Outcome: ELO 1 Analyse and interpret data to determine scale properties of objects in the solar system.
Clarification Statement: Emphasis is on analysing data from Earth-based instruments, space-based telescopes, and spacecraft to determine similarities and
differences among solar system objects. Examples of scale properties include the sizes of an object’s layers (such as crust and atmosphere), surface features (such as
volcanoes), and orbital radius. Examples of data include statistical information, drawings and photographs, and models.
Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include recalling facts about properties of the planets and other solar system bodies.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Distances: Exercise in Exponents How Big is the Sun Compared to the Earth?
Task Learners with completing the table. Learners are presented with the following items; basketball, golf ball,
Knowledge Planet Light Distance tennis ball, marble and 2mm bead or steel ball bearing.
• Define the terms: years from the
o relative from the sun (metres)
o exercise ball sun
o astronomers mercury 0.39 3.71 x 1015
o scientific notation venus 0.72 6.84 x 1015
o light year mars 1.52 1.44 x 1016
o telescope jupiter 5.20 4.94 x 1016
o Hubble space saturn 9.54 9.06 x 1016
telescope uranus 19.20 1.82 x 1017
o universe neptune 30.06 2.86 x 1017
o Kepler telescope Data retrieved from:
o Milky Way Galaxy https://science.howstuffworks.com/planets-
o NASA in-order.htm
o period of orbit
259
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Demonstrate they Calculating Circumference of Planets
understand distances are
large in the universe The formula for circumference of a circle is C
• Compare distances between =2𝜋𝑟 where π=3.14
planets Task Learners with calculating the
circumference of each planet based on the
• Show relative size of earth
radius data shown in the table below.
and sun
• Account for differences in
Planet Radius Circumfer
temperature on planet
(km) ence
surfaces.
(km)
• Explain the concept of a
mercury 2440 15323
light year and why it is
venus 6052 38007
needed.
mars 3390 21289
jupiter 69,911 439041
Skills Learners, if the earth was represented as the small bead (or ball bearing),
saturn 58,232 365697
• Observe and interpret video which of these objects do you think best represents the relative size of
uranus 25,362 159273
evidence the sun. The word relative means by comparing two things. For example,
neptune 24,622 154626
• Create pie graphs and you are probably shorter relative to the height of your parent.
Data retrieved from:
histograms from data tables
https://science.howstuffworks.com/planets-
• Calculate large distances Learners write down their choices.
in-order.htm
using scientific notation and You may be surprised but the relative size of the sun is actually bigger
Teacher note: You may decide to use this
exponential rules for than the basketball! Have you ever seen an exercise ball? (show an actual
opportunity to show how a spreadsheet could
mathematics. ball or a picture- see below)
be used to calculate the circumference data
• Calculate circumferences
above.
using a formula and
scientific notations.
If the earth has a radius of 6371 km, how many
• Interpret planetary models. times bigger is the circumference of Jupiter?
• Build planetary models. Earth circumference = 2πr =
• Research the internet for 2(3.14)(6371km)=
planetary information. 40,010 km
• Develop literacy skills Circumference of Jupiter /circumference of
through extended use of Earth = 439041/40010 = 10.97
Jupiter is 11 times bigger in circumference.
260
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
adjectives to describe Living on Mars – two-page report Retrieved from: https://www.fitball.com.au/product/opti-ball
planetary landscapes. Mars seems to be the most habitable planet
• Give examples of planetary after earth of course! Learners should do If the earth is represented as a ball bearing, the sun should be as a large as
research that has capitalized internet research and create a two-page report an exercise ball.
on using different types of that answers the following questions:
telescopes. Learners, you may have seen an earth-sun model similar to the one shown
• Interpret data on the ➢ With current space craft, how long is it here but I think you will agree, this is not an accurate representation of
planetary moons. likely to take to travel from earth to the relative size of the earth and the sun.
mars?
• Hypothesize why
➢ What resources exits on mars that
temperatures on planet
could be helpful to humans?
surfaces are not only
➢ What is the composition of the
dependent on proximity to
atmosphere and could it support life
sun (trapped gases in the
forms like plants and animals?
atmosphere)
➢ What is the surface of the plant like
• Communicate internet
and how would humans travel on
research results.
mars?
• Contrast planetary
➢ Is there a source of water to support
properties.
living things?
➢ An example of a real picture from the
surface? Retrieved from: https://www.eiscolabs.com/products/bd0075
➢ What are our homes projected to
Attitudes/Values
resemble on mars? How Far Apart are the Bodies in Our Solar System?
• Appreciate the vastness of Creative Writing Learners can be taken out in the school yard to map out the relative
the universe and the distance between the sun and all the planets.
magnitude of the distances Have Learners watch the video below of the 1. Cut 10 strings each 3 meters in length. These strings each
to neighboring planets.
pictures scientists currently have of planetary represent 500 x 106 km of distance (that is 500,000,000 km). Give
• Interest/Curiosity in the
surfaces. a string to each group for their respective planet.
science of observing the
In their own words, have them write 2. Refer to the following table. It shows the distances in our solar
universe with new
descriptive paragraphs of each of the planets
system. Share this with Learners and explain that ten to the
technologies.
represented. As a game, pairs of Learners
• Respect for the uniqueness should try to guess which planet is being power of six essentially means 6 zeros added to the number.
of the earth and its described as their partner reads their paragraph.
261
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
resources as it supports Video: Celestial Body Distance from sun
living things. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DXVGQ (x 106km)
• Care for the earth as a i3TreQ (8:03 mins) Mercury 57.9
special planet that supports
Venus 108.2
human beings. Teacher note: This is an opportunity to help
• Inquiry attitude researching Learners extend their use of adjectives to Earth 149.6
the properties of other describe landscapes. Direct them to the Mars 227.9
bodies in the universe. following websites to help them add to their Jupiter 778.3
descriptive words as they attempt to capture
• Collaboration &
the essence of the planetary pictures. Saturn 1427
Cooperation as Learners
undertake calculations See: https://capitalizemytitle.com/landscape- Uranus 2873
words/
• When conducting practical Neptune 4498
and group work, display
https://prezi.com/st9rxjgomh5p/describing- Pluto 5914
sensitivity and offer
landscape/ Our Moon Distance from earth
assistance to peers who may
0.382
have physical or learning
challenges.
3. With the teacher representing the sun, each celestial body group
• Participate actively in
classroom discussions. will use their string to measure how far their celestial body will be
Creating models
from the sun. Keep in mind the distance may be a fraction of the
string or a multiple of the string length.
Teacher Examples to explain to Learners.
➢ The relative distance of Pluto from the sun is ~12 string
lengths because 500 x 106km x 11 is nearly equivalent to
5914 x 106km. The student group representing Pluto would
fold the string end for end 12 times and stand this distance
from the sun.
➢ Similarly, Mercury is about 1/10 of a string length because
Retrieved from:
57.9/500 is about a tenth. Learners would estimate a tenth of
https://content.instructables.com/F2S/JZKP/
their string length and stand that distance from the sun.
J8AGO49N/F2SJZKPJ8AGO49N.jpg?auto=
webp
262
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Using a teacher provided scale (e.g., 1 cm = 4. Were Learners surprised, the planets are not evenly spaced, some
1,000 km), create a model of the solar system are very close in a group and others are very far away. Remind
with everyday objects to represent planets.
them that Pluto has recently been removed from the designation
of planet. The outer planets are very cold because they are so
Materials:
distant from the sun.
•Ruler or measuring tape
See distance activity video here:
•Objects from the environment
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wwz4Ff68Vt4 (1:45 mins)
Instructions:
1. Size Comparison: Have Learners use the
Distances in Space
diameters of planets to scale their models. For
Distances between the sun and planets in space are very large. They are
example, if Earth is 12,742 km and you choose
so large that we would be placing many zeros after the number. For that
a smaller scale, like 1 cm = 1,000 km, Earth
reason, astronomers (those who investigate the stars) use an easier unit.
would be about 12.74 cm in diameter.
2. Distance calculations: Using the scale and
Light from your flashlight (torch) travels very fast.
data for the actual distances between the
If you turn on that light while in the dark and cast the beam at an object
planets and the Sun, calculate how far each
even across the street, it seems to instantly appear.
planet should be from the Sun in the model.
In fact light travels at 300,000,000 metres per second; scientists use a
3.Construct Models: Learners will find
notation that accounts for all of those zeros as a multiple of 10.
various objects to match the sizes and place
300,000,000 =3 x 10 x10 x 10 x 10 x 10 x 10 x 10 x 10 =3 x 108 m/s
them the correct distances apart
(note the exponent number above the ten which accounts for 8 multiples
4.Display: Have Learners present their models
of 10 and the zeros) This short hand (3 x 108 m/s) is called scientific
and discuss the differences in size and distance
notation.
Why Do We Thrive on Earth- Quiz
The scientists then express distance as how far light travels in one year
and call that a light year. If you calculate the number of seconds in a year
Multiple-Choice Questions
and then multiply by the speed of light in (m/s) you will get the distance
1. What is one reason Earth can support life?
in metres. Let us do the math for the distance light travels in one year!
a. Earth is the largest planet in the solar system.
b. Earth has water in all three forms (solid,
60 s/min x 60 mins/hr x 24 hr/day x 365 days/yr = 31,536,000
liquid, gas).
seconds/yr
c. Earth is closest to the Sun.
Teacher note: take this opportunity to show Learners how the units
d. Earth has the shortest day/night cycle.
when multiplied and divided give the proper unit result. Avoid using the
263
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Answer: b word cancel and instead say mins/mins = 1 > anything multiplied by one
is itself!
2. Which of the following is essential for living 3 x 108 m/s x 3.1536 x 107 seconds/yr = 9.5 x 1015m/yr
organisms to survive on Earth? Point out that the exponents of 10 are additive here.
a. Extreme temperatures
b. A thick layer of ice Interesting Facts: Video Resources
c. An atmosphere containing oxygen Learners are given the following questions to consider as they watch the
d. No atmosphere at all two videos. They should write down their answers as the videos are
Answer: c played.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w36yxLgwUOc (4:21 mins)
3. How does Earth's atmosphere protect life? https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZHAqT4hXnMw (1:58 mins)
a. It keeps water vapour in space.
b. It reflects all sunlight away from Earth. 1. Which is the biggest planet in the solar system? (Jupiter)
c. It blocks harmful radiation from the Sun. 2. Which is the smallest planet? (Mercury)
d. It makes Earth the hottest planet. 3. What is in the center of the solar system? (sun)
Answer: c 4. What is the main source of light in the solar system? (sun)
5. Which planet supports life? (Earth)
Short Answer Questions 6. Which of the planets has the most moons around it? (Saturn)
7. Which planet is known as the ice giant? (Neptune)
1. Explain why liquid water is necessary for life 8. Which planet is the red planet? (Mars)
on Earth.
(Water is essential because all living organisms need it How Do We Observe the Solar System?
for survival. It helps with biological processes such as
transporting nutrients and removing waste.) Learners, have you ever wondered how scientists are able to view the
planets in outer space?
2. How does Earth's distance from the Sun One of the first tools for space exploration was the telescope. It gave
contribute to supporting life? scientists their first look at what exists beyond Earth’s atmosphere.
(Earth’s distance from the Sun places it in the Telescopes use lenses and mirrors to observe outer space.
"habitable zone," where temperatures are just right for
liquid water to exist. It’s not too hot or too cold for life.)
3. What role does the atmosphere play in
keeping Earth’s temperatures stable for life?
264
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
(Earth’s atmosphere helps trap heat from the Sun,
keeping temperatures warm enough for living organisms
while also blocking harmful solar radiation.)
Interpreting Moon Data
Learners should be tasked with answering the
following questions about the graph below
Retrieved from: https://images-na.ssl-images-
amazon.com/images/I/41omDLDHm2L._UL500_.jpg
The telescope is no longer an Earth-bound instrument. In 1990, the
Hubble Space Telescope was sent into outer space. It’s now been there
for over 30 years. It has sent back pictures of our universe that couldn’t
have been taken in any other way.
Retrieved from:
https://i0.wp.com/tutortugas.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/12/moons.png?fit=240
0%2C1350&ssl=1
Questions:
1. Which planet has the most moons? (Saturn)
2. Which planets have the same number of
moons? (Mercury, Venus)
3. What is the total number of moons? (205)
Retrieved from: https://science.nasa.gov/wp-
4. What is the difference between the number
content/uploads/2023/07/hubble-space-telescope-hst-
of moons for Jupiter and Neptune? (65)
6.jpg?w=4096&format=jpeg
5. What is the average number of moons for
the planets? (25.625)
6. Round the average number of moons in Thanks to the Kepler telescope, launched in 2009, scientists now know
number five to the nearest whole number. (26) that there are possibly over 3,000 planets orbiting more than 2,000 stars
265
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
in the Milky Way galaxy.(see:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Milky_Way)
Retrieved from: https://images-assets.nasa.gov/image/ARC-2006-
ACD06-0131-014/ARC-2006-ACD06-0131-
014~large.jpg?w=1920&h=1275&fit=clip&crop=faces%2Cfocalpoint
Probes, such as NASA’s Cassini probe, have been sent to explore other
planets.
Retrieved from: https://science.nasa.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2023/06/Spacecraft_heating_up_in_Saturns_atmosp
here-jpeg.webp?w=1280
266
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Atmospheres of Planets
Learners will have done the outdoor planetary distance activity but as a
review the teacher can show this picture of the order of the planetary
distances even if the relative distances are inaccurate.
Retrieved from: https://starlust.org/the-planets-in-order-from-the-sun/
Now ask Learners which planets they think are likely to be the warmest.
(those that are closest to the sun)
Next ask them to observe the following chart showing the average
temperatures of the planets. When you consider the distance of each
planet from the sun are there any pieces of data that don’t make sense?
What do they notice that doesn’t make sense?
(You would expect the closest planet to the sun to be the hottest but in fact Venus is
hotter than Mercury)
Have Learners speculate why that might be the case.
267
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Probe Learners as to their recollection of global warming and how fossil
fuel produced gases in the earth’s atmosphere seem to reflect heat back
down to the surface.
Explanation: Venus has a dense atmosphere of carbon dioxide which is denser than
Mercury’s atmosphere- Venus tends to hold the heat more as a result.
Retrieved from: https://templates.mindthegraph.com/temperature-of-
the-planets/temperature-of-the-planets-infographic-template-preview-
1.png
Teacher Note: Do not make the analogy of earth’s humidity and the
feeling of heat being linked to density of water in the air. The air is
actually less dense on humid days than dry days. (H O weighs 18 grams
2
268
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
mole whereas oxygen (O ) is 32! Applying the same force, a cricket ball
2
will go further on a humid day compared to a dry day because the
atmosphere is less dense!
Supporting Life on Planets
The earth is different from the other planets in our solar system because
of its ability to support life due to the high level of oxygen (20%) in its
atmosphere.
Have Learners observe the pie chart below and pose this question…
If you had 100 L of gases in eth earth atmosphere, how much of it would
be:
• oxygen (21 L)
• nitrogen (78 L)
• carbon dioxide (0.04 L)
Retrieved from:
https://scied.ucar.edu/sites/default/files/media/images/3d_gases_in_at
mosphere_pie_chart_2.jpg
Mars has been suggested as a possible place for humans to inhabit. Based
on the following table draw a pie chart that show the distribution of gases
in the Mars atmosphere.
269
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://www.nasa.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2015/01/yoss_act_4.pdf
Charting the Planetary Orbits
Explain to Learners that the time for a planet to circle the sun is called
the period of the orbit.
Given the data represented in the following picture, Learners should be
tasked with drawing a bar graph (histogram) of the planetary orbit
periods.
Retrieved from: https://starlust.org/the-planets-in-order-from-the-sun/
270
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Additional Resources and Materials
More About Telescopes: https://youtu.be/XB0Er2eZn54 (0:00 - 6:00 min
Scientific notation: https://www.dummies.com/article/academics-the-arts/math/basic-math/how-to-write-in-scientific-notation-149989/
Doing Calculations in Excel Spreadsheet: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jl0Qk63z2ZY (12:28 mins)
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Solar System overview: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=libKVRa01L8 (4:10 mins)
Solar System animation: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z8aBZZnv6y8 (2:40 mins)
Building a Model of the Solar System: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K6dqHEoj-AU (4:38 mins)
Opportunities for Subject Integration
Mathematics: calculations/graphical preparation and analysis
Language arts: research, project communication, creative writing, adjectives for describing planetary surfaces
Social Studies: Care for the uniqueness and privilege of living on earth
Creative arts/ TVET: building models
271
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: ELO 2: Construct and present arguments using evidence to support the claim that gravitational interactions are
attractive and depend on the masses of interacting objects.
Clarification Statement: Examples of evidence for arguments could include data generated from simulations or digital tools; and charts displaying mass,
strength of interaction, distance from the Sun, and orbital periods of objects within the solar system.
Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include Newton’s Law of Gravitation or Kepler’s Laws.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Multiple Choice Quiz Conversation/Discussion
Begin the class by taking Learners outside and giving each
Knowledge 1. What type of force is gravity?
one a small toy. Ask them to throw their toy as far up into
• Define the terms: A) A force that pushes objects away from each other
the air as possible on the count of three.
o force B) A force that pulls objects toward each other
o invisible force C) A force that only affects objects on Earth Ask Learners these questions to facilitate discussion
o gravity Correct Answer: B) A force that pulls objects toward
o period of planetary each other 1. What happened to the toys? (they fell to the ground)
orbits 2. Why did the toys fall to the ground when
o satellite 2. Which statement best explains how gravity released? Some will say it is because of something called
o tides exerted by a body affects two objects with gravity.
o mass different masses? 3. Is it a force that we can see? (no it is invisible)
o weight A) Gravity pulls equally on both objects, regardless of 4. Do things ever fall on an angle or only straight
o multiple their masses. down? (straight down)
o fraction B) The object with more mass experiences a stronger
o geostationary satellite gravitational pull. The teacher can then restate that “gravity” is an invisible
orbit C) Gravity pushes objects with less mass away from attractive force that pulls things downward towards the
the larger object.
centre of the earth.
• Demonstrate an understanding Correct Answer: B) The object with more mass
experiences a stronger gravitational pull.
that gravitational interactions Ask Learners to jump a few times. Then ask why they
occur between Earth and other always fall back instead of floating off. (When you jump, you
objects, such as the Moon and 3. Why do objects fall toward Earth when always come back down to the ground. This happens because
dropped?
Sun. Earth’s gravity pulls you back)
• Compare and contrast the
masses and gravitational pull of
272
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
different planets, the sun and A) Earth's gravity pulls the objects toward its center. Do you know of any other objects that exert gravity?
moon. B) The objects are being pushed by air. (Expected responses: sun, moon, other planets)
C) The objects are too heavy to stay in the air.
• Explain that the strength of Correct Answer: A) Earth's gravity pulls the objects Ask the Learners if they think the moon has gravity of its
gravitational interactions toward its center. own. Ask them to give evidence. (it pulls spaceships to the
depends on the mass of the surface; it pulls on the water on the earth and affects our tides)
objects involved. 4. Which of the following best supports the claim Restate that it seems that planets and moons have their
• Explain that the force of gravity that the strength of gravity depends on the mass own gravity.
becomes weaker as the distance of the objects?
A) A small rock and a large boulder both fall at the What Determines the Strength of Gravitational Pull?
between two objects increases.
same speed. Ask Learners to look at the tables below and see if they
B) The Moon orbits around Earth because of Earth’s can find any patterns that relate the mass of the planet and
• Demonstrate an understanding
gravity. its gravity. (higher mass leads to higher gravity)
that weight is the force of
C) A person weighs more on Earth than on the Moon
gravity acting on an object’s
because Earth is more massive.
mass.
Correct Answer: C) A person weighs more on Earth
than on the Moon because Earth is more massive.
• Explain why satellites orbit
without falling to earth.
5. What would happen if Earth’s mass decreased
by half?
Skills
A) The gravitational pull on objects would increase.
• Observe the behaviour of
B) The gravitational pull on objects would stay the
magnets to make an analogy to
same.
gravity.
C) The gravitational pull on objects would decrease.
Correct Answer: C) The gravitational pull on objects
• Infer mass is related to would decrease.
gravitational force by inspecting
tabulated data. 6. Which of the following is an example of
gravitational interaction?
• Classify planets based on mass A) The Moon orbiting around Earth.
and exerted gravity. B) A person pushing a car.
C) A balloon floating in the air.
Correct Answer: A) The Moon orbiting around
Earth.
273
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Measure strength of magnetic
forces as it relates to distance 7. Which of the following factors affects the
and mass. strength of gravitational force between two
objects?
• Use evidence from observations A) The distance between the objects
B) The temperature of the objects
and experiments to support
C) The speed of the objects
scientific claims.
Correct Answer: A) The distance between the objects
• Compare and contrast data to
8. Which of the following explains why astronauts
draw conclusions about how
float in space?
mass and distance influence the
A) There is no gravity in space. If we look at the sun or the planets with the greatest mass,
strength of gravity.
B) Gravity in space pushes them upward. they also have the greatest gravitational force.
C) They are in free-fall, but Earth’s gravity is still So then strength of gravity depends directly on mass
• Hypothesize why planetary
pulling them. of the object exerting the attracting force.
temperatures are related to
Correct Answer: C) They are in free-fall, but Earth’s
more than distance from the
gravity is still pulling them. Video Review
sun by analysing data.
Have Learners write down the following questions before
9. What would happen to the gravitational force they watch the video below so you promote active
• Interpret information from
between two objects if the distance between them listening.
informational videos and
increased? https://youtu.be/suQDwZcnJdg (3:01 mins)
models.
A) The gravitational force would stay the same.
B) The gravitational force would increase. 1. What keeps us from floating off into space?
• Communicate and explain
C) The gravitational force would decrease. (gravity)
research from the internet on Correct Answer: C) The gravitational force would 2. Who discovered gravity? (Sir Isaac Newton)
tides. decrease. 3. What does the size of the gravitational pull
depend on? (the mass of the object)
• Explain with a model how 10. Why is the Sun able to keep the planets in 4. What happens because of the gravitational pull of
satellites maintain an orbit. orbit around it? the moon? (the tides)
A) The Sun’s mass creates a strong gravitational force.
• Compare and contrast concepts B) The Sun’s heat pulls the planets toward it.
of mass and weight. C) The Sun’s light attracts the planets toward it.
Correct Answer: A) The Sun’s mass creates a strong
gravitational force.
274
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Construct a newspaper article Explaining the Tides on Earth Reinforcing the Variable Mass Using a Magnet
based on a true event (Apollo Learners should be tasked with explaining why we Analogy
13) have high tides on opposite sides of the earth. They
can do internet research but their submission to the Have Learners use magnets to investigate the effect of
• Calculate weight of humans on teacher should include a clear diagram with logical mass and distance on gravitational pull.
explanation. ***Learners should be encouraged to use
other planets.
a magnet model where strength of attraction and
distance are the controlling variables.
• Investigate information about
Learners may use the following website as a primary
orbits.
source for their assignment:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3RdkXs8BibE
• Compile/analyse data on
(5:10 mins)
magnetic attraction.
Why Do Planets Orbit the Sun
Attitudes/Values
The sun is pulling on the orbiting planet with its
gravity and you would expect the planet to fall to the https://arcscrap.com/wp-
• Appreciate the importance of
sun’s surface just the way a ball tossed in the air on content/uploads/2022/09/shutterstock_1630046611.jpg
using evidence to support
earth will certainly fall to the earth’s surface. But that
scientific claims.
doesn’t happen because the planet has momentum Magnets exert a similar pull to that of gravity
away from the surface of the sun. Think of a ball at
• Have confidence in the the end of string that you swing around in a circle. As Place Learners in groups and provide each group with two
ingenuity of humans to solve long as you hold the string, the ball will continue in a magnets, one large and one small (respective magnets
problems and endeavor to
circle. The string represents gravity and the swinging should be of the same size and strength) and magnetic
develop these skills in school
motion that keeps the ball on its path represents the objects of the same mass.
momentum the planet has trying to leave the sun. If
• Value evidence-based reasoning we drop the string (i.e. remove sun’s gravity), the ball Learners will investigate magnetic objects of the same
and understand that scientific would continue on a straight path away from us. mass placed at different distances away from the magnet.
arguments need to be Learners should revisit the alternate explanation
supported by observations and shown here: They experiment using the small magnet first then repeat
data. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wwYegvdEJHg using the large one. Learners record observations on a
record sheet.
• Demonstrate perseverance One-page Response Paper
when faced with challenges in Learners are expected to review the following internet
sources and respond to the following questions.
275
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
understanding complex Resources:
Investigating magnetic pull
concepts like gravity. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DVF3rK6ML_8
(2:54 mins)
• Develop curiosity about how https://www.nesdis.noaa.gov/news/why-dont- What do you think will happen to the object as it is
gravity works and its effects on satellites-fall-out-of-the-sky moved further away from the magnet?
everyday life.
Questions: Hypothesis:
• Be open to exploring new ideas 1. When communication satellites are launched
and revising their thinking into space- why don’t they simply fall back to
earth? (Communication satellites stay in orbit Distance Observation
based on new evidence.
because they balance the Earth’s gravitational pull
with their forward motion, ensuring they continually 2 cm
• Recognize the value of careful
“fall” around the Earth rather than back to its
experimentation and critical
10 cm
surface. The Earth’s gravitational pull, which
thinking.
constantly attracts satellites towards itself, acts as a
20 cm
tether pulling the satellite inward while the forward
• Develop a positive attitude
motion of the satellite at high speeds creates a force
toward learning and 30 cm
that counteracts gravity)
investigation,
2. How do you get satellites to orbit at higher
Conclusion
altitudes? (you give the satellite more initial velocity
• Demonstrate a willingness to
to get it further away from the earth before it begins to
collaborate and share ideas with
respond to the earth’s gravity and pull it into an orbit)
their peers As the Learners share their results, the teacher should
3. What is a geostationary satellite orbit and
attempt to inductively pull out two important features:
why might it help certain regions of the earth
• Practice safety when conducting benefit from consistent communication? (If
experiments the satellite is rocketed to 36,000 kms, it will 1. (The force of attraction is greatest, the closer the object is to
actually orbit at the same rate as the earth is rotating.
the magnet and the weakest when the object is furthest
• When conducting practical and This means the satellite will reside over the same away.
2. The force of attraction is greatest, the larger the magnet is.
group work, display sensitivity region of the earth permanently- called a geostationary
and offer assistance to peers orbit)
The Sun’s Gravity
who may have physical or 4. What causes satellites to eventually fall to the
The Sun has the largest mass in our planetary system and
learning challenges earth’s surface? (Satellites may encounter increase
therefore possesses a very large gravitational force. This
density of atmosphere that causes drag on the angular
force is enough that the planets are held in orbits, the
velocity of the satellite. Because the ability of the
completion of which, take varying amounts of time. We
276
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Participate actively in classroom satellite to stay in orbit is so closely adjusted to its saw the period of planetary orbits in the last lesson
discussions. angular velocity at a horizontal to the earth, any (earth is 365 days).
change in that velocity can allow for gravity to take Teacher note: The nature of orbits and the role of gravity
over the balance and pull the satellite to the ground) are explained here in these video resources.
https://howthingsfly.si.edu/flight-dynamics/gravity-orbit
Apollo 13- A Successful Failure https://youtu.be/VfdBgUwn9RU (2:49 mins)
https://youtu.be/ffGDxGQpHb4 0:00 (2:05 mins)
After an unexpected explosion on their spacecraft
enroute to the moon, the crew onboard and at NASA The Moon’s Gravity
devised a way to use the moon’s gravity to slingshot Ask the Learners what they know about the moon’s
them back to earth. You can read the story here gravity. Ask them to give evidence. (it pulls spaceships to the
https://www.planetary.org/space-missions/apollo-13 surface; it pulls on the water on the earth and affects our tides)
Restate that planets and moons have their own gravity.
Write a one-page newspaper article that responds to https://youtu.be/vwfbdPyzgDo (3:54 mins)
the following questions.
➢ What actually happened on the spacecraft? Learners look at this video of an astronaut walking on the
➢ What impact did it have on the intended moon. How does walking look different on the moon
mission? compared to the earth? (the astronaut appears to be bouncing
➢ What was the primary concern of the while walking on the moon)
astronauts and NASA? https://youtu.be/NHeOpJh5Q-M (0:30 mins)
➢ How do you think the astronauts felt about Why does the astronaut seem to bounce on the moon’s
their possible demise? surface?
➢ What was the clever solution to get the
astronauts back home safely? When Learners look at the force of gravity on the moon
➢ How does this experience demonstrate the compared to earth (1.62 versus 9.8 m/s2 or 9.8
ingenuity of humans to solve problems? Newtons/Kg) they should be able to explain why
➢ Why is problem solving crucial in our astronauts tend to bounce across the moon’s surface
compared to a walk on the earth. (the gravity on the moon is a
education system?
fraction less than 1/5th of the earth’s gravity- the force you normally
use to lift your foot when walking on earth would be 5 x what you
need on the moon so your body would overcompensate)
277
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The Moon and Tides
Earth has one moon which is kept in orbit by its
gravitational pull. This moon is a natural satellite of
Earth. Also, when the sun and moon line up around the
earth, their combined gravity causes higher tides as the
water is pulled away from the earth’s surface.
Retrieved from: https://qph.cf2.quoracdn.net/main-
qimg-c75266afb398b22afc6531f0f12b05b6-lq
278
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from: https://cdn.britannica.com/81/94581-
050-531CAC1F/Effects-gravity-Earth-Moon.jpg
Teacher note: If Learners have difficulty with the orbit
explanation above, return to the following analogy to help
them with the concept of the moon’s orbit and also
satellites that are placed in orbit around the earth.
See: https://howthingsfly.si.edu/flight-dynamics/gravity-
orbit
How are mass and weight different ideas?
Our body has the same mass no matter where we are in
the universe. However, because planets and moons have
different gravitational pull, our weight is different
depending on which of these planets we visited. When
standing on a scale, a person’s weight is a measure of
Earth’s gravitational pull on their mass. On planets with
stronger or weaker gravity than Earth, a person’s weight
would change even though their mass stays the same.
How Much Would We Weigh on Different Planets?
Gravity on Earth is 9.8 m/s2
The table below shows gravity on other planets.
279
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Share the table with Learners. Walk through an example
of how to calculate a person’s weight on another planet.
Sample Calculations
On Jupiter
On Earth, a person weighs 100lbs or 45.4 kg
How much will they weigh on Jupiter?
Gravity on Jupiter is 24.9 m/s2
This is a multiple of the gravity on Earth. How much
greater is the gravity on Jupiter?
24.9/9.8 =2.54 times greater
Therefore a 100 lb person x 2.54 = 254 lbs (~115 kg)
On Mercury
On Earth, a person weighs 100lbs or 45.4 kg
How much will they weigh on Mercury?
Gravity on Mercury is 3.7 m/s2
This is a fraction of the gravity on Earth. How much less
is the gravity on Mercury?
3.7/9.8 =0.378 times (a little over a third the weight)
Therefore a 100 lb person x 0.378 = 37.8 lbs (~17 kg)
280
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Based on these sample calculations, Learners are expected
to complete the following table for 100 lb person.
Planet Weight of 100 lb person
Mars
Neptune
Venus
Saturn
Uranus
Compare their results with the following:
Retrieved from: https://spaceplace.nasa.gov/what-is-
gravity/en/
Additional Resources and Materials
Life on the International Space Station (ISS): https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tgRMAVoHRbk (4:28 mins)
Orbits and Earth’s Seasons: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wwYegvdEJHg (2:53 mins)
Phet Simulations (orbits & gravity): https://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulations/gravity-and-orbits
Greenhouse Affect: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7IwPFXzLH8c&t=13s (4:03 mins)
Atmosphere Traps Heat: https://climatekids.nasa.gov/kids-guide-to-climate-change/
Gases in the Atmosphere That Trap Heat: https://climatekids.nasa.gov/greenhouse-cards/
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
NASA Resources: https://www.nasa.gov/learning-resources/for-educators/for-educators-grades-5-8/
Space Resources: https://sciencetrek.org/topics/planets/resources
281
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
https://teachers-ab.libguides.com/planets/resources
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics: collecting data/interpreting data/calculations of weight
Language Arts: reading online resources/creative writing/sorting information
Social Studies/TVET: problem solving/human inventiveness
282
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
History of the Earth
Strand (Topic): History of the Earth
Understanding the processes that have shaped earth over the millennia helps us to tap into our resources and predict /respond to natural disasters.
Essential Learning Outcome: ELO 1: Analyse and interpret data on the distribution of fossils and rocks, continental shapes, and seafloor structures to
provide evidence of the past plate motions
Clarification Statement: Examples of data include similarities of rock and fossil types on different continents, the shapes of the continents (including continental
shelves), and the locations of ocean structures (such as ridges, fracture zones, and trenches)
Assessment Boundary: Paleomagnetic anomalies in oceanic and continental crust are not assessed.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Student Response Paper Pangaea: The Forgotten Continent
Have Learners on a single page, present the
Knowledge argument that there is scientific evidence that Learners, let us look at a globe or map of the world. Have you ever
• Define the terms: Pangaea existed and that the continents have noticed the shapes of the continents seem to be somehow
o complimentary since drifted apart. complementary- that is, they could fit together like a jigsaw puzzle?
o Pangaea (fossils confirming the same living things lived on the Well, we wouldn’t be the first ones to notice that and for scientist
o continental drift boundaries of the past continent) many years ago it certainly made them curious about the history of
o core the earth!
o mantle New Words Used Everywhere
o crust Converge – means to come together Show learners a diagram of Pangaea, the supercontinent, and explain
o tectonic plates Sentence: The cars converged at the that it existed around 250 million years ago.
o convection currents intersection.
o plate margins Diverge- means to move apart or depart from
o ocean ridges the normal
o lithosphere Sentence: The girl was a divergent thinker; she
o constructive or came up with innovative ideas outside of the
divergent shift box!
.How are Volcanoes Formed?
283
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
o destructive or
convergent shift Based on the models they have observed in
o transform or class, have Learners explain the type of tectonic
conservative shift process they believe generates volcanoes.
o subduction/subduction
zones
o fault line
o tsunamis
o volcanoes
• Demonstrate they understand
how fossil records support the Retrieved from:
idea of a single continent https://www.bgs.ac.uk/discovering-
Retrieved from:
(Pangaea) geology/earth-hazards/volcanoes/how-
https://www.elephango.com/index.cfm/pg/k
volcanoes-form-2/
12learning/lcid/13382/The_Supercontinent:_
• Compare different types of
Where_Is_It_Now
tectonic movement processes Tsunamis
In a poster, student groups should include the
following: Explain that over millions of years, the tectonic plates beneath
• Give examples of fossil records
➢ What is a tsunami? Earth’s surface slowly moved, causing Pangaea to break apart into the
that support Pangaea’s
➢ An example of a tsunami that has continents we see today. This process is called continental drift,
existence.
occurred on earth. proposed by Alfred Wegener in 1912. It is a widely held theory that
➢ Show a map of where the tsunami can be accounted for using fossils records. Explain that Alfred
occurred. Wegener gave the German name Urkontinent to a single land mass
Skills
➢ Use a diagram to show the tectonic on the face of the earth in early geologic time. More often referred to
• Analyse media that
process that led to the tsunami. now as Pangaea.
demonstrate the separation of
➢ Describe the damage to the community Video resource: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QhldiOaFqpE
Pangaea into smaller
that experienced the tsunami. (0:55 mins)
continents.
➢ How can the impact of tsunamis be
reduced or prepared for? Proposed Timeline of Continental Drift
• Show with diagrams the three
types of tectonic plate
interactions.
• Account for the formation of
Earthquakes
ocean ridges.
284
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
In a poster, student groups should include the
• Account for the formation of following:
folded mountains. ➢ What is an earthquake?
➢ An example of an earthquake that has
• Account for the formation of occurred on earth.
volcanoes ➢ Show a map of where the earthquake
• Communicate your occurred.
understanding of how ➢ Use a diagram to show the tectonic
earthquakes occur. process that led to the earthquake.
➢ Describe the damage to the community
that experienced the earthquake.
• Construct models of tectonic
➢ How can the impact of earthquakes be Retrieved from: https://geography.name/continental-drift/
plate interactions.
reduced or prepared for?
Video Resource:
• Calculate continental drift
Continental Drift https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wq9kLzm36h0 (1:21 mins)
based on observed trends.
In class conversion problem for Learners.
How Did These Land Masses Move Apart?
• Investigate qualitative and If the rate of increased continental separation of Pose the following questions to Learners. While they watch the video
quantitative ($) impacts of North America and Africa is estimated at 2.5 below, they should write down the answers to these questions they
natural disasters such as cm/yr, how long will it take for the separation find in the video Teacher note: questions prior to a video promotes
earthquakes and tsunamis. to grow by 1 meter? active listening/viewing!
Video resource: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vxmoxDznXe4
• Practice the use of new 1 meter = 100 cm (6:47 mins)
vocabulary in project work.
100cm /2.5 cm per yr= 40 years
Questions:
Attitudes/Values Did You Know? 1. What are the three parts that make up the earth? (core, mantle,
The Mariana Trench in the Pacific Ocean is crust)
• Appreciate that continental deeper that Mount Everest is tall! 2. Which is the thinnest layer? (the crust)
drift happens over a very long On 10 November 2020, the Chinese 3. What is the combination of the upper mantle and crust
period of time. submersible Fendouzhe reached the bottom of called? (lithosphere)
the Mariana Trench at a depth of 10,909 m 4. What are the pieces called that make up the divisions in the
• Appreciate that estimates of (35,791 ft; 5,965 fathoms). lithosphere? (tectonic plates)
fossil age are based on scientific 5. What is the movement of plates over time called? (plate
data but remain estimates. tectonics or continental drift)
285
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Have Learners research the internet to discover 6. How do we know that the continents were once joined?
• Interest/Curiosity in how how the trench was likely formed. (Duplicate fossils have ben found on each side of the boundaries where
landforms are created especially Primary source: the continents were once joined.)
in our own region. https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/news/planet- 7. What causes the plates to move? (convection currents in the
postcard-mariana-trench mantle)
• Respect for Evidence of fossils 8. What are plate margins? (places where the tectonic plates meet)
9. What are three types of processes at the plate margins?
(constructive-divergent, destructive-convergent &transform-conservative)
• When conducting practical and
10. In what direction do plates move in a divergent tectonic
group work, display sensitivity
shift? (plates move apart)
and offer assistance to peers
11. What do divergent processes create? (mid-Atlantic ridge)
who may have physical or
learning challenges.
• Participate actively in classroom
discussions.
12. In what direction do plates move in a convergent tectonic
shift? (towards each other)
13. What are the two ways that convergent processes create landforms?
Sketch a picture) what do the each form?
286
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
One plate is forced up, while one is forced under (deep trenches)
Plates collide and are both forced upward. (fold mountains)
14. Describe the plate movement in a conservative tectonic shift?
(plates slide along each either opposed in direction or alongside each other
at different speeds)
Transform or conservative tectonic shifts.
15. What types of earth events occur as a result of conservative
tectonic shifts? Give an example.
(Earthquakes along boundaries fault lines- San Andresa fault California)
287
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
San Andreas fault California; site of a conservative tectonic shift
When tectonic plates from around the world interact in such a way
that the oceanic plate (of higher density) is pushed underneath a
continental plate (of lower density) this process is called subduction.
The denser oceanic plate is forced down into the mantle where it is
heated and essentially recycled. The region where this occurs is called
a subduction zone.
In the activity below, we will try to clearly demonstrate how plates
can interact in different ways.
Student Activity: Modelling Plate Movements
Station 1: Divergent Boundary Simulation
Materials: Modelling clay, wax paper
• Roll two long strips of clay (each representing a tectonic
plate) and place them side by side on the wax paper.
• Slowly move the clay strips apart to simulate a divergent
boundary. As the plates pull apart, a gap forms between
them. Explain that this process is similar to how new ocean
floor is created at mid-ocean ridges.
288
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Explanation: When plates move apart at divergent
boundaries, magma rises from below to form new crust.
Over time, this creates features like mid-ocean ridges.
Station 2: Convergent Boundary Simulation
Materials: Two foam blocks or sponges
• Place the two blocks at the edge of the wax paper.
• Slowly push the blocks toward each other to simulate a
convergent boundary. When they collide, one block should
"subduct" (sink) under the other, demonstrating the
subduction of one tectonic plate beneath another.
• Explanation: At convergent boundaries, one plate is often
forced beneath another, leading to the formation of deep
ocean trenches and volcanic arcs. Alternatively, if two
continental plates collide (without subduction), they form
mountains, such as the Himalayas.
Station 3: Conservative or Transform Boundary Simulation
Materials: Two cardboard strips
• Cut two strips of cardboard and place them side by side on
the wax paper. These strips represent tectonic plates at a
transform boundary.
• Gently slide the strips past each other in opposite directions
to simulate a transform fault (like the San Andreas Fault).
Explanation: At transform boundaries, plates slide past each other,
which causes intense friction. The release of built-up tension results
in earthquakes.
Natural Disasters of Evidence of Plate Movements
Show Learners videos of natural disasters that show evidence of plate
tectonic movements.
289
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Video on volcanoes
Retrieved from
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R_pDKyg5YKY
Video on earthquakes
Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RqqqSnaTfQo
Video on tsunamis
Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wx9vPv-
T51I&t=65s
Fossil Evidence for Continental Drift
Distribute fossil record evidence diagrams:
Provide diagrams showing where certain fossils of ancient plants and
animals have been found. For example:
Mesosaurus (a freshwater reptile) fossils found in South America
and Africa.
Retrieved from
https://www.busaccagallery.com/catalog.php?itemid=5231
Glossopteris (an extinct plant) fossils found in South America,
Africa, Antarctica, and India.
290
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Retrieved from https://www.alamy.com/stock-photo/glossopteris-
fossil-plant.html?sortBy=relevant
Lystrosaurus (a land reptile) fossils found in Antarctica, Africa, and
India.
Retrieved from https://carnivora.net/lystrosaurus-spp-
t990.html#google_vignette
Discuss how fossils provide evidence of continental drifts.
Explain that these organisms couldn’t have crossed oceans. The fact
that similar fossils are found on continents now separated by vast
oceans suggests that these landmasses were once connected,
supporting the idea of Pangaea and continental drift.
291
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Review: On either side of past boundaries of Pangaea, there are
identical fossil records of living things.
Retrieved from:
https://www.geolsoc.org.uk/~/media/shared/images/e
ducation%20careers/KS4/Chapter%201/chapter%201
%20slide%2018.jpg?la=en
Additional Resources and Materials
Demonstrating convection currents: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0mUU69ParFM (3:04 mins)
Tectonic using Play Doh: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GX7nai2aEtw (2:39 mins)
Plate Boundaries Interact: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=luDGub4PKjw (5:57 mins)
Finding the Age of Fossils: https://www.amnh.org/exhibitions/permanent/human-origins/understanding-our-past/fossil-dating-methods
Good books: https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/59762110-plate-tectonics
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Tectonic plates: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oCPjgv2Pccc
Density of Plates Determines the Process of Subduction: https://www.khanacademy.org/science/middle-school-earth-and-space-science/x87d03b443efbea0a:the-
geosphere/x87d03b443efbea0a:plate-tectonics/v/plate-tectonics-the-ocean-floor
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics: calculating continental drift
Creative Arts: Model building
Social Studies: Impact of natural disasters to families and economies
Language Arts: Research/new vocabulary/reading primary sources/ communicating assignment deliverables
292
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Earth Systems
Strand (Topic): Earth Systems
Understanding systems on earth helps to take better care of our natural resources and protect our fragile environment.
Essential Learning Outcome: ELO 1: Develop a model to describe the cycling of water through Earth’s systems driven by energy from the sun and
the force of gravity
Clarification Statement: Emphasis is on the ways water changes its state as it moves through the multiple pathways of the hydrologic cycle. Examples of
models can be conceptual or physical.
Assessment Boundary: A quantitative understanding of the latent heats of vaporization and fusion is not assessed.
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Recall Quiz Disappearing water, what is the trick?
• The teacher sets a shallow pie pan of water out on the warm
Knowledge Multiple Choice Questions: windowsill through the day and overnight.
• Define the terms: • In the morning, the water has disappeared. Ask Learners,
o water cycle 1. What is the process by which water turns where did the water go? (up in the air)
o hydrologic cycle into vapor and rises into the atmosphere? • Do our ponds and lakes lose water sometimes? (Yes, they can
o water vapor a) Precipitation
dry up).
o evaporation b) Condensation
• Do they stay that way or is the water replaced? (Rainwater
o precipitation c) Evaporation
sometimes replaces the water that was lost from drying up).
o transpiration d) Runoff
o sublimation 2. What happens to water vapor when it
We call that a water cycle or hydrologic cycle of water loss and
o glaciers cools down and turns back into liquid?
water gain.
a) Evaporation
b) Condensation
• Demonstrate they understand
Learners, let us investigate this further
c) Transpiration
how heat energy is responsible
d) Precipitation
for the changes of state of
Simulating Water Molecules
3. What do we call the water that falls from
water.
Ask Learners, why did the water molecules behave this way?
clouds as rain, snow, sleet, or hail?
293
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Show how the energy impacts a) Evaporation • Have the Learners stand up and pretend their fists are water
water particle motion. b) Precipitation molecules. Have them simulate cold liquid water molecules
c) Condensation by moving their fists slowly back and forth and relatively
• Show how the energy impacts d) Collection close together
water particle spacing. 4. What part of the water cycle involves • Then tell them they are adding energy and heating up the
water soaking into the ground?
water -their fists move more quickly, a little further apart.
a) Collection
• Account for how global • Now tell them it is getting very warm, so they move their
b) Infiltration
warming could influence water fists more quickly and much further apart.
c) Condensation
resources by melting glaciers.
d) Evaporation
Explain that the water molecules now have enough energy to
5. Which process involves plants releasing
• Explain how gravity brings jump out of the liquid and become a gas we call water vapor.
water into the air?
water down from higher This process is called evaporation. The water vapor is still H 2 O
a) Evaporation
altitudes to sustain life at but is now in the gas form.
b) Precipitation
lower altitudes. Can we prove that the water has just changed state and not
c) Transpiration
structure?
d) Runoff
Skills Teacher Demos
• Observe the process of • Cover a bowl of water with cellophane secured with an
True or False:
evaporation and account for elastic band, string or tape.
the result. • Place a coin on top of the cellophane over the middle of
6. Water can never be destroyed or created;
the bowl. Place the bowl assembly on a windowsill in the
it just changes form in the water cycle.
• Infer from experimentation sun.
a) True
that water molecules are not • What do we see after a few hours? (We see droplets on the
b) False
broken during boiling but underside of the cellophane).
7. Condensation is the process of water
instead converted to water turning into vapor. • What are the droplets? (Liquid water molecules are slowing
vapor. a) True down as they cool and converting back from gaseous vapor to liquid
b) False water).
• Conduct an experiment which • So, we get back the water that once evaporated, it only
demonstrates transpiration. Fill in the Blanks: changed state and not form, it is still H 2 O We call this
conversion process from gas to liquid condensation.
• Communicate the importance 8. Water from lakes, rivers, and oceans
of glaciers through a poster turns into water vapor through the (see extensions of this experiment at:
project. process of _______________. https://www.yumpu.com/en/document/view/11276437/experi
ment-1-mini-water-cycle-get-2-know-h2o-learning-zone )
294
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Collect, tabulate and graph 9. The water cycle is a continuous Why does it rain?
rainfall data. movement of water between the Earth's This is an example of the experiment above. When the water
surface and the _______________. molecules get cold enough, they return from the vapor state to
• Share rainfall data with a 10. Precipitation can fall as rain, the liquid state. (Have Learners slow the motion of their fists and
_______________, snow, or hail. bring them closer together) These liquid water droplets then
cooperating school.
gather in clouds.
• Express the change of state of Short Answer Questions: When liquid water droplets form in cold clouds they begin to
cling together, get heavy and fall to the ground. We call this
water using your hands to 11. What is the difference between
rainfall or precipitation.
model the impact of evaporation and condensation?
temperature on water 12. Why is the water cycle important for life
Review
molecules. on Earth?
As a review, have Learners watch the following video and relate it
back to the experiments in class.
• Create a model of the water
The Water Cycle- How rain is formed-Lesson for kids
cycle.
Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/s0bS-SBAgJI (2:43 mins)
Bonus Question:
Attitudes/Values
Other Processes That Cycle Water
13. Draw and label the four main stages of
Two other processes happen that make up the water cycle. Plants
• Appreciate that our water the water cycle.
take in water from the ground through their root systems and
supply on earth must be (Learners should include: evaporation,
they release water vapor into the air through their leaves via
protected so as to serve living condensation, precipitation, and
evaporation. The overall process is called transpiration.
things. collection.)
• Teachers should foster Answers:
interest/curiosity in the water
state change processes using 1. c) Evaporation
dramatic analogies with ones 2. b) Condensation
hands. 3. b) Precipitation
4. b) Infiltration
• Inquiry can be stimulated by 5. c) Transpiration
6. a) True
working with other schools on
rainfall data collection
7. b) False
8. Evaporation
projects. Retrieved from: https://www.vectorstock.com/royalty-free-
9. Atmosphere
vector/diagram-showing-transpiration-with-plant-and-water-
10. Sleet
vector-27144124
295
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• When conducting practical 11. Evaporation is the process of water Transpiration: Proof of Water Movement- A Teacher
and group work, display turning into vapor, while condensation is Demonstration
sensitivity and offer assistance the process of vapor cooling and turning Fill a vase or jar with water and add a little food colouring.
to peers who may have back into liquid. Place the flowers in the jar and leave for a few hours.
physical or learning challenges. 12. The water cycle ensures that water is Usually, you will see the flowers change colour within a few
continuously renewed and distributed, hours.
• Participate actively in providing fresh water for drinking, Retrieved from:
classroom discussions. agriculture, and maintaining ecosystems. https://www.science-sparks.com/changing-colour-flowers-with-
transpiration/
One-page Response Paper Another process can happen when water, in the form of ice, is
heated but directly changes to water vapor and does not ever pass
Learners should answer the following two through the liquid state. This process is called sublimation, and
questions on a single page. An explanation and it is common in the high altitudes or cold winter climates.
drawn picture should be included.
1. What role does the sun play in the water The teacher should use the following diagram to summarize the
cycle? (energy provided for water molecules to entire water cycle. Learners can draw their own version and label
change state solid>liquid>gas/transpiration in it as a review of the lesson.
plants)
2. What role does gravity play in the water
cycle? (water, ice and snow high in the hills is
brought to lower elevations in rivers and streams)
What Impact Do Glaciers Have on the Water
Cycle?
Using the following website as a primary source,
Learners in groups will create a poster that
outlines the influence of the polar ice caps Retrieved from:
(glaciers) on the overall water cycle. https://www.khanacademy.org/science/biology/ecology/biogeo
Primary source: https://www.usgs.gov/special- chemical-cycles/a/the-water-cycle
topics/water-science-school/science/ice-snow-
and-glaciers-and-water-cycle
Rubric
296
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
➢ Comprehensive coverage of the influence Review Questions Related to Diagram
(5 marks) Ask Learners the following questions in a closure session making
➢ Links to global warming and the sun’s comprehensive reference to the above diagram
energy that converts ice to liquid water. (5 1. What are the water sources for the water cycle? (Rivers,
marks) lakes, wells, ponds, runoff from mountains.)
➢ Graphics/pictures (5 marks) 2. Where does the water get the energy to change from
➢ Spelling & punctuation (5 marks) liquid to gas state (evaporation)? (sun’s energy)
3. Can water evaporate without the sun? (Yes but it is slow, it
gathers heat from the surroundings to get enough energy to change
state from liquid to gas)
4. Why does cooling in the atmosphere change the vapor
back to liquid water? (the particles have less energy, slowdown
their motion and get closer together-once they are water particles
they cling together, get heavy and fall)
As a review, have Learners listen to the Water cycle song and
pick out the familiar words associated with the process.
Water Cycle Song
Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/TWb4KlM2vts (3:41 mins)
How much water is available for users on earth?
Have Learners set up a rain gauge at the school, collect weekly
rainfall volumes and plot rainfall volume in ml versus the month
in a histogram.
Have the Learners linked with another school in a neighboring
country or region (through relatives or a teacher connection)
using social media to share rainfall data form another school. Do
comparisons of the monthly data and account for differences in
patterns (e.g. rainy seasons, prevailing winds, ocean currents etc.)
Creating a 3D model of the water cycle can be a fun and
educational project for Learners to understand how water moves
through Earth's spheres (atmosphere, hydrosphere, geosphere,
297
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
and biosphere). Below is a step-by-step guide to create a simple
yet effective 3D model using materials commonly found at home
or in the classroom.
Materials Needed:
• Large Styrofoam® or cardboard sphere (as the base)
• Modeling clay or playdough
• Blue cellophane or colored paper
• Small plastic trees, plants, or figurines
• Cotton balls or polyester fiberfill
• Craft glue, tape, scissors
• Markers or colored pencils
• Optional: Toothpicks, thin wire, or string for creating
connections
Steps to Create the 3D Water Cycle Model:
1. Prepare the Base Sphere:
• Use a large Styrofoam® or cardboard sphere as the base
for your model. This represents the Earth.
2. Represent the Geosphere:
• Landforms: Use modeling clay or play-dough to create
mountains, hills, valleys, and other landforms on the
surface of the sphere.
• Labeling: Use markers or colored pencils to label these
landforms directly on the sphere as "Geosphere."
3. Depict the Biosphere:
• Plants and Trees: Place small plastic trees, plants, or
figurines on the landforms you created with clay.
298
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Labeling: Label these plants and trees as "Biosphere."
4. Create the Hydrosphere:
• Water Bodies: Use blue cellophane or colored paper to
create rivers, lakes, and oceans on the surface of the
sphere.
• Labeling: Label these water bodies as "Hydrosphere."
5. Represent the Atmosphere:
• Clouds and Sky: Use cotton balls or polyester fiberfill to
create clouds around the sphere, representing the
atmosphere.
• Labeling: Label this area as "Atmosphere."
6. Show Interactions:
• Arrows or Connections: Use toothpicks, thin wire, or
string to create arrows between the different
components (geosphere, biosphere, hydrosphere, and
atmosphere) to show interactions. For example:
o Arrows from the atmosphere (clouds) to the
biosphere (plants) to represent rain.
o Arrows from the hydrosphere (rivers) to the
geosphere (soil) to show water infiltration.
7. Add Labels and Explanations:
• Use small pieces of paper or cardstock to write labels for
each sphere (geosphere, biosphere, hydrosphere, and
atmosphere).
• Write brief explanations of the interactions and attach
them near the corresponding arrows or spheres.
299
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Rubric for Assessment:
1. Model Accuracy and Detail:
• Excellent (4): Model accurately depicts the interactions
between spheres with detailed and realistic features.
• Good (3): Model accurately depicts the interactions with
some detail.
• Fair (2): Model depicts interactions with minimal detail
and some inaccuracies.
• Needs Improvement (1): Model lacks accuracy and
detail.
2. Comparison Analysis:
• Excellent (4): Comparison is thorough, well-explained,
and supported by detailed examples.
• Good (3): Comparison is clear and supported by
examples.
• Fair (2): Comparison is mentioned but lacks depth and
supporting examples.
300
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Needs Improvement (1): Comparison is unclear or
missing.
3. Creativity and Presentation:
• Excellent (4): Model is highly creative, well-organized,
and effectively presented.
• Good (3): Model is creative, organized, and clearly
presented.
• Fair (2): Model shows some creativity and organization
but is somewhat unclear.
• Needs Improvement (1): Model lacks creativity,
organization, and clarity.
4. Collaboration and Participation (if group work):
• Excellent (4): All group members actively participated
and collaborated effectively.
• Good (3): Most group members participated and
collaborated effectively.
• Fair (2): Some group members participated and
collaborated.
• Needs Improvement (1): Few group members
participated or collaborated.
301
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Additional Resources and Materials
NASA water cycle simulation: https://gpm.nasa.gov/education/videos/water-cycle-animation
Water cycle game/simulation: https://gizmos.explorelearning.com/find-gizmos/lesson-info?resourceId=435 also: https://water.usgs.gov/edu/watercycle-
kids-adv.html
Water run-off simulation: https://runoff.modelmywatershed.org/
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
States of matter simulation (choose water): https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/states-of-matter-basics/latest/states-of-matter-basics_en.html
Water conservation tips: https://davidsuzuki.org/living-green/make-every-drop-count-water-conservation-tips/
Disappearing Glaciers & Global warming: https://www.climate.gov/news-features/understanding-climate/climate-change-mountain-glaciers
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Mathematics: Collecting rainfall data.
Social Studies: Protecting our water supply
Language arts: new vocabulary/research/communicating results
Creative arts: building a model of a water cycle
302
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Essential Learning Outcome: ELO 2: Construct a scientific explanation based on evidence for how the uneven distributions of Earth’s mineral,
energy, and groundwater resources are the result of past and current geoscience processes.
Clarification Statement: Emphasis is on how these resources are limited and typically non-renewable, and how their distributions are significantly changing as
a result of removal by humans. Examples of uneven distributions of resources as a result of past processes include but are not limited to petroleum (locations of
the burial of organic marine sediments and subsequent geologic traps), metal ores (locations of past volcanic and hydrothermal activity associated with
subduction zones), and soil (locations of active weathering and/or deposition of rock).
Grade Level Expectations: Refer to grade level expectations at the beginning of this curriculum document.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learners are expected to: Water Conservation is Important to the What are Natural Resources?
Caribbean Ask Learners what they think the term “natural resources”
Knowledge The following verbatim excerpt outlines the means. From the word natural they should come to suggest that it
• Define the terms: status of water access in the Caribbean. comes from nature and resource is something we have access to
o natural resources help us accomplish something. Provide them with a formal
o energy Surface Water definition
o non-renewable Caribbean Surface Water is a mixture of North Natural Resources: are things that are supplied or produced by
o renewable resources Atlantic surface waters, Amazon River water, nature.
o petroleum and local freshwater runoff from South America.
o fossil fuel Low presence of plankton is what makes Teacher’s Notes:
o fracking Caribbean waters so famously crystal clear. Many Humans depend on Earth’s land, ocean, atmosphere, and
o oil sands of the islands predominantly use their surface biosphere for many different resources.
o minerals water for their water supplies. The urbanisation Minerals, fresh water, and biosphere resources are limited, and
o coal of islands has affected higher peak flows, many are not renewable or replaceable over human lifetimes.
o global warming downstream flooding, and overall reduction in These resources are distributed unevenly around the planet as a
o greenhouse effect base stream flows. The effects of catchment result of past geologic processes.
o water conservation conversion can be mostly seen in Haiti and its All human activity draws on natural resources and has both
o ground water devastating floods. Such decrease in surface short- and long-term consequences, positive as well as negative,
o surface water water quantity impacts water production. for the health of people and the natural environment.
o hydropower dam Resources are typically limited and renewable due to factors such
o solar power as long amounts of time required for some resources to form or
o geothermal power the environment in which resources were created forming once
o human rights & mining or only rarely in the Earth’s history.
303
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Demonstrate they understand Groundwater Let’s Talk About Energy
the difference between The average annual rainfall affects the ability to Learners, many of you would have electricity delivered to your
renewable and non-renewable of groundwater to recharge. Some islands make home to operate lights and appliances. You simply flick a switch
resources. use of groundwater for public water supply, or plug in an appliance but how is that energy produced? Maybe
• Compare ways that electricity meanwhile the groundwater heavily depend on you have never thought of that before? (generators fueled by oil) If
weather conditions to sustain itself. Recharge your country used generators, what happens when the oil runs
can be produced.
usually occurs in the peak wet season months, out? Many countries buy oil from other countries and the price
• Develop awareness of the
and it is key that the monthly rainfall is above and access is controlled by that oil-producing country. That
control oil-rich countries have
the threshold of 195 mm monthly. Another leaves your country very vulnerable from being cut-off from oil
over energy production
important issue is to keep the groundwater from supply and therefore electricity! We would say that oil is non-
worldwide.
contamination with the proper management of renewable; when it runs out we can’t just find more, there is a
• Give examples of how alternate
sewage and waste systems to prevent high levels limited quantity world-wide.
energies are more sensitive to
of nitrates flowing inland. (Retrieved from:
protecting the environment.
https://irglobal.com/article/article-freshwater- We do have other ways of creating electricity and our generation
• Give examples of different
situation-in-the-caribbean/) has become particularly innovative. I want you to write down
ways to extract oil for energy
three ways that you have read about that electricity can be
purposes.
After Learners have read this account of how generated.
• Use a picture to describe how the geology of the region impacts water access, Solar power
fracking is used to extract oil. task them with developing a poster that outlines Wind power
• Become aware of the how their region could preserve and recycle the Hydropower
environmental impacts of strip- water resource. Geothermal power
mining practices. Primary Sources that Learners may find useful in Tidal power
• Identify some dangers of the preparation of their posters.
underground mining. • https://www.newterra.com/article/innovati What do you notice about these examples?
ons-in-island-water-management-in-the- Will the sun ever stop shing? (no)
• Awareness of the scale coal use caribbean/ Will water ever stop flowing down hill due to gravity? (no)
in China and the inherent • https://www.cardi.org/wp- Will the wind ever stop blowing? (no)
impacts on global warming. content/uploads/2011/12/Sustainable- Will the earth ever stop having heat in its core? (no)
• Explain potential management-water-for-agri-in-Cbbean-P- Will the tides ever stop changing? (no)
environmental impacts of Titus-2011-Brussels-Oct-Final-version.pdf
Because we can be sure these resources will always be present, we
building large scale hydropower • https://davidsuzuki.org/living-green/make-
would call these renewable resources.
dams using the Three Gorges every-drop-count-water-conservation-tips/
Dam in China as an example.
304
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Establish which countries have Is Solar Power a Viable Alternative?- debate These resources have certain characteristics that I would like to
the greatest mineral resources. Learners have studied some of the negative review with you in this table of comparison
impacts of non-renewable resources such as
fossil fuels. In many island nations, solar power
Skills seems to be gaining popularity. Learners should
• Filter internet information for be tasked with investigating the cost of solar
power; both initial and long-term financial
objective facts and data on
renewable and non-renewable implications for a typical home. They may
resources in the world. choose to contact a local solar installation
company to get itemized costs to support their
study.
• Infer from a graph, the
Primary sources:
extrapolated consumption of
• https://ases.org/caribbeanelectricalbills/
coal in China.
• https://www.caribsurf.net/information/ph
• Classify resources as renewable otovoltaic_systems.html
Retrieved from: : https://www.etutorworld.com/7th-grade-
or non-renewable. • https://offgridinstaller.com/off-grid-solar-
science-worksheets/renewable-and-non-renewable-energy-
power-in-grenada-and-the-grenadines/
resources.html
• Research information on oil • https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/
extraction. read/four-facts-you-should-know-about-
the-caribbean-solar-market
Since oil is a common source of fuel for electricity worldwide, it
• Research the process of • https://www.ctc-n.org/sites/www.ctc- is worth spending more time investigating it.
geothermal energy production. n.org/files/resources/solar-pv-in-the-
caribbean.pdf
• Debate who should take Oil Industry
With an educated background, Learners should
responsibility for safe mining
be placed in groups of 4 where two persons
practices. Petroleum is referred to as a fossil fuel because it is formed
debate and argue the promise of solar power
when large quantities of dead organisms, (primarily zooplankton
whereas the remaining two support the
• Extract mining dangers from and algae), are buried beneath sedimentary rock and subjected to
economics of continued use of fossil fuels for
the lyrics of a song. both intense heat and pressure.
electricity production.
• Research methods of water The oil deposits are spread across the world in different locations
conservation. but the 5 top producers are: United States, Saudi Arabia, Russia,
Canada and China (see:
305
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
• Calculate/estimate short & long Geothermal Has Potential-one page https://www.investopedia.com/investing/worlds-top-oil-
term costs of solar power for response paper producers/)
family homes. Because of the volcanic activity in the Caribbean
region, geothermal energy for electricity Humankind are large consumers of oil for energy and therefore
Attitudes/Values production is gaining popularity. Learners they are constantly looking for new sources and ways to access
should conduct internet research and respond to more oil. With the best of intentions, humans in interacting with
• Appreciate that fossil fuel the following questions. natural resources can often cause problems.
resources are both limited and ➢ Using a picture and text, explain how
costly. geothermal energy is accessed for Learners should be asked to research and respond to 3 questions
electricity production. in an essay format regarding oil consumption.
➢ Why is geothermal energy an attractive 1. Humans have accessed oil under the sea. Give an
• Appreciate the burning of fossil
option for some Caribbean islands? example of how accessing that source has caused
fuels impacts the environment.
➢ Geothermal energy can be used for environmental problems. (teacher source:
applications other than electricity https://www.britannica.com/event/Deepwater-
• Awareness of limited water
production. Horizon-oil-spill)
supply.
Primary Sources:
2. “Fracking” is a process for accessing oil that has been
• Be inventive around
• https://www.energy.gov/eere/geother considered in North America. What is fracking and how
conservation of water supply.
mal/electricity-generation does this impact the environment?
(teacher source:
• https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m
• Be sensitive to the economics https://serc.carleton.edu/NAGTWorkshops/health/cas
CRDf7QxjDk&t=11s (3:47 mins)
(salary) that balance the danger e_studies/hydrofracking_w.html)
• https://oecs.int/en/geothermal-energy-
in a mining job or any risky
in-the-eastern-caribbean
occupation.
3. Canada has sought to access crude oil from what are
called “oil sands”. What aspects of this process pose
• Possess interest/curiosity as to dangers to our environment? Learners should consider
Mining Disasters
how geology of the Caribbean how transportation of petroleum is a factor here.
In years gone by and even present day, the
has impacted landforms and (teacher sources: https://www.capp.ca/oil/what-are-the-
conditions in underground coal mines can be
access to minerals and clean oil-sands/
dangerous. When humans make tunnels in the
water. https://www.watershedcouncil.org/pipeline-risks.html
earth, it is very easy for those tunnels to disturb
https://www.history.com/topics/1980s/exxon-valdez-
the natural rock strength and tunnels can
• Inventiveness around oil-spill
collapse. Within the rock there is also pockets of
developing potential alternate Rubric:
methane gas which can easily ignite and cause an
energy sources. Comprehensive review of questions (5 marks)
underground explosion.
306
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The Springhill mining disaster in Canada Unbiased reporting of facts (2 marks)
• When conducting practical and resulted in a famous song. Learners can learn Clear & logical arguments (5 marks)
group work, display sensitivity much about the culture of coal mining from the Spelling and grammar (5 marks)
and offer assistance to peers lyrics below. What do they learn from the song?
who may have physical or Learners should be tasked with submitting Accessing Mineral Resources
learning challenges. answers to the following questions next class. Sources of energy like coal and valuable minerals for (e.g. gold &
silver) have caused humans to dig in areas around the world
• Participate actively in classroom a) What are the conditions affecting the geology of the natural landscape.
discussions. experienced in a mine? Show Learners the picture below of open-pit mining and ask
b) What are the indicators of a them what the impact might be on the ecosystem (plants, animals,
problem in a mine? humans).
c) Why is it difficult to rescue
miners?
d) If you were an employed miner
with a family and knew the risks
what factors would you need to
weigh in order to decide
whether to continue with your
job?
Rubric:
5 marks for each question
5 marks overall for grammar & punctuation
5 marks for well-balanced rationale in question
(d)
Retrieved from: 10 deepest open mines in the world here:
Lyrics
https://www.mining-technology.com/features/feature-top-ten-
In the town of Springhill, Nova Scotia deepest-open-pit-mines-world/
Down in the dark of the Cumberland Mine
There’s blood on the coal and the miners lie
The Impact of Coal Mining on the Environment
in the roads that never saw sun nor sky
Unfortunately, coal burning for energy produces high levels of
Roads that never saw sun nor sky
emissions especially in heavily industrialized countries like China.
In the town of Springhill, you don’t sleep easy. In 2018, coal made up 59 percent of China's energy use. Since
Often the earth will tremble and roll. 2011, China has consumed more coal than the rest of the world
307
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
When the earth is restless, miners die; combined. China's industrial sector is by far the largest consumer
Bone and blood is the price of coal. of coal.
Have Learners review the graph below and determine
In the town of Springhill, Nova Scotia,
The increase in Chinas’ consumption between 2005 and 2010 (~
Late in the year of fifty-eight,
1billion tons)
Day still comes and the sun still shines,
But it’s dark as the grave in the Cumberland
Mine.
Down at the coal face, miners working,
Rattle of the belt and the cutter’s blade,
Rumble of the rock and the walls closed round
The living and the dead men two miles down.
Twelve men lay two miles from the pit shaft,
Twelve men lay in the dark and sang
Long hot days in the miners’ tomb
It was three feet high and a hundred long.
Three days passed and the lamps gave out
And Caleb Rushton he up and said, Retrieved from: https://www.worldometers.info/coal/china-
“There’s no more water nor light nor bread coal/
So we’ll live on songs and hope instead.”
North of Shanghai, the temperatures are such in the winter that
Listen for the shouts of the barefaced miners,
coal burning for heat is common in households. This contributes
Listen thru the rubble for a rescue team,
to high levels of emissions in cities like Beijing. This contributes
Six hundred feet of coal and slag;
to the problem of global warming.
Hope imprisoned in a three-foot seam.
Eight days passed and some were rescued, Global warming occurs when carbon dioxide (CO ) and other
2
Leaving the dead to lie alone. air pollutants and greenhouse gases collect in the atmosphere and
Thru all their lives they dug their grave absorb sunlight and solar radiation that have bounced off the
Two miles of earth for a marking stone. earth’s surface. Normally, this radiation would escape into
space—but these pollutants, which can last for years to centuries
In the town of Springhill, you don’t sleep easy
in the atmosphere, trap the heat and cause the planet to get
Often the earth will tremble and roll.
hotter. Commonly known as the greenhouse effect.
When the earth is restless, miners die
Bone and blood is the price of coal.
308
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
They can hear the song sung here: Excerpt from: https://www.nrdc.org/stories/global-warming-
101
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ebJFulmE
TMA (3:13 mins)
Coal Burning Replaced by Hydropower?
The Chinese have tried to curb their need for coal as power
Mining Practices
source by creating the largest hydropower dam in the world.
In many parts of the world, mining occurs deep
This is another example of how humans have sought to capitalize
underground in conditions that can be
on natural resources with some unwanted results. Have Learners
dangerous. Nonetheless, miners in need of a
research this major Chinese project (the Three Gorges Dam-
salary to support their families, will take
https://www.britannica.com/topic/Three-Gorges-Dam) and
potentially take a daily risk and return to the
report back to class the potential impact on local habitat.
mines.
(diversion of water sources-agricultural impacts, displacement of
Learners should debate (in teams) where the
peoples from indigenous lands, displacement of natural species from water
responsibility lies for protecting miners? Is it the
ways and land)
mining companies, the government regulators or
do the miners themselves make the choice to
Gold Mining in Guyana
visit the mine in less than perfect conditions?
In the interior of Guyana in South America, gold mining is
undertaken by locals using huge water pumps to flush sand in
Primary sources:
pools and filter for gold. It is also common for these junior
• https://www.csis.org/analysis/why-
miners to use mercury as a way of binding out the gold. Ask
responsible-mining-human-rights-imperative
Learners to research the dangers of using mercury in the mining
• https://www.bsr.org/en/primers/10-
process. (they should look at the impact of mercury on water sources)
human-rights-priorities-for-the-extractives-
sector
309
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Photograph Taken Above Region Near Mahdia, Guyana
Comprehension Activity
Learners should be asked to read the following passage and
summarize the negative effects of mining.
“While there have been improvements to mining practices in
recent years, significant environmental risks remain. Negative
impacts can vary from the sedimentation caused by poorly built
roads during exploration through to the sediment, and
disturbance of water during mine construction. Water pollution
from mine waste rock and tailings may need to be managed for
decades, if not centuries, after closure. These impacts depend on
a variety of factors, such as the sensitivity of local terrain, the
composition of minerals being mined, the type of technology
employed, the skill, knowledge and environmental commitment
of the company, and finally, our ability to monitor and enforce
compliance with environmental regulations. One of the problems
is that mining has become more mechanized and therefore able
to handle more rock and ore material than ever before.
Therefore, mine waste has multiplied enormously.
As mine technologies are developed to make it more profitable to
mine low-grade ore, even more waste will be generated in the
future.”
Quoted directly from: https://www.safewater.org/fact-sheets-
1/2017/1/23/miningandwaterpollution
Distribution of Mineral Resources
The Caribbean region has been shaped by a number of tectonic
plate interactions
310
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z72DaFPMGwo ) that has
contributed to the formation of volcanic and coral islands. This
geology has inherently led to a limited number of mineral and
fossil fuel resources many of which have been exhausted.
Wood, coal and oil fuels traditionally used for heating and
cooking tends to be located in other parts of the world. This
means the Caribbean is heavily reliant on South America for
some of these necessities.
The interaction of the Caribbean tectonic plate with neighboring
plates has impacted the mineral deposits in the region.
“In the distant past, as North and South American plates rifted
apart, metal deposits began to accumulate in the rift basins,
which were later exposed, as a result of subduction on the eastern
edge of the Caribbean Plate. Within the Caribbean, some of the
most important deposits of bauxite and lateritic nickel, as well as
significant deposits of gold and silver, copper, zinc, manganese,
cobalt, and chromium, are hosted in the Greater Antilles. Massive
sulphide deposits formed in fore-arc basins as well as back-arc
basins due to volcanic activity, also giving rise to porphyry
copper and precious metal deposits in the more mature island
arc.
The various tectonic features listed above all formed as a result of
rifting and subsequent subduction and collision in the Caribbean
region. This provides a perfect setting for initial deposition
followed by uplift along with weathering to yield a variety of
deposits.” (Retrieved verbatim from:
https://caribbeantectonics.weebly.com/resources-in-the-
caribbean.html primary source:
Nelson, C. E., Proenza, J. A., Lewis, J. F., & López-Kramer, J.
(2011). The metallogenic evolution of the Greater Antilles.
Geological Act: an international earth science journal, 9(3-4), 229-264.
311
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Largest Mineral Deposits in the World
The majority of mineral deposits seem to reside on large
continental plates rather than the subduction zones that populate
the Caribbean region.
Country Deposits
Australi Largest producer bauxite, iron ore and lithium/ a
a top global producer of coal, aluminum, copper,
gold, manganese, nickel, silver, uranium, and zinc.
Chile copper, lithium
China Rare earth elements, salt, cement, phosphate,
nitrogen and potash. Coal, gold, antimony,
magnesium, tin, zinc, manganese and tungsten. It
leads in barite, fluorspar, graphite, molybdenum,
phosphate rock, strontium, and lead reserves as
well.
Russia Gold, iron ore, aluminum, nickel, copper. It is
among the top three nickel, platinum and palladium
producers as well.
Canada It ranks among the top five worldwide producers
of potash, uranium, cobalt, aluminum, tungsten,
platinum group metals, salt, titanium concentrate,
and diamonds. Canada’s immense geology hosts
abundant deposits of gold, silver, nickel, copper,
cobalt, graphite, lithium, rare earths
Congo 70% of global cobalt reserves, boasts rich diamond
deposits and has bountiful reserves of copper, tin,
tantalum, tungsten and gold.
Brazil World’s largest niobium, third-largest bauxite and
third-highest iron ore reserves globally. It ranks as a
top producer of gold, tin, lithium, nickel,
United Leading producer of copper, gold, molybdenum,
States phosphate rock, rare earths, salt, soda ash, zeolites
and zinc
312
Grade 6 Science Curriculum
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Data retrieved from: https://www.cruxinvestor.com/posts/top-
mining-countries-in-the-world-2024
Additional Resources and Materials
Why is Water Access in the Caribbean a growing Problem?: https://www.preventionweb.net/news/thirsty-paradise-water-crises-are-growing-problem-across-
caribbean-islands
Oil Consumption Statistics -2010: https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Nadia-Smith-
2/publication/280100406/figure/fig5/AS:667864386244623@1536242686869/Oil-Consumption-among-Caribbean-Countries-8.jpg
Additional Useful Content Knowledge for the Teacher:
Caribbean Tectonics: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BZHwMZYNxAw (5:41 mins)
Caribbean Plates: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z72DaFPMGwo (15:33 mins)
Mineral Deposits of the Caribbean: https://pubs.usgs.gov/myb/vol3/2019/myb3-2019-caribbean.pdf
Opportunities for Subject Integration:
Language Arts: Research/filtering and comprehension of primary sources/communications: Response papers, projects & posters.
Mathematics: Interpretation of data and graphs/ extrapolating data
Social Studies: environmental impacts/ safety in jobs/ costing of energy options
Creative Arts: Interpreting song lyrics
313
