November 2024
OHPC KINDERGARTEN
WEATHER
INTEGRATED UNIT #2 NOVEMBER - DECEMBER 5 WEEKS
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Week 1
Is the weather
important to me
and my family?
Week 2
What different kinds
of weather do we
have? What seasons
do we have?
Week 5
How do people
Integrat ed Unit on
Weather
protect themselves
and their
Is the
belongings from
the weather? weather
Week 3
How does the
weather make a
Week 4
difference to the
land and water
How do we
around us?
know about the
weather? 2
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Table of Contents:
Introduction to Weather Integrated Unit ................................................................................................................................................ 4
Essential Question: “Is the Weather Important?” .................................................................................................................................. 6
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Linked to Inclusive Learning Strategies in this Integrated Unit...................................................... 7
Overview and Preparation ...................................................................................................................................................................... 11
Sample Letter to Parents/Caregivers ..................................................................................................................................................... 12
Sample Recording Sheet After a Guest Speaker or Field Trip ............................................................................................................. 13
Detailed Five-Week Plan ........................................................................................................................................................................ 14
I. WEEK ONE ............................................................................................................................................................................... 14
II. WEEK TWO ............................................................................................................................................................................... 32
III. WEEK THREE .......................................................................................................................................................................... 50
IV. WEEK FOUR ............................................................................................................................................................................. 72
V. WEEK FIVE ............................................................................................................................................................................... 90
3
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Introduction to Weather Integrated Unit
The Kindergarten Curriculum consists of 6 documents:
• Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies
• Integrated Unit # 1 – Belonging
• Integrated Unit #2 – Weather
• Integrated Unit #3 – Celebrations
• Integrated Unit #4 – Plants and Animals
• Integrated Unit #5 – Games
The Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies document provides the framework for the delivery of the curriculum. Teachers must
examine this document prior to teaching this Unit to have a thorough understanding of the learning outcomes for Kindergarten, to teach the Integrated
Unit effectively and assess learner progress.
The Integrated Topics have been chosen to meet the learning outcomes for Language Arts, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies. No one Integrated
Unit contains all outcomes. Rather, they are spread across the Integrated Units. The five Integrated Topics are: Belonging, Celebrations, Weather,
Plants and Animals and Games with each having its own curriculum guide. This document contains the Learning Outcomes and Inclusive Learning
and Assessment Strategies that will be taught in the Weather Integrated Unit. The following table highlights the letters, sounds, words and specific
concepts in mathematics that are designated to be taught in each of the Integrated Units.
First IU Topic Second IU Topic Third IU Topic Fourth IU Topic Fifth IU Topic
Integrated Unit Topic Belonging Weather Celebrations Plants and Animals Games
Proposed Sequence for s, a, t, i, p, n c(k), e, h, r, m, d g, o, u, l, f, b z, w, y, x j, qu, v
Language Arts Letters and
Sounds
Proposed sequence for Pre-primer words Pre-primer words Primer words Primer words Primer words
Language Arts Sight Words
(loosely following Dolch sight a, and, big, can, go, I, in, one, three, two, four, all, am, at, be, but, said, where, she,
words) is, me, see, the, to look, make, play, did, do, get, he, like, they, was, went, will,
4
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
First IU Topic Second IU Topic Third IU Topic Fourth IU Topic Fifth IU Topic
it, not, run, up, we, you, yellow, blue, no, on, please, ran, yes, eat, good, have,
away, find, help, here, red, brown, black, say into, new, now,
jump, little, my white, come, down there, this, with
Proposed Sequence for Strand 1 Strand 1 Strand 1 Strand 1 Strand 1
Math Skills (refer to Strand 3, 6 Strand 3, 6 Strand 3, 6 Strand 2 Strand 2
outcomes for Kindergarten Strand 4 Strand 3, 6 Strand 5
Mathematics in this document) Strand 3, 6
Teaching and learning through Integrated Units provides engaging, authentic, and relevant opportunities for children to learn knowledge, skills, and values
in Language Arts, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies. The children experience learning as a whole and they see “academic” knowledge and skills
being applied to topics that are part of their lived experiences. Where appropriate, teachers may find ways that Health and Physical Well-being, Arts and
Crafts, Music, and Additional Languages may be a part of the Integrated Units.
5
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Essential Question: “Is the Weather Important?”
The Essential Question provides the over-arching focus throughout the unit. Teachers should start the unit by asking their learners the question (and
perhaps create a chart with the learners’ answers). Teachers and children will revisit the question at the end of the unit and consider what they have
learned.
The Essential Question should be posted in the classroom and referred to frequently. If a visitor enters the room, it should be obvious what the
children are learning about. If a visitor/parent/administrator asks the children what they are learning about, the children should be able to readily
answer.
Essential Question: Is the Weather Important?
Weekly questions:
Week 1: Is the weather important to me and my family?
Week 2: What different kinds of weather do we have? What seasons do we have?
Week 3: How does the weather make a difference to the land and water around us?
Week 4: How do we know about the weather?
Week 5: How do people protect themselves and their belongings from the weather?
End of Unit summary/celebration: Return to discuss the essential question: Is the weather important?
6
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Linked to Inclusive Learning Strategies in this Integrated Unit1
Language Arts: These outcomes are taken from the OHPC Kindergarten Curriculum and Assessment Guidelines document and have been distributed to fit the weekly
questions in this Integrated Unit.
SCO Strand 1: Listening and Speaking
1.1 Listen to music, conversation and environmental sounds for personal enjoyment
1.2 Demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in sharing the experiences of others and with oral stories and information sharing.
1.3 Use social listening and speaking skills to interact with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and respect
1.4 Interact and collaborate with the teacher and children who have diverse interests, backgrounds and languages
1.5 Become aware of how effective listening enhances understanding
1.6 Observe how tone, fluency and intonation impact meaning and mood
1.7 Use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English develops, share their thoughts, feelings and questions about engaging events, stories and
conversations with increasing confidence
1.8 Develop increasing clarity and focus when sharing stories or experiences
1.9 Engage in active phonological awareness activities and word play to discriminate between various sounds in their environment, letters of the
alphabet, rhyme and meaningful sound patterns
1.10 Develop and apply vocabulary and language structures to enhance their understanding of how to communicate ideas with purpose and focus
SCO Strand 2: Reading and Viewing
2.1 Interact meaningfully with a wide range of genres and text forms
2.3 Connect background knowledge to the titles and pictures of fiction and nonfiction passages to build a foundation of understanding
2.4 Develop understanding and application of the Concepts of Print
2.5 Develop knowledge about the purpose and variety of texts that are read or read to them
2.6 Browse through a variety of images, and nonfiction material in pre-emergent and emergent level passages, or passages of interest, to discover
information.
2.7 Demonstrate understanding of some environmental print and pictorial information
1 Note: All Kindergarten Curriculum Outcomes are available in the OHPC Kindergarten Curriculum and Assessment Guidelines document. An individual Integrated
Unit does not contain all of the outcomes for the entire curriculum.
7
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
SCO Strand 2: Reading and Viewing
2.8 Begin to apply comprehension strategies to visualize, predict and connect
2.9 Demonstrate understanding by responding to read-alouds with images, model making, discussions, or temporary writing
2.10 Connect words and images in pre-emergent and emergent level texts to background knowledge
2.11 Recognise and use a variety of high frequency words of personal importance, such as names and pre-emergent level high-frequency words
2.12 Participate in shared reading and use the meaning and flow of the language to anticipate upcoming words
2.13 Begin to demonstrate fluency and phrasing during shared reading, independent and guided reading of emergent level passages
2.14 Identify an increasing number of letter names and letter sounds, beginning with those of personal importance
2.15 Use known letter sounds to decode upcoming words in emergent level passages
SCO Strand 3: Writing and Representing
3.1 Use shared ideas to co-construct stories
3.2 Assign meaning to experimental drawing and writing
3.3 Begin expressive writing to share ideas and real and imagined topics
3.4 Use peer collaboration and classroom tools to assist in writing process
3.5 Learn to print the upper and lower case letters of the alphabet
3.6 Connect spoken language(s) to written language and other representations (e.g. drawings)
3.7 Connect phonological awareness to letter shapes
3.8 Spell name and some words of personal importance correctly
Mathematics: These outcomes are taken from the OHPC Kindergarten Curriculum and Assessment Guidelines document and have been distributed to fit the weekly
questions in this Integrated Unit.
SCO Strand 1: Number Sense
1.1.1 Say the number sequence to 10 by 1s
1.2.2 Answer the question, How many are in the set? using the last number counted in a set
1.2.3 In a fixed arrangement, starting in different locations, can show that the count of the number of objects in a set does not change
SCO Strand 3: Pattern and Relationship
3.1.1 Create simple repeating patterns (2 elements)
3.1.2 Extend simple repeating patterns (2 elements)
3.1.3 Copy a given repeating pattern
SCO Strand 4: Geometrical Thinking
4.2.1 Identify and describe shapes (2-D = squares, circles, triangles, 3-D = cubes, cones, and spheres).
8
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
SCO Strand 5: Measurement
5.1.1 Classify objects according to selected attributes, e.g., size, colour, shape, texture, sound, etc.
5.1.2 Classify objects and count the number of objects in each category
5.2.2 Identify days, weeks, months, holidays, and seasons (standard units of measure)
5.2.3 Recite days of the week and months of the year in order
SCO Strand 6: Data Management and Probability
6.1.1 Collect simple sets of data in the class and school environment using observation.
6.1.2 Describe data classification.
6.1.3 Use counting to determine the number of objects in a group.
6.1.4 Describe the results of classification and data collection activities.
Science: These outcomes are taken from the OHPC Kindergarten Curriculum and Assessment Guidelines document and have been distributed to fit the weekly questions in
this Integrated Unit.
SCO Strand 3: Weather and Climate
3.1 Make observations to determine the effect of sunlight on Earth’s surface.
3.1.1 understand that sunlight can make a difference to things on the earth’s surface
3.1.2 observe that soil may change when the sun is shining
3.1.3 observe that a wet rock may change when the sun is shining on it
3.1.4 observe that a puddle may change when the sun is shining on it
3.2 Use tools and materials to design and build a structure that will reduce the warming effect of sunlight on an area
• Asking questions, making observations, and gathering information are helpful in thinking about problems
• Designs can be conveyed through sketches, drawings, or physical models. These representations are useful in communicating ideas for a problem’s
solutions to other people
3.2.1 explain why people might want to reduce the warming effect of the sun
3.2.2 name one thing people can build to minimize the warming effect of the sun – could be umbrellas, canopies, and tents
3.2.3 explain one thing (asking questions, making observations, and gathering information) that people might do to solve problems like the warming
effect of the sun
3.2.4 tell one way that the child may protect themself and their belongings from the sun, or the rain
3.2.5 design a structure that will keep the rain or sun off their play things at their house (this could be making a drawing of something that would
keep the rain or sun off their play things)
3.2.6 build a structure that will keep the rain or sun off their play things at their house (to do this, the children might use recycled objects to make a
shelter for their toy car, or tricycle – whatever is relevant to their experience)
3.3 Use and share observations of local weather conditions to describe patterns over time
• Weather is the combination of sunlight, wind, snow or rain, and temperature in a particular region at a particular time.
• People measure these conditions to describe and record the weather and to notice patterns over time
9
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
SCO Strand 3: Weather and Climate
3.3.1 understand that the weather makes a difference to people, plants and animals.
3.3.2 Understand that people measure weather conditions to describe and record the weather and to notice patterns over time
3.3.3 Can tell one example of a weather patterns could include that it is usually cooler in the morning than in the afternoon and the number of sunny
days versus cloudy days is different in different months.
3.3.4 Can list the seasons there are in their country
3.3.5 keep track of descriptions of the weather (such as sunny, cloudy, rainy, and warm)
3.3.6 keep track of numbers of sunny, windy, and rainy days in a month
3.4 Ask questions to obtain information about the purpose of weather forecasting to prepare for, and respond to, severe weather.
• Some kinds of severe weather are more likely than others in a given region.
• Weather scientists forecast severe weather so that the communities can prepare for and respond to these events
3.4.1 explain one way that people can find out what the weather forecast is
3.4.2 tell who prepares a weather forecast
3.4.3 understand that it is important to know if severe weather is coming so people can prepare for it
3.4.4 understand that it is important to know if severe weather is coming so people can respond to it
3.4.5 understand what is meant by the motto: Be prepared; not scared
3.4.6 list one kind of severe weather that might happen where they live
Social Studies: These outcomes are taken from the OHPC Kindergarten Curriculum and Assessment Guidelines document and have been distributed to fit the weekly
questions in this Integrated Unit.
SCO Strand 3: Myself – Spatial Thinking
3.7 Describe various weather conditions (K)
3.8 Observe and record different weather conditions (S)
3.9 Appreciate the importance of taking safety precautions in some weather conditions (V)
10
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Overview and Preparation
Preparation of the Room
Teachers are encouraged to display the Essential Question for the Integrated Unit on a bulletin board or the wall.
Resources
Teachers are encouraged to look through the entire plan for the Integrated Unit on Weather (below) and gather resources needed to teach this
unit.
Possible guest speakers and field trip(s)
When preparing for this unit, teachers are encouraged to consider: What/who is in the school/neighborhood to help us learn about weather?
Before any guest speaker comes to the class, the children will be guided to think of questions to ask him/her. After the guest speaker leaves, the
children will complete a sheet that shows what they learned (in pictures and words, with help). Sample of that sheet is provided on page 12 of this
document.
Letter Introducing the New Unit to Parents/Families
One way to find out who might come into the classroom as a guest speaker is to send a note home (and circulate in the school) telling what the
unit will be about and asking if anyone knows someone who could come into the classroom. In the letter, describe the focus of the Integrated Unit, ask
for specific resources (if appropriate), provide some examples for guest speakers, such as “someone who has….”, “someone who knows about…”.
Sample letter is provided on page 11 of this document.
Consider possible play connections/materials (some possibilities are listed below)
Art/craft materials
Paint easel
Water table
Sand table
Toys connected to the topic
Blocks
Dress-ups
Puzzles
11
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Sample Letter to Parents/Caregivers
School logo?
Date
Dear Parents and Caregivers,
On Monday, (date), we will be starting our last Integrated Unit of study. We will be learning all about “Weather” and we will be thinking
about the question “Is the Weather Important?” This unit of study will be the focus in our classroom until (date).
We are wondering if any of you have a particular interest, or experience with weather and if you could come into our class one
afternoon to tell us about it. Maybe you love surfing, when the wind has created large waves. Maybe you have always kept track of the wind
direction with a weather vane outside your house. Maybe you have a friend who builds shelters to provide a shady spot in people’s gardens.
Maybe you have a problem with water erosion on your street and you and others are trying to fix that. Maybe you know the weather person
who shows those fancy maps on the evening newscast!
Or, perhaps you know someone else in the community who might be willing to come in to our class to help us learn more about
Weather.
If you can help us out, please contact _______________, phone: _______________, and we will find a day and time for you, or someone
you might suggest, to visit our class.
Meanwhile, please ask your child about what he or she is learning about Weather and enjoy some discussions about this topic at home!
Thank you so much,
(Teacher)
12
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Sample Recording Sheet After a Guest Speaker or Field Trip
What I learned from ___ (place for guest speaker’s name, or location of field trip) ________________________
(Place for the child to do a drawing based on the guest speaker’s visit)
(lines for child to write a word or two, probably with assistance from the teacher)
___________________________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________________________
13
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Detailed Five-week Plan
I. WEEK ONE
Essential Question: Is the weather important?
Question for Week One: Is the weather important to me and my family?
Language Arts – Plans for the Unit (5 weeks)
The teacher will be observing for children’s Concepts of Print. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for a list
of Concepts of Print.
The letters/sounds c (k), e, h, r, m, d will be the focus. The teacher might do some “stand-alone” lessons to introduce the children to
these letters/sounds. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for teaching children letters/sounds.
Phonemic Awareness skills will commence and the focal point will be on initial phoneme isolation in words related to this Integrated
Unit, such as “rain”. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for engaging learners in phonemic
awareness skills
The high frequency (sight) words it, not, run, up, we, away, find, help, here, jump, little, my will be the focus. The teacher might do some
“stand-alone lessons” to introduce these words. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for
teaching high frequency words.
The teacher is encouraged to find opportunities to emphasize those letters/sounds/phonemes/high frequency words with
the children throughout the ILS for the unit.
14
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Gathering Assessment Data and Record-keeping
The SCOs and ILS for this unit are directly linked. The learners learn and demonstrate development on the SCOS in the ILS. The
teacher gathers assessment data on each of the SCOs (during the ILS). The Assessment data is gathered through Observation,
Conversation and Products, as set out in the IAS column.
The teacher will use the master checklist (hard copy or digital) included in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies to record data
collected about children’s progress in achieving the SCOs. The teacher will observe the children and will listen to the children’s responses or the
teacher will arrange for the children to create a “product” to gather evidence of the children’s development of the SCO attitudes, skills, and
knowledge.
The teacher will use a consistent scale in the checklist:
Is the child easily meeting the outcome (+)? Is the child meeting the outcome (=)? Does the child need more practice (-)?
The teacher will note the date of the observation/conversation, and the teacher may also add some comments for additional clarification
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Introduction to the Integrated Unit:
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in The teacher will enter information into the checklist Language Arts and Science: Discussion & Exploration
sharing the experiences of others and with oral for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, Stations
stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.7 and 1.8 based on observation and
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to interact conversation with the learners. The teacher will show learners large pictures of weather
with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and symbols (sun, rain, wind, clouds) and ask them to name each
respect one. The teacher will ask the learners to look outside and tell
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and if they see what the pictures show. The teacher will ask the
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds learners if the sky is always like that. Then, the teacher will
and languages inform the learners that they will be learning about the
1.5 become aware of how effective listening weather. The teacher will ask the learners the question ‘Is the
enhances understanding weather important?’
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English
develops, share their thoughts, feelings and questions Afterwards, in small groups, the learners will be rotated in
four named weather stations; Sun, Rain, Clouds, Wind, upon
15
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
about engaging events, stories and conversations a signal from the teacher. At each station, the learners will
with increasing confidence explore through observation and hands-on, some weather
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when sharing associated props and materials. For example; in the sunny
stories or experiences station, may have sunglasses, visors and sun hats. The rainy
station may have umbrellas, rain boots, raincoats and a
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
simulated puddle. The cloudy station may have a cloudy sky
The teacher will enter information into the checklist collage with white or gray cotton balls or small pieces of soft
2.11 Recognize and use a variety of high frequency
for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.11 and 2.14 fabric which learners can help complete by gluing on more
words of personal importance, such as names and
based on observation and conversation with the cloud formations. The windy station may have learners play a
pre-emergent level high-frequency words
learners. game among their group members where they would have to
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter names
use their mouths to blow some light weight items, such as
and letter sounds, beginning with those of personal
strips of paper or leaves across a table, and the child who
importance
blows it the farthest wins.
Language Arts - Writing and Representing After the station activities, the teacher will gather all the
learners and they will be asked, ‘Which was their favourite
weather station?’ Why was that their favourite station? Is
3.2 Assign meaning to experimental drawing and
The teacher will enter information into the checklist that also their favourite kind of weather?
writing
for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.5, 3.6,
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case letters of
3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and conversation
the alphabet
with the learners. Exit Ticket: The learners will be asked to draw to show one
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written language
way the weather is important. The learners will be helped to
and other representations (e.g. drawings)
write a sentence about their picture and they will be
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter shapes
encouraged to explain their picture to the teacher. To
3.8 spell name and some words of personal
further enhance the children’s learning, the learners might
importance correctly
share their ideas verbally with a partner.
Science – Weather and Climate Science: Observation and Conversation
3.3.1 understand that the weather makes a The teacher will enter information into the checklist
difference to people, plants and animals. for Weather and Climate Outcome 3.3.1 based on
observation and conversation with the learners.
Science – Product
The children’s drawings (Exit Tickets) will provide
the teacher with information regarding their
16
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
understanding of Science SCO 3.3.1. The teacher
may want to make some notes based on the children’s
drawings.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Science and Art: Weather Walk
1.1 listen to music, conversation and environmental The teacher will enter information into the checklist The learners will be taken on a short walk outside of the
sounds for personal enjoyment for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, classroom. They can either go for a walk around the school
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation or to the playground. The learners will be asked to use their
sharing the experiences of others and with oral and conversation with the learners. different senses; sight, hearing, touch, and smell while on the
stories and information sharing. walk. For example; they will feel the temperature outside or
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to interact the grass/ plants, see the clouds or dry or wet areas or people
with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and and animals outside, listen to sounds like the wind or rain.
respect Then the learners can return inside and discuss all their
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and observations by saying how the weather affects them and
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds others, as well as, what they may need to wear or do
and languages differently based on the conditions outside.
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
enhances understanding The learners will be given canvases or white blank paper
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation impact along with their water paints and paint brushes, to paint a
meaning and mood picture of outside to include people, or animals or plants.
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English
develops, share their thoughts, feelings and questions
about engaging events, stories and conversations
with increasing confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when sharing
stories or experiences
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language
structures to enhance their understanding of how to
communicate ideas with purpose and focus
17
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Writing and Representing
3.2 Assign meaning to experimental drawing and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
writing for Writing and Representing Outcome 3.2 based on
observation and conversation with the learners.
Science – Weather and Climate Science - Observation and Conversation
3.3.1 Understand that the weather makes a The teacher will enter information into the checklist
difference to people, plants and animals. for Weather and Climate Outcome 3.3.1 based on
observation and conversation with the learners.
Science – Product
The children’s drawings will provide the teacher with
information regarding their understanding of Science
SCO 3.3.1. The teacher may want to make some
notes based on the children’s drawings.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Mathematics, and Science: Picture
Discussion
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in
The teacher will enter information into the checklist
sharing the experiences of others and with oral
for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will give each learner a picture at random
stories and information sharing.
1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and illustrating a weather symbol, such as; sun, rain, clouds and
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to interact
conversation with the learners. wind. The teacher should ask the learners what does the
with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and
picture make them think of? The teacher will explain to
respect
learners that the weather is what we feel and see outside at
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and
the time we are looking out, like if it is sunny, rainy/stormy,
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds
windy or cloudy. After, the learners will be shown two large
and languages
pictures of a Sunny Day and a Rainy Day (shown below)
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
which will be posted on the board. Then, focusing on one
enhances understanding
picture at time, the learners will engage in a THINK-PAIR-
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation impact
SHARE activity, where they would describe the pictures by
meaning and mood
stating what is happening, what are they wearing, etc. (Please
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English
consult the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies
develops, share their thoughts, feelings and questions
for explanation of the Think Pair Share strategy).
18
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
about engaging events, stories and conversations Then, the teacher will engage learners in a follow-up
with increasing confidence discussion of why the weather is important by asking them to
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when sharing think and share some other things they do with their families
stories or experiences on a sunny day and on a rainy day.
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language
structures to enhance their understanding of how to Sunny Day Sample
communicate ideas with purpose and focus
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
2.6 browse through a variety of images, and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
nonfiction material in pre-emergent and emergent for Reading and Viewing Outcome 2.6 based on
level passages, or passages of interest, to discover observation and conversation with the learners.
information.
Rainy Day Sample
Mathematics - Number Sense Mathematics - Observation and Conversation
1.1.1 Say the number sequence to 10 by 1s The teacher will enter information into the checklist
1.2.2 Answer the question; How many are in the for Number Sense Outcomes 1.1.1, 1.2.2 and 1.2.3
set? using the last number counted in a set based on observation and conversation with the
1.2.3 In a fixed arrangement, starting in different learners.
locations, can show that the count of the number of
objects in a set does not change
The learners will be asked to vote for their favourite picture
Science – Weather and Climate Science - Observation and Conversation by sitting or standing. Then they will help the teacher count
the seated and the standing votes. The picture with more
3.3.1 Understand that the weather makes a The teacher will enter information into the checklist votes will remain posted on the board, while the other will be
difference to people, plants and animals. for Weather and Climate Outcome 3.3.1 based on taken down. The teacher will ask learners to help identify all
observation and conversation with the learners. the people in the picture, and as they do, a small sticky note
will be placed on each person in the picture. The learners will
be told that they will be counting the number of people in
the picture to determine the quantity. They will be informed
that they will start from the one, point to each sticker and
read aloud to ensure they have all the objects in the group.
The quantity will be written on the board and learners will
19
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
read the number aloud. The same will be repeated for every
group of objects in the picture, such as tress or animals or
things. Then as an extension, especially to more advanced
learners, the teacher can ask learners to identify which group
has the most, or the least or the same amount.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Mathematics, Science, and Music:
Video Presentation
1.1 listen to music, conversation and environmental
The teacher will enter information into the checklist
sounds for personal enjoyment
for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, Learners will view the following music video on “What’s the
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in
1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation weather like today?”
sharing the experiences of others and with oral
and conversation with the learners.
stories and information sharing.
What's The Weather Like Today | Weather Song For Kids
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to interact
with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and
The learners will talk about the things they see in the video,
respect
and answer the question asked by the main character at the
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and
end of the video: “What’s the weather like today where you
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds
live?” Then the teacher will play the video a second time, so
and languages
the learners can dance along and perform some of the
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
actions as best as they could while the video is being played.
enhances understanding
At the end of the video, the learners and the teacher will talk
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation impact
about any new words the learners might have heard or learnt
meaning and mood
in the video; such as puddles, lightening, thunder and stormy.
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English
develops, share their thoughts, feelings and questions
about engaging events, stories and conversations
Shape Weather Craft
with increasing confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when sharing
The teacher will draw three simple weather scenes on a
stories or experiences
poster board or whiteboard (sunny day, rainy day or windy
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language
day). Space will be left for learners to add shapes which were
structures to enhance their understanding of how to
already pre-cut into circles, triangles squares, rectangles, etc.,
communicate ideas with purpose and focus
and provided by the teacher. The teacher will explain to the
learners that they will be creating a weather scene using
different shapes.
20
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing Sunny day- Use yellow circles for the sun and blue rectangles
for a clear sky
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.3, 2.5, 2.6, Rainy day- Use blue circles for raindrops and grey rectangles
2.3 connect background knowledge to the titles and and 2.7 based on observation and conversation with for clouds
pictures of fiction and nonfiction passages to build the learners.
a foundation of understanding Windy day- Use green rectangles and triangles for trees and
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and plants
variety of texts that are read or read to them
2.6 browse through a variety of images, and Ask the learners to take turns adding a shape and talk about
nonfiction material in pre-emergent and emergent how each shape is shown in the weather scene. After, the
level passages, or passages of interest, to discover learners will review the different shapes. The teacher may ask
information. questions like; “How many triangles did we use for the
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some plants?” and “What shape did we use for the sun?”
environmental print and pictorial information
Mathematics - Number Sense Mathematics – Observation and Conversation
1.2.2 answer the question; How many are in the set? The teacher will enter information into the checklist
using the last number counted in a set for Number Sense Outcomes 1.2.2 and 1.2.3 based
1.2.3 in a fixed arrangement, starting in different on observation and conversation with the learners.
locations, can show that the count of the number of
objects in a set does not change
Mathematics – Geometrical Thinking
4.2.1 identify and describe shapes (2-D = squares, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
circles, triangles, 3-D = cubes, cones, and spheres) for Geometrical Thinking Outcome 4.2.1 based on
. observation and conversation with the learners.
Mathematics – Measurement
5.1.1 classify objects according to selected The teacher will enter information into the checklist
attributes, e.g., size, colour, shape, texture, sound, for Measurement Outcome 5.1.1 based on
etc. observation and conversation with the learners.
21
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation
3.3.1 understand that the weather makes a The teacher will enter information into the checklist
difference to people, plants and animals. for Weather and Climate Outcome 3.3.1 based on
observation and conversation with the learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Science and Craft: Circle Time
1.2 Demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in The teacher will enter information into the checklist The teacher dresses up in a weather appropriate attire, e.g.
sharing the experiences of others and with oral for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, for rainy/stormy weather: a raincoat, hat, water boots and an
stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.6, 1.7 and 1.8 based on observation and umbrella for Circle Time and discussion. Then, the teacher
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to interact conversation with the learners. will ask the learners the following questions to evoke
with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and thinking about the weather; e.g. What am I wearing? Have
respect you or anyone else you know dresses like this? Do we always
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and dress like this? When are we not dressed like this? What
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds other ways do you dress when going outside/outdoors?
and languages
1.5 Become aware of how effective listening After learners share their responses, the teacher will explain
enhances understanding that the weather affects many parts of our lives, just like the
1.6 Observe how tone, fluency and intonation clothes we wear. Learners will be asked, ‘Is the weather
impact meaning and mood important?’ Why is the weather important? The teacher will
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English make notes of learners’ free responses. After, the learners
develops, share their thoughts, feelings and will select materials from a large table placed in the front of
questions about engaging events, stories and the classroom in order to create one item that can be used
conversations with increasing confidence outdoors for a weather condition, then show their craft work
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when with the class.
sharing stories or experiences
Sample List of Materials:
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation - Wikki Stix
- Playdough
3.3.1 Understand that the weather makes a The teacher will enter information into the checklist - Popsicle sticks
difference to people, plants and animals. for Weather and Climate Outcome 3.3.1 based on - Glue
observation and conversation with the learners. - Construction paper
- Ribbon
- Yarn
- Scissors
22
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation, Conversation Language Arts and Social Studies: Weather Game
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in
The teacher will enter information into the checklist The teacher will ask learners to tell various activities which
sharing the experiences of others and with oral
for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, they do for various weather conditions. Afterwards, the
stories and information sharing.
1.5, 1.6, 1.7 and 1.8 based on observation and learners will be told that they will be playing a game, and for
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to interact
conversation with the learners. this game they will be placed in small groups and be given
with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and
one sheet of blank paper and a pencil for drawing. Learners
respect
will be told to choose someone in the group to draw on
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and
behalf of the group, and they can change that person if they
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds
wish after each round. The game will require learners to draw
and languages
an item in response to each round of questions asked by the
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
teacher based on things we do or wear because of the
enhances understanding
weather:
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation
• Round 1: If it is raining, what can we use to stay dry?
impact meaning and mood
• Round 2: When it is sunny, what do we wear to
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English
protect our eyes?
develops, share their thoughts, feelings and
• Round 3: What is big enough to hide the sun in the
questions about engaging events, stories and
sky?
conversations with increasing confidence
• Round 4: What can be eaten and melts quickly in
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
your hands, on a sunny day
sharing stories or experiences
• Round 5: What is something children like to do
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation outside on a windy day?
3.3.1 Understand that the weather makes a The teacher will enter information into the checklist A Sports variation of the game can be done by learners
difference to people, plants and animals. for Weather and Climate Outcome 3.3.1 based on being placed in teams and participate in a relay or tag race
observation and conversation with the learners. (indoor/ outdoor) to find the items placed at a distance in
front of them for each round of questions posed by the
teacher. The teacher has the choice to change the questions
listed above to coincide with the activity or items presented.
Learners will be encouraged to cheer for each of their team
members.
23
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Mathematics and Social Studies:
Observation, Record and Colouring Activity
1.2 Demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in The teacher will enter information into the checklist
sharing the experiences of others and with oral for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, NB: This activity should be done over at least two
stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.6, 1.7 and 1.8 based on observation and consecutive days.
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to interact conversation with the learners.
with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and The teacher will ask the learners to recite the days of the
respect week and to state which day of the week is today. The
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and learners will be asked questions such as, “What is the
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds weather like today?” and “How did they prepare or come
and languages Language Arts: Product dressed for the weather at school today?”
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
enhances understanding The Colouring Worksheet will provide the teacher The learners will be shown two drawn symbols on the board
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation with data about the children’s development of SCOs /chart which represents the sun and the rain. The learners
impact meaning and mood 3.5 and 3.8 will be asked to identify each symbol and look outside to say
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English which of the two can be seen. Afterwards, the teacher will
develops, share their thoughts, feelings and use a coloured chalk/marker and shade inside of the one
questions about engaging events, stories and which the learners have identified that can be seen. If both
conversations with increasing confidence can be seen at the same time, then the teacher informs
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when learners that both can be shaded in. Learners are given their
sharing stories or experiences own worksheets which contain the same drawings to do the
same, along with one other row (see the example below).
Language Arts - Writing and Representing Learners will be required to colour the symbol next to either
Day 1 or Day 2 of the week they are observing.
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case letters of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
the alphabet for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.5 and 3.8 Sample Colouring Worksheet (children should print their
3.8 spell name and some words of personal based on observation and conversation with the name on it)
importance correctly learners.
Day 1
Mathematics – Measurement Mathematics - Observation and Conversation
5.2.2 identify days, weeks, months, holidays, and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
seasons (standard units of measure) for Measurement Outcomes 5.2.2 and 5.2.3 based on Day 2
5.2.3 recite days of the week and months of the year observation and conversation with the learners.
in order
24
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Mathematics - Data Management and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
Probability for Data Management and Probability Outcomes
6.1.1 and 6.1.2 based on observation and
6.1.1 collect simple sets of data in the class and conversation with the learners.
school environment using observation.
6.1.2 describe data classification.
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Thinking Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
3.7 describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.8 observe and record different weather conditions for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcomes 3.7 and 3.8
(S) based on observation and conversation with the
learners.
Language Arts – Listening and Speaking Language Arts: Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Science and Social Studies: Shared
Reading
1.1 listen to music, conversation and environmental The teacher will enter information into the checklist
sounds for personal enjoyment for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, The teacher will begin by asking the learners whether they
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.10 based on enjoy it when it rains, and what are their favourite things to
sharing the experiences of others and with oral observation and conversation with the learners. do when it rains. Then the teacher will play the song ‘Rain,
stories and information sharing. Rain Go Away’
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to interact
with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and Rain, rain, go away,
respect Come again another day,
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and Rain, rain, go away,
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds Little children want to play.
and languages https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zu6o23Pu0Do
1.5 become aware of how effective listening The teacher can put the words to the poem on a chart. Then
enhances understanding read the poem aloud to the learners making sure to use an
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation engaging tone and expressive gestures. After, for shared
impact meaning and mood reading the teacher can support the learners in doing the
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English following:
develops, share their thoughts, feelings and Choral Reading – Invite the learners to read the poem
questions about engaging events, stories and together with the teacher, while pointing to each word as it is
conversations with increasing confidence read.
25
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when Echo Reading – The teacher will read one line at a time and
sharing stories or experiences have the learners read each line.
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness activities
and word play to discriminate between various (Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
sounds in their environment, letters of the alphabet, Strategies for more specific ideas of ways to help children
rhyme and meaningful sound patterns develop Language Arts skills through Shared Reading).
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language
structures to enhance their understanding of how to Then, the teacher will engage learners in some questions
communicate ideas with purpose and focus about the poem: For example; “Why do the children want
the rain to go away?” and “Will reciting the poem actually
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing make the rain go away?”
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.8, 2.10, Science and Craft: Extension to Lesson on Poem –
2.4 develop understanding and application of the 2.11, 2.12 and 2.13 based on observation and Rain, Rain, Go Away
Concepts of Print conversation with the learners.
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to The teacher will explain to learners that in some places in the
visualize, predict and connect world, there are people who do not have rain for a very long
2.10 connect words and images in pre-emergent and time, therefore, to get rain, they would make rain sticks, and
emergent level texts to background knowledge believed that the sounds that the rain sticks make will call for
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high frequency the rain and cause it to fall. The teacher would ask the
words of personal importance, such as names and learners why do they think those people needed the rain.
pre-emergent level high-frequency words Then, the teacher will tell the learners that they will be
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the making rain sticks.
meaning and flow of the language to anticipate
upcoming words Note: Instructions for making a rain stick found here
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and phrasing • Cover one end of the paper towel roll with duct
during shared reading, independent and guided tape.
reading of emergent level passages • Insert a long rolled-up piece of aluminium foil into
the paper towel roll.
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation • Fill the inside of the paper towel roll 1/4 full with
the mixture of corn kernels, rice, and small noodles.
3.3.1 understand that the weather makes a The teacher will enter information into the checklist • Cover the other end of the paper towel roll with
difference to people, plants and animals. for Weather and Climate Outcome 3.3.1 based on duct tape.
observation and conversation with the learners.
DIY Rainstick | Crafts for Kids | PBS KIDS for Parents
26
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Thinking Social Studies – Observation and Conversation After their rain sticks are done, the learners will pretend to
play them in order to call for rain.
3.7 describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcome 3.7 based on
observation and conversation with the learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts: Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Mathematics, Science, Social Studies
and Arts/ Craft: Weather Art
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in The teacher will enter information into the checklist
sharing the experiences of others and with oral for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, Weather Sorting Game - Mathematics
stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to interact conversation with the learners. Using picture cards or small objects to represent various
with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and weather conditions (e.g. rain, sun, wind, clouds), the learners
respect will work together in small groups to categorize the picture
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and cards or objects based on a weather condition. The children
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds will count how many cards or small objects are in each group
and languages (rain, sun, wind, clouds). The teacher will go around the
1.5 become aware of how effective listening various groups observing and asking questions to learners,
enhances understanding while stating how the weather is important and it affects our
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation daily lives.
impact meaning and mood
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English The teacher will discuss the form (below) with the learners.
develops, share their thoughts, feelings and Learners will be given time to do their drawings. Then, as a
questions about engaging events, stories and whole class, the teacher will ask the learners to compare the
conversations with increasing confidence activities they have drawn in each section to check if they do
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when similar things or different things based on the weather
sharing stories or experiences outside.
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language
structures to enhance their understanding of how to
communicate ideas with purpose and focus
Name________________________
Language Arts - Writing and Representing Language Arts: Product
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing and The worksheet will provide the teacher with data Draw a picture of something you do
writing about the children’s development of SCOs 3.2, 3.5 w hen there is lots of…...
and 3.8.
27
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case letters of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
Sun Wind
the alphabet for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.5 and
3.8 spell name and some words of personal 3.8 based on observation and conversation with the
importance correctly learners.
Mathematics - Number Sense Mathematics – Observation and Conversation
1.2.2 answer the question; How many are in the set? The teacher will enter information into the checklist Rain Clouds
using the last number counted in a set for Number Sense Outcomes 1.2.2 and 1.2.3 based
1.2.3 in a fixed arrangement, starting in different on observation and conversation with the learners.
locations, can show that the count of the number of
objects in a set does not change
Mathematics – Measurement
5.1.1 classify objects according to selected The teacher will enter information into the checklist
attributes, e.g., size, colour, shape, texture, sound, for Measurement Outcomes 5.1.1 and 5.1.2 based on
etc. observation and conversation with the learners.
5.1.2 classify objects and count the number of
objects in each category
Science– Observation and Conversation
Science – Weather and Climate
The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.3.1 understand that the weather makes a for Weather and Climate Outcome 3.3.1 based on
difference to people, plants and animals. observation and conversation with the learners.
Social Studies– Observation and Conversation
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Thinking
The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.7 describe various weather conditions (K) for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcome 3.7 based on
observation and conversation with the learners.
28
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
End of Week One: End of Week One: Slideshow Presentation
Science, Social Studies and Language Arts
Reassessing Previous Checklists
The focus of this ILS is to return to the question of the
The teacher should use the assessment strategy tools week: Is the weather important to me and my family?
used throughout the week to reassess learners for
new knowledge/improvements. The teacher will use pictures on a slideshow to reinforce the
importance of weather to learners, from prior class
Teacher will make notes in the anecdotal notes area discussions on the topic. Since the depictions on the
of learners who may have been able to master the slideshow would have been familiar to learners, the teacher
concept by the end of the week with dates. would ask the learners to talk about them, and discuss if this
kind of weather is important to them and their family.
After, the learners will be asked to create a drawing of a
weather scene. For example, a rainy day at home, a sunny day
at the beach or a windy day at the park. Learners will use
materials such as crayons, paints and coloured paper.
Learners will write a sentence about their drawing, explaining
how that weather is important for them and their family.
For those who have difficulty writing, the teacher will either
provide the learner with a model or act as a scribe for the
learner. Learners will share their finished work with the
whole class.
The children might enjoy this read-aloud (which has some
unexpected elements) as a final prompt to consider how the
weather makes a difference to people. Farmer Joe’s Hot
Day. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9rwZ-7H9Ok0
29
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Additional Resources
All About the Weather: https://youtu.be/ZfamR09Jklw
Online Worksheets
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/science/298757
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/general-science/1541957
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/english-second-language-esl/289330
Fry Word List: https://sightwords.com/wp-content/uploads/fry_1st_100_Updated-2.pdf
Weather pattern worksheet:
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/488922103295616605/
https://www.sciencekids.co.nz/quizzes/wordsearch/weather.html
30
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Useful Content for the Teacher
Unless otherwise indicated here, useful content to support the Inclusive Learning Strategies in this week is embedded in the ILS.
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
• Elkonin boxes: those are a series of squares used to help learners break down the sounds they hear in words into phonemes.
• Use large puzzle pieces depicting types of weather (at least four piece
• A pocket chart can be used so learners could manipulate word and picture cards to engage in reading sentences about the weather.
• Clothes and weather pin activity: https://wunderkiddy.com/activity/clothes-and-weather
• Use playdough (red, yellow, blue) to create primary colours orange, green, purple, etc
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
Play weather bingo (use website to create bingo cards using weather pictures) https://bingobaker.com/
• Content for weather bingo: https://www.pinterest.com/pin/free-printable-weather-bingo-gift-of-curiosity--499407046160949497/
• Write the beginning letter for each weather word. https://twistynoodle.com/my-weather-book-232-minibook/
Online jigsaw puzzles depicting weather types:
https://www.jspuzzles.com/en/outdoors/sky/cloud/cumulus/2455799?size=4&cut=8&scale=3
• Complete word search puzzle
• Create and play a memory game using cards with pictures of the different types of weather and cards with the names to match.
• Complete online worksheet
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/english-second-language-esl/511678
• Complete “ I Spy the Weather” worksheet.
https://rosiereader.com/i-spy-weather/
• Create “My Weather Book” with pictures of different types of weather or clothing worn in a particular type of weather and write simple sentences.
• Dress for the weather activity
https://www.twinkl.com.hk/resource/us-a-10-dress-for-the-weather-activity-sheet
31
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
II. WEEK TWO
Essential Question: Is the weather important?
Question for Week Two: What different kinds of weather do we have? What seasons do we have?
Language Arts – Plans for the Unit (5 weeks)
The teacher will be observing for children’s Concepts of Print. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for a list
of Concepts of Print.
The letters/sounds c (k), e, h, r, m, d will be the focus. The teacher might do some “stand-alone” lessons to introduce the children to
these letters/sounds. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for teaching children letters/sounds.
Phonemic Awareness skills will commence and the focal point will be on initial phoneme isolation in words related to this Integrated
Unit, such as “rain”. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for engaging learners in phonemic
awareness skills
The high frequency (sight) words it, not, run, up, we, away, find, help, here, jump, little, my will be the focus. The teacher might do some
“stand-alone lessons” to introduce these words. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for
teaching high frequency words.
The teacher is encouraged to find opportunities to emphasize those letters/sounds/phonemes/high frequency words with
the children throughout the ILS for the unit.
32
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation, Conversation Introduction to Week Two:
Language Arts and Social Studies: Read Aloud
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will engage learners in a Read Aloud for the
others and with oral stories and information 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and week. The story can be read in parts throughout the week
sharing. conversation with the learners. focusing on various lessons, until it is completed.
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to Read Aloud Story “What Will the Weather Be Like
interact with a variety of audiences with Today?”
sensitivity and respect https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BgvbpxTX0rM
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher
and children who have diverse interests, Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
backgrounds and languages Strategies for ideas of ways to enhance the development of
1.5 become aware of how effective listening Language Arts outcomes through a Read Aloud. Also,
enhances understanding provided here are some suggestions for steps for a Read
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation Aloud.
impact meaning and mood
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
Before:
English develops, share their thoughts,
• The teacher will ask learners the weekly question:
feelings and questions about engaging events,
“What different kinds of weather do we have?”, and
stories and conversations with increasing
invite them to share their favourite types of
confidence
weather. The teacher will also ask “What seasons do
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
we have?”
sharing stories or experiences
• The teacher will begin the Read Aloud video by
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
showing the image of the book cover to be read and
language structures to enhance their
ask the learners what they think the story is about
understanding of how to communicate ideas
based on the title and the illustrations.
with purpose and focus
• The teacher will have learners review the key
vocabulary words related to weather, such as; rainy,
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
sunny, windy and cloudy by completing a matching
activity of the words to a picture which best
2.3 connect background knowledge to the The teacher will enter information into the checklist
describes it. The words can be read to learners if
titles and pictures of fiction and nonfiction for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.3, 2.5, 2.8 and
needed.
passages to build a foundation of 2.9 based on observation and conversation with the
During:
understanding learners.
• The teacher will begin the Read Aloud video. As
pages are read, the teacher will pause occasionally to
33
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose point out to illustrations or ask comprehension
and variety of texts that are read or read to questions or make predictions which would help
them guide those following main concepts being covered
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies in the story: ‘What is Weather?, Seasons, What is
to visualize, predict and connect the Sun?, What is Wind?,
2.9 demonstrate understanding by • What are Clouds? What is a Thunderstorm?
responding to read-alouds with images, Rainbows, and ‘What is your favourite Type of
model making, discussions, or temporary Weather?
writing • The teacher can use engagement activities with
learners to interact with the story parts read. When
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Social Studies- Observation and Conversation reading about sunny weather, learners can be
Thinking invited to stand up and do their best sunshine
dance. When reading about the rainy weather,
3.7 describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist learners can mimic sounds of the rain using various
for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcome 3.7 based parts of their bodies or actions. When reading about
on observation and conversation with the learners. the windy weather, learners can pretend to blow
things away or act like the items being blown away.
After:
• After finishing the story, the teacher can ask
learners to name the different types of weather
from the story and express their feelings about the
different types of weather.
• Learners can talk about their favourite parts of the
story and share what they learned. Or, learners can
draw their favourite part of the story using their
own illustrations and present it to a friend.
• Learners will go outside and describe the type of
weather based on information they learned from
the story read.
34
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts – Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Mathematics, Science, and Social
Studies: Class Weekly Weather Chart
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will create a simple weather chart together with
others and with oral stories and information 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and the learners to hang up in the classroom, and to work with
sharing. conversation with the learners. each day of the week. This chart should be repeated for
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to Weeks 3, 4, and 5 of this unit. To make the chart, learners
interact with a variety of audiences with can be given various responsibilities to draw, colour, and
sensitivity and respect select pictures on a computer or print with the teacher,
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher images representing the different types of weather. Or paste,
and children who have diverse interests, design, help cut and hang the chart up in the classroom.
backgrounds and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening Along with the chart, there can also be a sentence strip
enhances understanding where learners have to add the missing word to describe the
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard weather. “Today it is .......”
English develops, share their thoughts,
feelings and questions about engaging events, Each day a different learner will be designated to be the
stories and conversations with increasing ‘weather reporter’ and place the appropriate weather symbol
confidence on the chart based on what is observed outside, as well as
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when find the appropriate word to complete the sentence which
sharing stories or experiences describes the weather.
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
language structures to enhance their https://www.pinterest.com/pin/practical-life--
understanding of how to communicate ideas
683280574698657521/ (weather chart with pictures).
with purpose and focus
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
Through a whole class discussion with the teacher, the
learners will interpret the class weather chart at the end of
2.4 develop understanding and application of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
every week by responding to the following questions:
the Concepts of Print for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.4, 2.5, 2.7,
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose 2.8, 2.11 and 2.15 based on observation and
1. Which type of weather did we have the most this
and variety of texts that are read or read to conversation with the learners.
week?
them
2. Which type of weather did we have the least this
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
week?
environmental print and pictorial information
35
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies 3. How many days in the week were rainy/ sunny/
to visualize, predict and connect windy?
2.11 Recognise and use a variety of high 4. Did we have any days with more than one type of
frequency words of personal importance, weather?
such as names and pre-emergent level high- Patterns over time: The teacher will examine the chart
frequency words with the learners at the end of each week to look for
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode patterns. Perhaps the learners will note that there were
upcoming words in emergent level passages three sunny days in a row. Perhaps they can look at the 5
days of the week and notice that there was a pattern of
sunny days, with no rain, or something like that. Then, they
Language Arts - Writing and Representing
will compare this to other weeks during the unit.
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case The teacher will enter information into the checklist
The teacher will use this class weather chart to review the
letters of the alphabet for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.5, 3.6,
days of the week with the class.
3.6 Connect spoken language(s) to written 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and conversation
language and other representations (e.g. with the learners.
drawings) Throughout this ILS, the teacher will make direct
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter connection to Science outcomes 3.3.2, 3.3.3, and 3.3.5.
shapes
3.8 Spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly
Mathematics – Measurement Mathematics: Observation and Conversation
5.2.2 identify days, weeks, months, holidays, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
and seasons (standard units of measure) for Measurement Outcomes 5.2.2 and 5.2.3 based
5.2.3 recite days of the week and months of on observation and conversation with the learners.
the year in order
Mathematics - Data Management and
Probability
6.1.1 collect simple sets of data in the class The teacher will enter information into the checklist
and school environment using observation. for Data Management and Probability Outcomes
6.1.2 describe data classification. 6.1.1, 6.1.2, 6.1.3 and 6.1.4 based on observation
6.1.3 use counting to determine the number and conversation with the learners.
of objects in a group
36
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6.1.4 describe the results of classification and
data collection activities
Science – Weather and Climate Science: Observation and Conversation
3.3.2 understand that people measure The teacher will enter information into the checklist
weather conditions to describe and record for Weather and Climate Outcomes 3.3.2, 3.3.3,
3.3.5 and 3.3.6 based on observation and
the weather and to notice patterns over time
conversation with the learners.
3.3.3 can tell one example of a weather
pattern that could include that it is usually
cooler in the morning than in the afternoon
and the number of sunny days versus cloudy
days is different in different months
3.3.5 use and share observations of local
weather conditions to describe patterns over
time
3.3.6 keep track of numbers of sunny, windy,
and rainy days in a month
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Social Studies: Observation and Conversation
Thinking
3.7 describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.8 observe and record different weather for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcomes 3.7 and 3.8
conditions (S) based on observation and conversation with the
learners.
37
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts -Listening and Speaking Language Arts- Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Social Studies – Video and Nature
Walk
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, -Analyse and Discuss a Video. All About the
others and with oral stories and information 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and Weather: https://youtu.be/ZfamR09Jklw
sharing. conversation with the learners.
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to The Teacher will have learners view a short YouTube
interact with a variety of audiences with video displaying various weather conditions. After watching
sensitivity and respect the video, learners will answer the question ‘What is your
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher favourite type of weather? Why?
and children who have diverse interests,
backgrounds and languages
- A Nature Walk- comparison with the video: Learners
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
will talk about the weather outside by going on a nature
enhances understanding
walk. They will talk about what they see, hear and feel.
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation
They will count clouds, water puddles, etc. They can state
impact meaning and mood
the colour of the clouds, sun, water puddles, etc. Learners
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
will state what other weather conditions they know that
English develops, share their thoughts,
were not displayed in the video or on their nature walk
feelings and questions about engaging events,
(stormy, snowy, etc.)
stories and conversations with increasing
The learners will be asked to draw the type of weather being
confidence
experienced presently.
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
Weather “I Spy” Game
language structures to enhance their
understanding of how to communicate ideas
This game can be used to help the learners observe and
with purpose and focus
identify the different types of weather conditions. The
teacher will explain to the learners that the weather changes
Language Arts – Reading and Viewing
from day to day, and briefly review the different weather
conditions such as, rainy, sunny, cloudy and windy, while
2.9 demonstrate understanding by
using a weather chart with the various weather symbols.
responding to read-alouds with images, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
Then the teacher will take the learners either to a large
model making, discussions, or temporary for Reading and Viewing Outcome 2.9 based on
window or outside and tell them that they will be playing a
writing. observation and conversation with the learners.
game; “I Spy”. The teacher can explain the rules of the game
to the learners by going first. The teacher will state “I spy
38
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Social Studies – Observation and Conversation with my little eye something fluffy and white (or any other
Thinking weather condition). Learners will take turns guessing. After a
The teacher will enter information into the checklist correct guess, a learner can try out the game. After several
3.7 Describe various weather conditions (K) for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcomes 3.7 and 3.8 rounds of the game, the learners will discuss the different
3.8 Observe and record different weather based on observation and conversation with the types of weather conditions identified and asked to share
conditions (S) learners. their observations.
Social Studies – Product
The learners will use the children’s drawing (to
determine if the child is demonstrating
understanding of the two Social Studies outcomes.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts- Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Science, and Social Studies: Song/
Rhyme - ‘The Itsy-Bitsy Spider’ -
1.1 listen to music, conversation and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
environmental sounds for personal enjoyment for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, The teacher will present the rhyme with pictures on a large
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation chart. The teacher will read the title of the rhyme and ask
engagement in sharing the experiences of and conversation with the learners. learners if they have ever heard or sang the rhyme before.
others and with oral stories and information The teacher will sing the rhyme and have learners to do the
sharing. same. The teacher can ask the learners to discuss what the
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to rhyme is about line by line.
interact with a variety of audiences with
sensitivity and respect
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher
and children who have diverse interests,
backgrounds and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
enhances understanding
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation
impact meaning and mood
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
English develops, share their thoughts,
feelings and questions about engaging events, The Itsy Bitsy Spider Story Telling Kit by Preschool
stories and conversations with increasing Perfect | TPT (teacherspayteachers.com)
confidence
39
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when After going through the first four lines in the rhyme, the
sharing stories or experiences teacher will ask the learners the following questions:
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
language structures to enhance their • What was the weather like for the spider?
• How do you think the spider felt? (If the learners
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing respond by stating an emotion such as sad, then the
teacher can ask - ‘Why did the weather make the
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist spider feel that way?’
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.3, 2.4,
2.3 connect background knowledge to the 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14 and Then, after going through the last four lines of the rhyme,
titles and pictures of fiction and nonfiction 2.15 based on observation and conversation with the teacher can repeat the same questions as before. The
passages to build a foundation of the learners. teacher can add an additional question - ‘if you were the
understanding spider, which type of weather would you prefer?’ Learners
2.4 develop understanding and application of will share their responses. Then, sing along with the teacher
the Concepts of Print to learn the rhyme.
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose
and variety of texts that are read or read to The teacher will use this Shared Reading opportunity to
them reinforce and encourage development of sight words, letter
2.6 browse through a variety of images, and sounds, identifying letters, etc. Link to the “green box” just
nonfiction material in pre-emergent and before Week One. Also, please see the Curriculum Outcomes
emergent level passages, or passages of and Guide for Effective Strategies for more ideas of enhancing a
interest, to discover information Shared Reading experience.
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
environmental print and pictorial information
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies
to visualize, predict and connect Colouring and Writing Activity The learners will sing the
2.9 demonstrate understanding by rhyme and the teacher can ask them -
responding to read-alouds with images,
model making, discussions, or temporary • What did the spider do?
writing. • What types of weather did the spider face? How do
2.10 connect words and images in pre- you know this?
emergent and emergent level texts to
background knowledge Then using an example like the picture below, the learners
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high will be asked to colour the itsy-bitsy spider and write on the
frequency words of personal importance,
40
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
such as names and pre-emergent level high- spaces provided one kind of weather the spider liked or did
frequency words not like (the teacher can scribe learners’ responses).
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the
meaning and flow of the language to
anticipate upcoming words
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and
phrasing during shared reading, independent
and guided reading of emergent level
passages
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with
those of personal importance
_________________________
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages
_________________________
Language Arts - Writing and
_________________________
Representing
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing The teacher will enter information into the checklist
and writing for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.3,
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and
and real and imagined topics conversation with the learners.
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case
letters of the alphabet
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written Language Arts – Product
language and other representations (e.g.
drawings) The children’s writing activity will provide the
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter teacher with assessment data on the Writing and
shapes Representing SCOs.
3.8 Spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly
41
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Science – Weather and Climate Science- Observation and Conversation
3.3.1 understand that the weather makes a The teacher will enter information into the checklist
difference to people, plants and animals. for Weather and Climate Outcome 3.3.1 based on
observation and conversation with the learners.
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
Thinking
3.7 describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.8 observe and record different weather for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcomes 3.7 and 3.8
conditions (S) based on observation and conversation with the
learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts- Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Social Studies,: Expression through
the Arts
1.1 listen to music, conversation and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
environmental sounds for personal enjoyment for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, Weather Wheel Craft
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, 1.4, 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and
engagement in sharing the experiences of conversation with the learners. Learners will use large paper plates and materials of their
others and with oral stories and information choice to make a weather wheel showing four types of
sharing. weather (sunny, rainy, cloudy, and windy). Part of their
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to weather wheel will include an arrow to point to the type of
interact with a variety of audiences with weather needed. Learners will use their weather wheels to
sensitivity and respect track the changes in the weather throughout the day and to
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher help predict the weather. Their observations will be shared
and children who have diverse interests, to the whole class, where they would need to state the
backgrounds and languages different kinds of weather.
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
enhances understanding
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
English develops, share their thoughts,
feelings and questions about engaging events,
stories and conversations with increasing
confidence
42
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when Sample of a weather wheel
sharing stories or experiences
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
language structures to enhance their
understanding of how to communicate ideas
with purpose and focus
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Social Studies - Observation and Conversation
Thinking
3.7 describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.8 observe and record different weather for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcomes 3.7 and 3.8
conditions (S) based on observation and conversation with the
learners.
Social Studies and Music: Weather Dance
The teacher will play instrumental music and ask learners to
dance freely around the room, expressing different types of
weather through movement. Learners can move like they’re
walking in the rain; stomping their feet in puddles of water
as they dance, or swirl their bodies like the wind, or behave
like sunbeams. The teacher will provide learners with props
like umbrellas, sun hats and scarves to enhance the
movements and add fun. Then, learners can select their own
instruments to play along, such as tambourines to mimic
rain or tapping drums to mimic thunder. Afterwards,
learners will be invited to share the sounds that they made
or heard and state the type of weather associated with those
sounds.
Social Studies and Arts
The teacher will explain to learners that today they will be
creating paintings inspired by different types of weather. To
43
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
engage a discussion, the teacher will ask learners the
following questions:
1. What does sunny weather look like?
2. How can we represent windy weather in our
paintings?
3. What colours might we use for a rainy day?
Learners will be encouraged to use their imagination to come
up with ideas for their paintings. Using large sheets of paper
and paints, learners will choose a type of weather and start
their artwork. When the paintings are completed, learners will
write their names on their art pieces and hang them on the
wall in the classroom. The learners will put up an art
exhibition, where the teacher will invite another class to view
the learners’ work, and the learners would get an opportunity
to describe their art.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts: Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Social Studies and Science: Seasonal
Changes
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will use floor tape to divide the class into half
others and with oral stories and information 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and (two groups) to represent our two seasons: wet season and
sharing. conversation with the learners. dry season. Give one half of the class cut-outs sunglasses
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to and the other half of the class mini cut-outs umbrellas. The
interact with a variety of audiences with learners will be asked why they think the classroom is set up
sensitivity and respect in this way. Then, the teacher will also ask the learners if
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher they have ever noticed that sometimes it rains a lot, while
and children who have diverse interests, other times it does not rain much at all. The teacher will
backgrounds and languages explain the result of two seasons with different types of
1.5 become aware of how effective listening weather.
enhances understanding
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard The teacher should introduce the idea of “weather pattern”
English develops, share their thoughts, and explain that there is a pattern of sunny days, or a pattern
feelings and questions about engaging events, of rainy days, depending on the season. The weather pattern
stories and conversations with increasing repeats every year, with the season. One season is wet,
confidence
44
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when which the umbrella group represents, and the other season
sharing stories or experiences is dry, which the sunglasses group represents.
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and The teacher will draw a line halfway down the whiteboard or
language structures to enhance their blackboard, and label one side wet season and the other side
understanding of how to communicate ideas dry season using drawn examples of the same symbols as an
with purpose and focus umbrella and sunglasses to help distinguish the labels for the
learners. Learners will be asked:
Science – Weather and Climate Science - Observation and Conversation • What do you think happens during the wet season?
• How is the dry season different to the wet season?
3.3.2 Understand that people measure The teacher will enter information into the checklist • What types of activities do people do during each
weather conditions to describe and record for Weather and Climate Outcomes 3.3.2, 3.3.3, and season?
3.3.3 Can tell one example of a weather 3.3.4 based on observation and conversation with Learners’ responses will be recorded by the teacher in the
patterns could include that it is usually cooler the learners. appropriate column on the board.
in the morning than in the afternoon and the The teacher might want to show the video about Wet and
number of sunny days versus cloudy days is Dry Seasons to the class (see below in Additional
different in different months. Resources).
the weather and to notice patterns over time The teacher will tell the children the time (month) that the
3.3.4 can list the seasons there are in their wet and dry seasons usually begin in their region.
country
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Social Studies - Observation and Conversation Investigative Matching Activity
Thinking
Learners will investigate pictures and match them to one of
3.7 describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist the two seasons in the Caribbean - Wet Season and Dry
3.8 observe and record different weather for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcomes 3.7 and 3.8 Season.
conditions (S) based on observation and conversation with the The teacher will place learners in small groups and give
learners. them some pictures showing plant fields, farms with
animals, people, activities and water bodies. In groups the
learners will investigate
the pictures for clues/ evidence to determine the type of
season. A learner from each group will share on behalf of its
members by explaining the clues/ evidence found.
Learners will discuss and draw the weather of the day and
state their likes and dislikes about that particular type of
weather condition.
45
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
For example:
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Mathematics, and Science: Weather
Patterns
1.1 listen to music, conversation and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
environmental sounds for personal enjoyment for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, The teacher will ask learners to name the different types of
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.10 based on weather that they know. They will discuss briefly what each
engagement in sharing the experiences of observation and conversation with the learners. type of weather looks like. The teacher will explain to
others and with oral stories and information learners that they will be learning about patterns using
sharing. pictures of different types of weather. The teacher will
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to explain that a pattern is something that repeats in a
interact with a variety of audiences with predictable way.
sensitivity and respect
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher Before attempting to use the weather types pictures, the
and children who have diverse interests, teacher will use the learners to show patterns such as; boy-
backgrounds and languages girl, boy-girl, boy-..... and ask them who comes next: boy or
1.5 become aware of how effective listening girl. Then another example on a white board/ blackboard to
enhances understanding illustrate patterns with two colour shades like; red-yellow,
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation red-yellow, red-....... (Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and
impact meaning and mood Guide for Effective Strategies for additional ways to help
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard children learn about Patterning).
English develops, share their thoughts,
46
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
feelings and questions about engaging events, Afterwards, learners will attempt together patterns using the
stories and conversations with increasing weather type pictures before being asked to do it
confidence independently.
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences Using weather cards learners will complete a simple pattern
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness
activities and word play to discriminate For example:
between various sounds in their environment,
letters of the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful
sound patterns
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
language structures to enhance their
understanding of how to communicate ideas
with purpose and focus
Mathematics – Pattern and Relationship Mathematics - Observation and Conversation
Note: For differentiated activity; learners can create weather
3.1.1 create simple repeating patterns (2 The teacher will enter information into the checklist symbols with playdoh and formulate patterns under the
elements) for Pattern and Relationship Outcomes 3.1.1, 3.1.2 guidance of the teacher.
3.1.2 extend simple repeating patterns (2 and 3.1.3 based on observation and conversation
elements) with the learners.
3.1.3 copy a given repeating pattern
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation
3.3.3 Can tell one example of a weather The teacher will enter information into the checklist
patterns could include that it is usually cooler for Weather and Climate Outcome 3.3.3 and 3.3.4
in the morning than in the afternoon and the based on observation and conversation with the
number of sunny days versus cloudy days is learners.
different in different months.
the weather and to notice patterns over time
3.3.4 can list the seasons there are in their
country
47
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
End of Week Two: End of Week Two: Language Arts, Science, and Social
Studies, – Gallery Walk, Fashion Show
Reassessing Previous Checklists
The teacher will do a Gallery Walk with the children to
The teacher might want to use the assessment look at all the displays that were created during the
strategy tools used throughout the week to reassess week. The teacher will focus on the questions for the
learners for new knowledge/improvements. week: What different kinds of weather do we have? What
seasons do we have? The discussion should lead to a review
Teacher will make notes in the anecdotal notes area of the Social Studies and Science outcomes for the week.
of learners who may have been able to master the
concept by the end of the week with dates. Concluding Event: Weather Fashion Show - Learners
and the teacher will have a fashion show to model a variety
of clothes and items that can be worn in different types of
weather.
The teacher would have requested prior that learners bring
in clothing items or other objects that are suitable. For
example, when it is raining outside and when it is sunny
outside; such as raincoats, umbrellas, sweaters, jackets,
sunglasses, hats, and boots. Learners will discuss the items
they brought and the type of weather they will be
representing in the Fashion Show. Then
learners will model their clothing items along a make-shift
runway in the classroom.
Additional Resources
DRY & WET SEASON. Teachable Moments (youtube.com)
48
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Useful Content for the Teacher
Next Generation Science Standards (https://www.nextgenscience.org/sites/default/files/AllDCI.pdf)
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
Weather chart and cards, matching game and season sorting game
https://www.etsy.com/ca/listing/929315271/weather-learning-weather-chart-todays?fbclid=IwAR0PkRbT-
HDBi9qan8lapZfrMMKvgaGyoS6Gyi488XYIoKA1LNaii7pgJB0&load_webview=1&bid=kJ6nALod7tDqfQ08QeF4rjNuT-1h
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies are open-ended
(rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies.
49
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
III. WEEK THREE
Essential Question: Is the weather important?
Question for Week Three: How does the weather make a difference to the land and water around us?
Language Arts – Plans for the Unit (5 weeks)
The teacher will be observing for children’s Concepts of Print. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for a list of
Concepts of Print.
The letters/sounds c(k), e, h, r, m, d will be the focus. The teacher might do some “stand-alone” lessons to introduce the children to these
letters/sounds. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for teaching children letters/sounds.
Phonemic Awareness skills will commence and the focal point will be on initial phoneme isolation in words related to this Integrated Unit,
such as “rain”. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for engaging learners in phonemic awareness
skills
The high frequency (sight) words it, not, run, up, we, away, find, help, here, jump, little, my will be the focus. The teacher might do some
“stand-alone lessons” to introduce these words. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for teaching
high frequency words.
The teacher is encouraged to find opportunities to emphasize those letters/sounds/phonemes/high frequency words with the
children throughout the ILS for the unit.
50
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Introduction to Week Three:
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist Language Arts and Science: Outdoor Picnic /
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, Discussion
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners.
The teacher will organize an outdoor picnic with the learners.
interact with a variety of audiences with
It could be under the shade of a large tree near the school, or
sensitivity and respect
in a nearby park. Learners will be asked to act like police
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and
detectives and observe their surroundings through sight,
children who have diverse interests,
touch and smells; such as dry patches of grass and other areas
backgrounds and languages
with fresh green grass or plants, animals feeding, muddy areas
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
if any, puddles if any, dry and dusty ground, movement of
enhances understanding
leaves on trees and movement of the sea or a river if it can be
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation
seen from a distance.
impact meaning and mood
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
The teacher will ask the learners the essential question for the
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
week: How does the weather make a difference to the land and water
and questions about engaging events, stories and
around us? Learners will explore the area in a safe way while
conversations with increasing confidence
sharing their observations.
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language
structures to enhance their understanding of how
to communicate ideas with purpose and focus
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation
3.1.1. understand that sunlight can make a The teacher will enter information into the checklist
difference to things on the earth’s surface for Weather and Climate Outcomes 3.1.1, 3.1.2,
3.1.2 observe that soil may change when the sun 3.1.3 and 3.1.4 based on observation and
is shining conversation with the learners.
3.1.3. observe that a wet rock may change when
the sun is shining on it
3.1.4 observe that a puddle may change when
the sun is shining on it
51
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Thinking Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
3.7 describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.8 observe and record different weather for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcomes 3.7 and 3.8
conditions (S) based on observation and conversation with the
learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Science, and Social Studies (Extension
to Outdoor Picnic Activity): Shared Writing
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will have learners gather in a circle and discuss
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.6, 1.7 and 1.8 based on observation and the outdoor picnic. The learners will be asked to share their
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners. favourite parts of the picnic and their observations about the
interact with a variety of audiences with weather. The teacher will write down on either chart paper or
sensitivity and respect board, some of the keywords the learners mention about the
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and picnic and the weather. The learners will be encouraged to
children who have diverse interests, think about:
backgrounds and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
- What the weather was like (sunny, windy, cloudy,
enhances understanding
etc.)
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation
- How the weather felt (hot, cold, warm, etc.,)
impact meaning and mood
- Activities they did while outside because of the
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
weather (collected leaves, jumped over puddles of
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
water, played a game, etc.)
and questions about engaging events, stories and
conversations with increasing confidence
During that time, the teacher will inform the learners that they
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
will be writing a short story together about their outdoor
sharing stories or experiences
picnic, by using the keywords from the discussion to complete
sentences that are given and read by the teacher. The
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
emphasis on keywords should include the high
frequence/sight words for the week (jump, little, help, my)
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
and the emphasis on the sounds (/m/ as in ‘my’, and /h/ as
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.7,
in ‘help’)
2.4 develop understanding and application of 2.8, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14 and 2.15 based on
the Concepts of Print observation and conversation with the learners.
52
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
environmental print and pictorial information Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to Strategies for additional ideas to help children develop their
visualize, predict and connect high frequency/sight words, and also ideas for leading a
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high Shared Writing and Shared Reading experiences.
frequency words of personal importance, such
as names and pre-emergent level high-frequency
Examples of sentence starters that the teacher may put on the
words
chart and ask for suggestions from learners to complete, such
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the
as:
meaning and flow of the language to anticipate
upcoming words
On Monday, we had a picnic and the weather was ___________.
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and phrasing
during shared reading, independent and guided
We felt ____________, so we ________________ outside.
reading of emergent level passages Language Arts – Product
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
Then the teacher will read aloud the completed story to the
names and letter sounds, beginning with those The children’s writing activity will provide the
learners, pointing to each word as it is read. Learners will be
of personal importance teacher with assessment data on the Writing and
encouraged to participate in reading aloud (Shared Reading).
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode Representing SCOs.
upcoming words in emergent level passages
The teacher will explicitly discuss the Science SCOs: 3.1.1,
Language Arts - Writing and Representing The teacher will enter information into the checklist 3.1.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4 with the children.
for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.1, 3.4 and
3.1 use shared ideas to co-construct stories
3.7 based on observation and conversation with the After completing the shared writing task, the learners will
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools to
learners. draw one picture to represent their favourite picnic moment.
assist in writing process
The learners will be given tape to display their pictures around
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
the completed story.
shapes
Science: Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation
3.1.1. understand that sunlight can make a The teacher will enter information into the checklist
difference to things on the earth’s surface for Weather and Climate Outcomes 3.1.1, 3.1.2,
3.1.2 observe that soil may change when the sun 3.2.3 and 3.2.4 based on observation and
is shining conversation with the learners.
3.2.3. observe that a wet rock may change when
the sun is shining on it
53
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.2.4 observe that a puddle may change when
the sun is shining on it
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Thinking Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
3.7 describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.8 observe and record different weather for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcomes 3.7 and 3.8
conditions (S) based on observation and conversation with the
learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Mathematics, and Social Studies -
Weather Likes and Dislikes
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will ask the children some questions and use their
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.7 and 1.8 based on observation and answers to complete a data collection chart. The teacher can
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners. begin with the category of favourite type of weather (sunny,
interact with a variety of audiences with rainy, cloudy, windy) to collect data for representation in a
sensitivity and respect graph. For example:
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher
and children who have diverse interests, Favourite Weather
backgrounds and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening Learner Name Favourite Weather
enhances understanding
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard Danny Rainy
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
and questions about engaging events, stories and Philip Sunny
conversations with increasing confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
Ruby Sunny
sharing stories or experiences
Sam Windy
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist (The teacher may print the first names of the learners in the
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.7, class in the left column of the chart. Learners will read or
identify their names to answer when their name comes up.
54
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.4 develop understanding and application of 2.11, 2.12 and 2.14 based on observation and Or, learners may be given the practice of writing their names
the Concepts of Print conversation with the learners. in the left column of the chart)
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
environmental print and pictorial information From the chart of favourite weather, the teacher will create a
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high Tally Chart (example below).
frequency words of personal importance, such
as names and pre-emergent level high-frequency
Tally Chart
words
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the
Favourite Tally Total
meaning and flow of the language to anticipate
Weather
upcoming words
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
Rainy l l l l 4
names and letter sounds, beginning with those
of personal importance
Sunny l l 2
Language Arts – Writing and Representing
3.8 spell name and some words of personal The teacher will enter information into the checklist
Windy l l l 3
importance correctly for Writing and Representing Outcome 3.8 based on
observation and conversation with the learners.
Cloudy l l 2
Mathematics - Number Sense Mathematics – Observation and Conversation
1.1.1 say the number sequence to 10 by 1s The teacher will enter information into the checklist This activity can be further extended to learners being able to
1.2.2 answer the question; How many are in the for Number Sense Outcomes 1.1.1, 1.2.2 and 1.2.3 count and match numbers to their corresponding values. As
set? using the last number counted in a set based on observation and conversation with the well as, an opportunity for learners to practice writing the
1.2.3 in a fixed arrangement, starting in different learners. numbers. (See the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
locations, can show that the count of the Strategies for activities to develop mathematics concepts, that
number of objects in a set does not change can be used by the teacher)
Mathematics - Data Management and Then with the help of the learners, a picture graph can also be
Probability created using the weather symbols and the total number to
represent the data from the tally chart.
6.1.1 collect simple sets of data in the class and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
school environment using observation. for Data Management and Probability Outcomes NB: Other examples of data, remembering the picnic, can be
6.1.2 describe data classification. collected and used to eventually create picture graphs, by
55
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
6.1.3 use counting to determine the number of 6.1.1 6.1.2, 6.1.3 and 6.1.4 based on observation and asking the learners questions such as who saw puddles of
objects in a group conversation with the learners. water, or dusty ground, who felt the sun, or who saw the wind
6.1.4 describe the results of classification and moving the leaves, etc.
data collection activities
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Thinking Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
3.7 describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.8 observe and record different weather for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcomes 3.7 and 3.8
conditions (S) based on observation and conversation with the
learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Social Studies, and Science: Song/
Rhyme - ‘The Itsy-Bitsy Spider’ -
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, Note- This rhyme was introduced in Week Two, therefore,
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.6, 1.7 and 1.8 based on observation and the learners should already be familiar with it.
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners.
interact with a variety of audiences with Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
sensitivity and respect Strategies for specific ways to enhance a Shared Reading
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and experience.
children who have diverse interests,
backgrounds and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
enhances understanding
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation
impact meaning and mood
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
and questions about engaging events, stories and
conversations with increasing confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences
56
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Reading and Viewing
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.7, 2.8,
2.4 develop understanding and application of 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14 and 2.15 based on observation
the Concepts of Print and conversation with the learners.
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
environmental print and pictorial information
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to
visualize, predict and connect
2.11 recognise and use a variety of high
frequency words of personal importance, such
as names and pre-emergent level high-frequency
words
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the
meaning and flow of the language to anticipate
The Itsy Bitsy Spider Story Telling Kit by Preschool
upcoming words
Perfect | TPT (teacherspayteachers.com)
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and phrasing
during shared reading, independent and guided
The teacher can have the learners sing the rhyme a few times
reading of emergent level passages
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter while following it on a large chart.
names and letter sounds, beginning with those
of personal importance Pointing to the pictures in the rhyme, the teacher can engage
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode learners in a discussion of how the land and water are affected
upcoming words in emergent level passages
by the types of weather we have.
The teacher can ask the learners - ‘what happened in the
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation
spout as it rained? The learners may use words like wet,
3.1.1. understand that sunlight can make a The teacher will enter information into the checklist soaked, soggy, slippery; or even flood. The teacher will guide
difference to things on the earth’s surface for Weather and Climate Outcomes 3.1.1, 3.1.2, learners as much as possible with questions to get them
3.1.2 observe that soil may change when the sun 3.2.3 and 3.2.4 based on observation and thinking. Then, the teacher can ask learners if they have ever
is shining conversation with the learners.
seen the land get filled with water when it rains and what
3.2.3. observe that a wet rock may change when
happens around them when it does.
the sun is shining on it
3.2.4 observe that a puddle may change when
the sun is shining on it
57
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Thinking Social Studies – Observation and Conversation The teacher should extend this activity by having learners do
some “first hand” science experiments on the ground or in
3.7 describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
spaces outside. Learners can choose a particular place outside,
3.8 observe and record different weather for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcomes 3.7 and 3.8
pretend that it is raining by using a water bottle, and then talk
conditions (S) based on observation and conversation with the
about what changes happened to the ground or the space.
learners.
Then, later during the day, the learners can return outside to
where they made puddles on the ground to investigate the
area to find out if it has dried up, and what may have caused
the puddles to dry, and what they think happened to the water
on the ground; Or, if the puddles are still there and why.
The learners will return to the class and further try to explain
the ideas of the water puddles outside. The learners can act
like scientists and draw what happened to the water puddles.
The teacher can point out that scientists observe carefully and
they also record what they observe, often with words and
pictures.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Science, and Music – Mr. Sun Song
1.1 listen to music, conversation and The teacher will enter information into the checklist The teacher will play a video with the lyrics on the screen for
environmental sounds for personal for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, learners to learn and sing along to the song: ‘Oh, Mr. Sun’
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7 and 1.8 based on observation and
in sharing the experiences of others and with conversation with the learners
Oh, Mr. Sun | Nursery Rhymes | Classic | Little Fox |
oral stories and information sharing.
Animated Songs for Kids (youtube.com)
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to
interact with a variety of audiences with
The teacher should have learners get into positions that they
sensitivity and respect
feel comfortable while learning the song. The learners can
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and
clap their hands or stamp their feet in time with the rhythm of
children who have diverse interests,
the song.
backgrounds and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
After performing the song a few times, the teacher and the
enhances understanding
learners will discuss each line of the song. The learners will
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation
say what they understand by each line. The learners will be
impact meaning and mood
asked, Do they like the sun? Do the land and rivers/sea like
58
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard the sun? During that discussion the teacher can help learners
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings understand the positive and negative impact of the sun.
and questions about engaging events, stories and
conversations with increasing confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when This is a song that the children could sing every day when the
sharing stories or experiences class fill in the daily weather chart (see Week Two), if the
weather is sunny. If the weather is rainy, the class could sing
Science: Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation The Itsy Bitsy Spider song
3.1.1. understand that sunlight can make a The teacher will enter information into the checklist
difference to things on the earth’s surface for Weather and Climate Outcome 3.1.1 based on
observation and conversation with the learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Science and Social Studies: A Nature
Walk –
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will explain to learners that they will be taking a
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.6, 1.7 and 1.8 based on observation and weather walk around the school to explore the land and to
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners. carry along paper and pencils for drawing. (The teacher might
interact with a variety of audiences with have the papers clipped to a piece of cardboard so it’s easier
sensitivity and respect for the children to handle). The learners will be asked to
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and describe the type of weather outside. The teacher will explain
children who have diverse interests, that they will be using their senses; touch, smell, sight, and
backgrounds and languages hearing to look out for ways that the land and water around
1.5 become aware of how effective listening them are changed by the weather. The teacher can start by
enhances understanding giving an example so the learners will understand what they
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation are expected to do. The learners can record their observations
impact meaning and mood through drawing.
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
The teacher can use the example of how a wet rock might
and questions about engaging events, stories and
change if the sun is shining on it. Firstly, the learners will
conversations with increasing confidence
observe or draw the dry rock. Then, the teacher will spray a
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
bit of water on the rock, and the learners will watch to see
sharing stories or experiences
how the sun can change the wet rock into a dry rock. The
learners can also draw their observations showing this effect.
59
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation The learners can discuss their observations/ drawings in class
in a follow-up lesson.
3.1.1. understand that sunlight can make a The teacher will enter information into the checklist
difference to things on the earth’s surface for Weather and Climate Outcomes 3.1.1, 3.1.2,
3.1.2 observe that soil may change when the sun 3.2.3 and 3.2.4 based on observation and
is shining conversation with the learners.
3.2.3. observe that a wet rock may change when
the sun is shining on it
3.2.4 observe that a puddle may change when
the sun is shining on it
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Thinking Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
3.7 describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.8 observe and record different weather for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcomes 3.7 and 3.8
conditions (S) based on observation and conversation with the
learners.
Social Studies – Product
The children’s drawings will provide the teacher
with assessment data on the Social Studies SCO: 3.8
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Science and Social Studies:
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist Weather Experiments - The teacher will set up stations
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.5, 1.6, outside the classroom where simple experiments on the
oral stories and information sharing. 1.7 and 1.8 based on observation and conversation effects of the weather will be performed and discussed by the
1.5 become aware of how effective listening with the learners learners. For example:
enhances understanding
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation - Station 1: What changes happens to a rock when it
impact meaning and mood rains, and then what changes happens to the rock
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard after it is left a while in the sun? (NB: Sprinkle water
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings and observe what happens)
and questions about engaging events, stories and
conversations with increasing confidence*
60
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when - Station 2: What changes happen to the soil when it
sharing stories or experiences rains, and what changes happen to a puddle when it is
sunny? (NB: Sprinkle lots of water and observe what
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation happens)
- Station 3: What changes happen to water in a large
3.1.1. understand that sunlight can make a The teacher will enter information into the checklist bowl if it is windy? (NB: Use a powerful fan, or hair-
difference to things on the earth’s surface for Weather and Climate Outcomes 3.1.1, 3.1.2, dryer for demonstration and observe what happens)
3.1.2 observe that soil may change when the sun 3.2.3 and 3.2.4 based on observation and - Station 4: What changes happen to a mountain when
is shining conversation with the learners. it rains heavily and for a long time? (NB: Learners
3.2.3. observe that a wet rock may change when will pour cups of water down a model clay mountain
the sun is shining on it and observe what happens)
3.2.4 observe that a puddle may change when
the sun is shining on it
After the station experiments, the learners will state which
station was their favourite and why. They will also say if those
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Thinking Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
were the changes they expected to happen or if before today
they have seen those changes happen. Then, the learners can
3.7 describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
give an idea of a station experiment to observe changes that
3.8 observe and record different weather for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcomes 3.7 and 3.8
can happen because of the weather.
conditions (S) based on observation and conversation with the
learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Science & Language Arts: Plant Observation/ Show and
Tell
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.5, 1.6, The teacher would have asked learners before class to each
oral stories and information sharing. 1.7 and 1.8 based on observation and conversation bring in a potted plant. The learners will get turns to show
1.5 become aware of how effective listening with the learners. and talk about their plants to the class. They can name their
enhances understanding plants, describe the colours, where it is grown/ or found, and
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation how they think their plants grow. After the learners have had
impact meaning and mood their turns, the teacher will ask them what they think is their
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard plant's favourite weather to grow, and also how the weather
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings conditions help their plants grow.
and questions about engaging events, stories and
conversations with increasing confidence* Then, the learners will each draw their plant and write a
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when sentence with the help of the teacher about what kind of
sharing stories or experiences weather conditions help their plant to grow.
61
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts: Reading and Viewing
2.4 develop understanding and application of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
the Concepts of Print for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.4, 2.11, 2.14
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high and 2.15 based on observation and conversation
frequency words of personal importance, such with the learners.
as names and pre-emergent level high-frequency
words
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with those
of personal importance
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages
Language Arts: Writing and Representing
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
writing for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.3,
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and
real and imagined topics conversation with the learners.
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools to
assist in writing process
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case letters
of the alphabet Language Arts – Product
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written
language and other representations (e.g. The children’s writing activity will provide the
Drawings) teacher with assessment data on the Writing and
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter Representing SCOs.
shapes
3.8 spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly
62
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation
3.1.1. understand that sunlight can make a The teacher will enter information into the checklist
difference to things on the earth’s surface for Weather and Climate Outcome 3.1.1 based on
observation and conversation with the learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Science: Field Trip to a Local Farm-
The learners will visit a local farm where the farmer will show
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist and speak with them about how the weather helps his plants
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.5, 1.6, (fields) and animals. The farmer will explain how the rain, sun,
oral stories and information sharing. 1.7 and 1.8 based on observation and conversation and wind help make a difference to the plants and animals on
1.5 become aware of how effective listening with the learners. his farm. The farmer can also share ways he conserves or uses
enhances understanding the rainwater during the dry season, so the learners can
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation understand the importance of the weather. The learners can
impact meaning and mood come prepared to ask questions to the farmer.
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
and questions about engaging events, stories and
conversations with increasing confidence*
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation
3.1.1. understand that sunlight can make a The teacher will enter information into the checklist
difference to things on the earth’s surface for Weather and Climate Outcome 3.1.1 based on
observation and conversation with the learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts: Shared Writing (Extension to Field Trip
Activity)
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, Sight Words Emphasis: my, help
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.6, 1.7 and 1.8 based on observation and
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners.
Letter Sounds Emphasis: /h/, /m/
interact with a variety of audiences with
sensitivity and respect
63
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and
children who have diverse interests, The teacher will explain to the learners that they will be
backgrounds and languages making a thank you card together. The learners and the
1.5 become aware of how effective listening teacher will discuss the importance of saying thank you, and
enhances understanding the teacher will inform them that they need to thank the
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation farmer for the field trip. The teacher will help the children to
impact meaning and mood remember what they saw and did on the trip to the farm. The
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard teacher will ask learners what they would like to say on the
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings card and write down those ideas on a chart or board. The
and questions about engaging events, stories and teacher will choose the most popular ideas and begin writing
conversations with increasing confidence on the chart or board. The teacher should find a way to
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when incorporate the sight words: my, help; into the writing.
sharing stories or experiences
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
For example:
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.7, 2.8,
2.4 develop understanding and application of 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 1.14 and 2.15 based on observation Mr. Joe,
the Concepts of Print and conversation with the learners.
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some Thank you for your help at the farm. It was
environmental print and pictorial information
a good day. My friends and I had fun.
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to
visualize, predict and connect *
As each sentence is written the learners will help the teacher
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high
find the words; my & help. After the words are pointed out,
frequency words of personal importance, such
the learners will read the sentences together with the teacher.
as names and pre-emergent level high-frequency
The teacher will also ask learners to identify where they hear
words
the sounds; /h/ and /m/ in the words being read. The
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the
learners will practice saying those sounds with the help of the
meaning and flow of the language to anticipate
teacher and give other examples of words where they hear
upcoming words
those sounds. Some of those words will be written on a
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and phrasing
separate side of the chart or board by the teacher.
during shared reading, independent and guided
reading of emergent level passages
Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
Strategies for ideas to help children develop their recognition
64
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter of high frequency/sight words, and also ideas for leading a
names and letter sounds, beginning with those Shared Writing experience.
of personal importance
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode Optional Activity: Learners can be given construction paper
upcoming words in emergent level passages to create individual cards with only the first sentence: ‘Thank
you for your help at the farm’. Then choose to draw, colour,
Language Arts - Writing and Representing or paint a picture, or decorate their card with stickers.
The teacher will enter information into the checklist After, the teacher will either have one large card or a
3.1 use shared ideas to co-construct stories
for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.1, 3.4, collection of individual cards to present to the farmer on
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools to
and 3.7 based on observation and conversation with behalf of the learners.
assist in writing process
the learners.
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
shapes
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Science: Sunlight Exploration-
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist The teacher will use a large globe and a large flashlight to help
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, support this lesson. The teacher can begin by asking the
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.6, 1.7 and 1.8 based on observation and learners what is sunlight. Also, why is sunlight important? The
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners. teacher will show the learners a globe and explain what it is.
interact with a variety of audiences with Then, the teacher will use the flashlight to simulate sunlight
sensitivity and respect shining on different parts of the globe. This can be done by
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and spinning the globe and holding the flashlight steadily as the
children who have diverse interests, different parts are shown on the globe. The teacher will
backgrounds and languages explain to the learners the effects of the sunlight in providing
1.5 become aware of how effective listening light and warmth to things on the earth which causes changes
enhances understanding and makes some things grow. The learners can also take turns
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation trying out the simulation activity with the flashlight and the
impact meaning and mood globe or map. The teacher can also have the learners to
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard pretend to be some of those things on the earth that the
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings sunlight gives light and warmth and have them act it out. For
and questions about engaging events, stories and example, the learners can pretend to be a forest and start as
conversations with increasing confidence small as seeds or small plants and as the flashlight shines on
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when them, they grow tall by standing up and opening their arms
sharing stories or experiences like branches on trees. Also, the learners can be taken outside
to feel the warmth of the sunlight on different things; such as
the soil, pavement, rocks, buildings, and plants/ grass.
65
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation
3.1.1. understand that sunlight can make a The teacher will enter information into the checklist
difference to things on the earth’s surface for Weather and Climate Outcomes 3.1.1, 3.1.2,
3.1.2 observe that soil may change when the sun 3.2.3 and 3.2.4 based on observation and
is shining conversation with the learners.
3.2.3. observe that a wet rock may change when
the sun is shining on it
3.2.4 observe that a puddle may change when
the sun is shining on it
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Science, and Social Studies : Weather Role
Play
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will begin by asking learners the question for the
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.6, 1.7 and 1.8 based on observation and week: How does the weather make a difference to the land and
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learner water around us? Then, the teacher will explain to the learners
interact with a variety of audiences with that they will be in groups to discuss this and act out how their
sensitivity and respect type of weather can affect the land and water around them. The
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and teacher will divide the class into four groups and give them
children who have diverse interests, costumes or props representing four different weather
backgrounds and languages conditions (sun, rain, clouds, wind)
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
enhances understanding NB: Each group will represent and play out a different weather
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation condition:
impact meaning and mood
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard Group 1: Rain
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
and questions about engaging events, stories and Group 2: Sun
conversations with increasing confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
Group 3: Wind
sharing stories or experiences
Group 4: Clouds
66
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation After the learners are placed in their groups, the teacher with
the help of learners through probing questions, will briefly
3.1.1. understand that sunlight can make a The teacher will enter information into the checklist explain what each weather condition does:
difference to things on the earth’s surface for Weather and Climate Outcome 3.1.1 based on
observation and conversation with the learners. Rain – Falls from the clouds, waters the plants, helps the plants
to grow, creates water puddles on the ground, and fills the
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Thinking Social Studies – Observation and Conversation rivers and seas.
3.7 describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist Sun – Shines in the sky, makes the ground feel hot/ warm,
for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcome 3.7 based on helps the plants to grow, and dries up water on the ground.
observation and conversation with the learners
Wind – Blows across the land, rivers, and the sea, it can move
the clouds and branches or leaves on trees and can make waves
on the sea.
Clouds – Can block the sun to prevent it from shining brightly,
can make the ground feel cool, and can bring rain.
Learners will act out each scenario one group at a time. Then
there will be a discussion by the teacher and the learners about
what happened to the land and water in each scenario.
Questions such as the following can be asked by the teacher:
- What did the sun do to the land/water puddles?
- How did the rain help the plants?
- What happened to the land and rivers when it rained?
- How did the wind affect the sea?
Then, the teacher will ask the learners the essential question: Is
the weather important?
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Science: Educational Video
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist https://youtu.be/dD0ycPpUyM4?si=fhdUhMu-
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, r01oH8A-
oral stories and information sharing.
67
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to 1.5, 1.6, 1.7 and 1.8 based on observation and
interact with a variety of audiences with conversation with the learners. The teacher can begin by asking the learners ‘How does the
sensitivity and respect weather affect us?’ Then, the learners will view the video (see
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and the link above) on the effects of the Sun. The teacher will
children who have diverse interests, explain to the learners that they will be discussing the video
backgrounds and languages afterward. The following questions can be asked by the
1.5 become aware of how effective listening teacher:
enhances understanding
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation
1. What did you learn about the Sun?
impact meaning and mood
2. How does the weather affect the ocean?
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
3. What can happen if there is no Sun?
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
and questions about engaging events, stories and
Learners’ responses will be recorded by the teacher. This is a
conversations with increasing confidence
Shared Writing experience (please see Curriculum Outcomes and
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
Guide for Effective Strategies for further information).
sharing stories or experiences
The teacher will draw a big outline of a sun on a large piece of
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
paper. The children will be invited to draw small sketches of
people, places, and things that are effected by the sun. The
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
teacher might want to show the video a second time to
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.11, 2.12,
remind the children of some things they saw that they could
2.11 recognise and use a variety of high 2.13, 2.14 and 2.15 based on observation and
put on the big sun mural.
frequency words of personal importance, such conversation with the learners.
as names and pre-emergent level high-frequency
words
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the
meaning and flow of the language to anticipate
upcoming words
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and phrasing
during shared reading, independent and guided
reading of emergent level passages
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with those
of personal importance
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages
68
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Writing and Representing
3.1 use shared ideas to co-construct stories
The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools to
for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.1, 3.4,
assist in writing process
and 3.7 based on observation and conversation with
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
the learners.
shapes
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation
3.1.1. understand that sunlight can make a The teacher will enter information into the checklist
difference to things on the earth’s surface for Weather and Climate Outcome 3.1.1 and 3.1.2
3.1.2 observe that soil may change when the sun based on observation and conversation with the
is shining learners.
Science – Product
The children’s drawings on the big paper sun will
provide the teacher with assessment data on the
Science SCOs.
End of Week Three: End of Week Three: Language Arts & Science
Reassessing Previous Checklists
Group Project - Creating a Shoebox Diorama Note: This
can be done in the classroom with groups as explained below,
The teacher might want to use the assessment
or done by the learners at home.
strategy tools used throughout the week to reassess
learners for new knowledge/improvements.
The teacher will ask the learners discuss the question for
Week Three: How does the weather make a difference to the land and
Teacher will make notes in the anecdotal notes area
water around us?
of learners who may have been able to master the
concept by the end of the week with dates.
In particular, the teacher will ask the children to state
examples of how the sun can make a difference to the land
69
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
and water around them. The children may be encouraged to
think about the educational video they viewed previously and
the other experiences they had this week.
The teacher will divide the class into small groups and explain
to the learners that they will be using a large shoebox to show
one way that the weather affects the land or water, from
everything that have been discussed. The teacher will provide
the materials, such as; large shoeboxes, small cut-outs of
weather symbols such as plain white clouds, rain clouds and
sun, small models of plants, trees, animals, people, playdough,
wikki-stix, coloured paper, etc. The learners will select the
materials of their choice after they have discussed as a group,
and work on creating their shoebox diorama. The learners’
work can be placed on display on a table in the classroom.
An example of a shoebox diorama
Additional Resources
All resources to support the Inclusive Learning Strategies in this week are embedded in the ILS.
70
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Useful Content for the Teacher
Next Generation Science Standards (https://www.nextgenscience.org/sites/default/files/AllDCI.pdf)
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies are open-ended
(rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies.
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies are open-ended
(rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies.
71
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
IV. WEEK FOUR
Essential Question: Is the weather important?
Question for Week Four: How do we know about the weather?
Language Arts – Plans for the Unit (5 weeks)
The teacher will be observing for children’s Concepts of Print. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for a list of
Concepts of Print.
The letters/sounds c (k), e, h, r, m, d will be the focus. The teacher might do some “stand-alone” lessons to introduce the children to these
letters/sounds. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for teaching children letters/sounds.
Phonemic Awareness skills will commence and the focal point will be on initial phoneme isolation in words related to this Integrated Unit,
such as “rain”. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for engaging learners in phonemic awareness
skills
The high frequency (sight) words it, not, run, up, we, away, find, help, here, jump, little, my will be the focus. The teacher might do some
“stand-alone lessons” to introduce these words. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for teaching
high frequency words.
The teacher is encouraged to find opportunities to emphasize those letters/sounds/phonemes/high frequency words with the
children throughout the ILS for the unit.
72
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Introduction to Week Four: Language Arts, Science
and Arts/Craft: Create Weather Journals
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The learners will be asked the question for the week: How do
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and we know about the weather? Their responses will be recorded by
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners. the teacher for future reference throughout the week.
interact with a variety of audiences with
sensitivity and respect Then the learners will be given sheets of white blank paper,
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and two sheets of hard paper for front and back of a book, some
children who have diverse interests, crayons, stickers, glitter, glue, etc. They will be asked to use
backgrounds and languages those things to create their own Weather Watch Journal.
1.5 become aware of how effective listening The teacher will be helping learners to put their journals
enhances understanding together and show them completed examples of some
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation weather journals.
impact meaning and mood
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard One way to know about the weather is to look outside and
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings observe. The teacher will tell the children that they will act
and questions about engaging events, stories as weather watchers to observe and record daily weather
and conversations with increasing confidence patterns every day for Week Four of the unit. The learners
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when will be asked to look outside each day and observe the
sharing stories or experiences* weather. Discuss what they see and draw a picture in their
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and weather journals which they created. Then write or circle
language structures to enhance their which word for the weather type (sun, rain, wind, clouds) is
most observed under their picture. Also, each page of their
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing drawing must be labelled according to the day of the week
being observed.
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.5, 2.7,
At the end of the week, there will be a discussion on any
2.4 develop understanding and application of 2.11, 2.14 and 2.15 based on observation and
weather patterns they notice, and be asked questions by the
the Concepts of Print conversation with the learners.
teacher, such as:
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and
variety of texts that are read or read to them
- How many sunny /rainy days did we have?
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
- What was the weather like most of the time?
environmental print and pictorial information
- How can the sky tell us about the weather?
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high
frequency words of personal importance, such
73
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
as names and pre-emergent level high-
frequency words NOTE: Regarding Science SCOs 3.3.5 and 3.3.6, (starting
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter in Week Two of this Integrated Unit. the children will be
names and letter sounds, beginning with those working as a class to collect the descriptive data (sun, wind,
of personal importance etc.) and the numerical data (3 sunny days, 5 windy days,
etc.). The children will collect data about the weather,
Language Arts - Writing and Representing individually, here in Week 4.
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing The teacher will enter information into the checklist
and writing for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.3. 3.5,
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and
real and imagined topics conversation with the learners.
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case
letters of the alphabet Language Arts – Product
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written
language and other representations (e.g. The children’s Weather Journals will provide the
drawings) teacher with assessment data on the Writing and
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter Representing SCOs.
shapes
3.8 Spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly
Science Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation
3.3.2 Understand that people measure weather The teacher will enter information into the checklist
conditions to describe and record the weather for Weather and Climate Outcome 3.3.2, 3.3.5 and
and to notice patterns over time 3.3.6, 3.4.1 based on observation and conversation
3.3.5 keep track of descriptions of the weather with the learners.
(such as sunny, cloudy, rainy, and warm, windy
days in a month Science – Product
3.3.6 keep track of numbers of sunny, windy,
and rainy days in a month The children’s Weather Journals will provide the
3.4.1 Explain one way that people can find out teacher with assessment data on the Science SCOs.
what the weather forecast is
74
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Thinking Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
3.7 describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.8 observe and record different weather for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcomes 3.7 and 3.8
conditions (S) based on observation and conversation with the
learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Science, Social Studies and
Mathematics: Outdoor Circle Time
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The learners will be taken outside to sit under some shade,
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and where they can properly observe the weather. The teacher
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners. can begin a discussion by asking the learners, how they or
interact with a variety of audiences with their family know how to dress to go outside. The teacher
sensitivity and respect will ask the learners to do the following to help with the
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and discussion:
children who have diverse interests,
backgrounds and languages - Look at the sky (not directly at the sun). Can the sky
1.5 become aware of how effective listening tell you about the weather? What do you see?
enhances understanding - Look at the trees, the rocks, and the land. Can those
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation things tell you about the weather? What do you see?
impact meaning and mood - Feel the grass and how does your body feel? Does
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard the grass feel wet or dry? Do you feel cold, hot, or
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings warm? Can the way the grass feels or the way you
and questions about engaging events, stories feel tell you about the weather?
and conversations with increasing confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
Afterward, the learners will return inside and talk again
sharing stories or experiences
about how they or their family know how to dress to go
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
outside. The teacher may need to prompt for answers, if the
language structures to enhance their
children only say that they can look outside, or go outside to
communication
see what the weather is. The teacher may prompt about
what a weather forecast is, and if the children know about a
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
weather forecast being on the radio, or on the television, or
on a website. The class might have a discussion about
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high The teacher will enter information into the checklist
frequency words of personal importance, such for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.11, 2.12, 2.13,
75
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
as names and pre-emergent level high- 2.14 and 2.15 based on observation and conversation which way best tells them about the weather and how to
frequency words with the learners. dress for it when going outside.
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the
meaning and flow of the language to anticipate The teacher might make a chart, as a Shared Writing and
upcoming words Shared Reading experience. The title might be: How do we
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and know what the weather is going to be? The children may provide
phrasing during shared reading, independent suggestions. As this Week Four continues, and the children
and guided reading of emergent level passages learn more about weather forecasting the teacher might add
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter more ideas to this chart.
names and letter sounds, beginning with those
of personal importance
Please consult the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
Strategies for specific ideas of ways to enhance the
upcoming words in emergent level passages
development of Language Arts SCOs through a Shared
Writing or Shared Reading experience.
Language Arts - Writing and Representing
3.1 use shared ideas to co-construct stories
The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools
for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.1, 3.4, and
to assist in writing process
3.7 based on observation and conversation with the
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
learners.
shapes
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation
3.3.2 Understand that people measure weather The teacher will enter information into the checklist
conditions to describe and record the weather for Weather and Climate Outcome 3.3.2, 3.3.5, 3.3.6
and to notice patterns over time and 3.4.1 based on observation and conversation with
3.3.5 keep track of descriptions of the weather the learners.
(such as sunny, cloudy, rainy, and warm, windy
days in a month
3.3.6 keep track of numbers of sunny, windy,
and rainy days in a month
3.4.1 explain one way that people can find out
what the weather forecast is
76
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Thinking Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
3.7 describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.8 observe and record different weather for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcomes 3.7 and 3.8
conditions (S) based on observation and conversation with the
learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Arts/Crafts & Social Studies: Simple
Weather Tools
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.5, 1.6, Making a Paper Windmill
oral stories and information sharing. 1.7 and 1.8 based on observation and conversation
1.5 become aware of how effective listening with the learners. The teacher will explain to the learners that there are tools
enhances understanding that people can use to know about the weather. The teacher
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation will use the example of wind since it cannot be seen like the
impact meaning and mood sun or rain, but it can be felt or observed by the movement
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard of trees and waves on the water, etc. Some weather
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings forecasters have fancy instruments to know about the wind.
and questions about engaging events, stories Children, too, can use something to know about the wind –
and conversations with increasing confidence a paper windmill!
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences
The teacher will show the video (below) to the children and
explain that this video is giving us the directions for how to
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
make a paper windmill.
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
https://youtu.be/HN0GxOQMzME?si=6tuCFccN6LOnsp
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.5 and 2.7
G9
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and based on observation and conversation with the
variety of texts that are read or read to them learners.
The teacher will work with a small group of children at a
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
time, to help them make their own windmill. (The other
environmental print and pictorial information
children might be working on another craft, or playing
games. Or, one or two additional adults might be invited
into the class to help everyone make a paper windmill).
77
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Thinking Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
Afterward, learners will go outside and test their windmills
3.7 Describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist to find out if there is wind, and by the slow or quick
for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcome 3.7 based on movement of the sections, they can determine the degree of
observation and conversation with the learners. the wind. The learners can use their tools to predict the
weather, as will be told by the teacher.
paper windmill
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Science and Social Studies: Video
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist The teacher will ask the learners the question, ‘How do we
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.5, 1.6, know about the weather?’ The class may look at the chart
oral stories and information sharing. 1.7 and 1.8 based on observation and conversation made in the ILS (above) and take part in a Shared Reading
1.5 become aware of how effective listening with the learners. of that chart.
enhances understanding
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation Then, the teacher can have learners view a video (see below)
impact meaning and mood of how scientists or meteorologists tell us about the weather
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard through observations and different tools.
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
and questions about engaging events, stories
During the video, the teacher may pause and discuss some
and conversations with increasing confidence
of the vocabulary that is introduced: meteorologist, radar,
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
satellite, patterns.
sharing stories or experiences
https://youtu.be/dLQ0lHpyZd8?feature=shared
After watching the video, the learners will say ways that
were shown in the video which tell us about the weather.
78
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing The teacher will add those ways to the class chart (Shared
Writing)
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high The teacher will enter information into the checklist
frequency words of personal importance, such for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, Please consult the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
as names and pre-emergent level high- 2.14 and 2.15 based on observation and conversation Strategies for specific ideas of ways to enhance the
frequency words with the learners. development of Language Arts SCOs through a Shared
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the Writing or Shared Reading experience.
meaning and flow of the language to anticipate
upcoming words
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and
phrasing during shared reading, independent
and guided reading of emergent level passages
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with those
of personal importance
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages
Language Arts - Writing and Representing
3.1 use shared ideas to co-construct stories The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.1, 3.4, and
to assist in writing process 3.7 based on observation and conversation with the
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter learners.
shapes
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation
3.3.2 Understand that people measure weather The teacher will enter information into the checklist
conditions to describe and record the weather for Weather and Climate Outcome 3.3.2, 3.4.1 and
and to notice patterns over time 3.4.2 based on observation and conversation with the
3.4.1 explain one way that people can find out learners.
what the weather forecast is
3.4.2 tell who prepares a weather forecast
79
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Thinking Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
3.7 Describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcome 3.7 based on
observation and conversation with the learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Science, and Social Studies: The
Weather Forecasts/Report
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will review with the learners how they can know
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and about the weather. The teacher will ask the learners if they
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners. have ever heard or seen someone on the radio or television
interact with a variety of audiences with talk about the weather. The teacher and the learners will
sensitivity and respect discuss this by mentioning the different things the person
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher may say about the weather. Then, the teacher will have
and children who have diverse interests, learners observe a video on weather forecasts explaining
backgrounds and languages simply how it is done and why it is important (see link
1.5 become aware of how effective listening below)
enhances understanding
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation https://youtu.be/_0S8VpU3bTY?si=KUQPxk3S3Z5ryCqt
impact meaning and mood
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
After the video, the learners will say what they understand
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
about the video.
and questions about engaging events, stories
and conversations with increasing confidence
Then, the children will listen to a simple weather report (see
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
link below). The children will be told that they will choose a
sharing stories or experiences*
partner and create their own weather report through role-
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
play with the help of the teacher.
language structures to enhance their
communication
https://youtu.be/_O3tiKkcP3s?feature=shared
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
The learners can have fun doing their versions of weather
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist reporting. They can “perform” their weather reports to the
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcome 2.1 based on rest of the class, who will act as the audience.
observation and conversation with the learners.
80
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Writing and Representing
The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.1 use shared ideas to co-construct stories
for Writing and Representing Outcome 3.1 based on
observation and conversation with the learners.
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation
3.3.2 Understand that people measure weather The teacher will enter information into the checklist
conditions to describe and record the weather for Weather and Climate Outcome 3.3.2, 3.4.1 and
and to notice patterns over time 3.4.2 based on observation and conversation with the
3.4.1 explain one way that people can find out learners.
what the weather forecast is
3.4.2 tell who prepares a weather forecast
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Thinking Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
3.7 describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcome 3.7 based on
observation and conversation with the learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Science & Mathematics: The Weather
Report
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation The teacher will enter information into the checklist
impact meaning and mood for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.6, 1.9 and The teacher will review with the children what a weather
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness 1.10 based on observation and conversation with the report is and why it is important. For example; weather
activities and word play to discriminate learners. reports help us know what the weather will be like so we can
between various sounds in their environment, dress appropriately and plan our activities well. If it rains for
letters of the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful the day, then we may not be able to go outside for a Physical
sound patterns* Education Class.
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
language structures to enhance their
The teacher will display on a large chart, or on the board, a
understanding of how to communicate ideas
simple weather report.
with purpose and focus
This chart will be used for Shared Reading, with the teacher
emphasizing the high frequency/sight words and letter
sounds, for this unit, and from the Belongings Unit. (Please
81
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for
further detailed support on this teaching strategy.)
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
genres and text forms* for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.8, 2.10,
2.4 Develop understanding and application of 2.12 and 2.13 based on observation and conversation
the Concepts of Print with the learners.
Sunday, June 10th, 2024
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to
visualize, predict and connect
2.10 connect words and images in pre- Good morning! I am Ann Brown, with the
emergent and emergent level texts to weather report for the week. Today is sunny.
background knowledge
On Monday it will be sunny. On Tuesday the sky
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high
will be partly cloudy, and it will be windy
frequency words of personal importance, such
as names and pre-emergent level high- outside. On Wednesday there will be lots of
frequency words rain here, so find your umbrellas! On Thursday
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the it will be back to a cloudy sky. On Friday it will
meaning and flow of the language to anticipate
rain here again. Make sure to have your pet
upcoming words
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and
inside. On Saturday it will be back to sunny.
phrasing during shared reading, independent
and guided reading of emergent level passages
Mathematics – Measurement Mathematics – Observation and Conversation Then, while pointing to the simple weather report, the
teacher will show the learners key details such as the date,
5.2.2 identify days, weeks, months, holidays, The teacher will enter information into the checklist days of the week, and weather conditions. The learners will
and seasons (standard units of measure) for Measurement Outcomes 5.2.2 and 5.2.3 based on attempt to read those keywords from the weather report.
5.2.3 recite days of the week and months of the observation and conversation with the learners. Afterward, learners and the teacher will read together the
year in order report aloud, as each word is pointed to by the teacher,
emphasizing the sight words and letters/sounds for this
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation Integrated Unit.
3.3.2 Understand that people measure weather The teacher will enter information into the checklist Also, the teacher can ask the learners the following
conditions to describe and record the weather for Weather and Climate Outcomes 3.3.2, 3.4, 3.4.1 questions to check for comprehension:
and to notice patterns over time and 3.4.2 based on observation and conversation with
the learners.
- What will the weather be like on Friday?
- What should we wear if it is rainy?
82
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.4 Ask questions to obtain information about - On which day was it windy?
the purpose of weather forecasting to prepare - How many days are in one week?
for, and respond to, severe weather. - How many days was it sunny?
3.4.1 explain one way that people can find out - Where are some places we can go outside if it is
what the weather forecast is sunny?
3.4.2 tell who prepares a weather forecast
Language Arts – Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Mathematics, Social Studies, and
Science – Representing Data from Weather Journals
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist and Weather Reports
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4,
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and The teacher will ask the children to look through their own,
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners. individual weather journals (started at the beginning of
interact with a variety of audiences with Week 4) and ask them to identify the type(s) of weather for
sensitivity and respect each day of the week. Then the teacher will give each learner
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher the graph below and ask them to fill it out with the
and children who have diverse interests, information from their weather journals. The teacher can do
backgrounds and languages the first one as an example with the learners. The learners
1.5 become aware of how effective listening can draw symbols or pictures to represent the type of
enhances understanding weather conditions for their graphs (see the sample below)
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
Weather Pictograph (Sample)
and questions about engaging events, stories
and conversations with increasing confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
language structures to enhance their
communication
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.8, 2.10,
2.4 develop understanding and application of 2.11, 2.12 and 2.13 based on observation and
the Concepts of Print conversation with the learners.
83
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to
visualize, predict and connect
Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday
2.10 connect words and images in pre- Language Arts– Product
emergent and emergent level texts to The teacher will use the graphs that the children made as a
background knowledge The children’s Individual Weather Reports will guide for learners to construct on a chart or the board, a
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high provide the teacher with assessment data on the class Weather Report for the current day and a forecast for
frequency words of personal importance, such Writing and Representing SCOs.
the following day.
as names and pre-emergent level high-
frequency words
This is a Shared Writing and Shared Reading experience.
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the
Please consult the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
meaning and flow of the language to anticipate
Strategies for many suggestions of ways to enhance the
upcoming words
development of Language Arts skills through this ILS.
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and
phrasing during shared reading, independent
The weather report might be like the following: The
and guided reading of emergent level passages
learners will begin by stating the current date, and describe
the weather outside. The teacher can also help learners by
Language Arts - Writing and Representing
checking a weather app for information about the weather.
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing The teacher will enter information into the checklist
and writing for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.5, 3.7 Today is _____________. (day)
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case and 3.8 based on observation and conversation with
letters of the alphabet the learners. The weather is __________________ here. (weather
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter condition)
shapes
3.8 spell name and some words of personal
It is _______________ outside. (temperature)
importance correctly
Tomorrow we may have ___________________
Mathematics - Number Sense Mathematics – Observation and Conversation
(weather condition)
1.1.1 say the number sequence to 10 by 1s The teacher will enter information into the checklist
1.2.2 answer the question; How many are in for Number Sense Outcomes 1.1.1, 1.2.2 and 1.2.3 Afterward, the learners will be given an individual weather
the set? using the last number counted in a set based on observation and conversation with the report template just like the above to complete. The
1.2.3 in a fixed arrangement, starting in learners. learners may copy the information from the class chart, or
different locations, can show that the count of they may enter their own information. The teacher will
the number of objects in a set does not change place the children’s weather reports on a class bulletin
84
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Mathematics – Measurement board. The bulletin board can be updated regularly by the
learners with new weather reports.
5.2.2 identify days, weeks, months, holidays, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
and seasons (standard units of measure) for Measurement Outcomes 5.2.2 and 5.2.3 based on
5.2.3 recite days of the week and months of the observation and conversation with the learners. The children may be given additional structured writing
year in order practice such as pattern books where learners add words or
letters related to weather
Mathematics - Data Management and
Probability
6.1.1 collect simple sets of data in the class and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
school environment using observation. for Data Management and Probability Outcomes
6.1.2 describe data classification. 6.1.1 and 6.1.2 based on observation and
conversation with the learners.
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation
3.3.2 Understand that people measure weather The teacher will enter information into the checklist
conditions to describe and record the weather for Weather and Climate Outcomes 3.3.2, 3.3.5, 3.4.1
and to notice patterns over time and 3.4.2 based on observation and conversation with
3.3.5 Keep track of descriptions of weather the learners.
(such as sunny, cloudy, rainy, and warm)
3.4.1 explain one way that people can find out
what the weather forecast is
3.4.2 tell who prepares a weather forecast
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Thinking Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
3.7 describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.8 observe and record different weather for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcomes 3.7 and 3.8
conditions (S) based on observation and conversation with the
learners.
85
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts – Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Science: Circle Time with Pictures
and Drawing Activity
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The learners will gather in a circle and the teacher can begin
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and by asking the learners the following questions:
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners.
interact with a variety of audiences with
- What will happen if the weather report says there
sensitivity and respect
will be no rain for a few days?
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher
- What will happen if it rains heavily for a long time
and children who have diverse interests,
during the day?
backgrounds and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
Then the learners will be shown large pictures or videos of
enhances understanding
severe weather conditions; namely, a storm/bad weather.
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
The learners will be asked to name the type of weather and
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
talk about the things they notice in the picture. The learners
and questions about engaging events, stories
will be asked if they have ever experienced a storm/ bad
and conversations with increasing confidence
weather and what was it like. The teacher will ask the
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
learners how they found out about the storm or the bad
sharing stories or experiences
weather. Also, the teacher will ask the learners if it was
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
important to know about the storm or bad weather before it
language structures to enhance their
happened.
communication
The learners will be asked to draw and colour a picture of a
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
stormy day. The children might also be encouraged to print
a sentence under their drawing, telling about their picture.
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
genres and text forms* for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.5, 2.7,
2.4 develop understanding and application of 2.8, 2.9, 2.10 and 2.11 based on observation and
the Concepts of Print conversation with the learners.
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and
variety of texts that are read or read to them
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
environmental print and pictorial information
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to
visualize, predict and connect
86
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.9 demonstrate understanding by responding
to read-alouds with images, model making,
discussions, or temporary writing.
2.10 connect words and images in pre-
emergent and emergent level texts to
background knowledge
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high
frequency words of personal importance, such
as names and pre-emergent level high-
frequency words
Language Arts - Writing and Representing Language Arts– Product
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing The children’s sentences under their drawings of a
and writing stormy day will provide the teacher with assessment
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case data on the Writing and Representing SCOs.
letters of the alphabet
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter The teacher will enter information into the checklist
shapes for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.5, 3.7
3.8 spell name and some words of personal and 3.8 based on observation and conversation with
importance correctly the learners.
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation
3.4.3 understand that it is important to know if The teacher will enter information into the checklist
severe weather is coming so people can for Weather and Climate Outcome 3.4.3 based on
prepare for it observation and conversation with the learners.
End of Week Four End of Week Four: Language Arts & Science
Reassessing Previous Checklists Concluding Event – Guest Speaker
The teacher might want to use the assessment
The teacher will bring in an older person from the
strategy tools used throughout the week to reassess
community to speak with learners and relate old sayings
learners for new knowledge/improvements.
about folks who long ago would know about the weather.
87
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Teacher will make notes in the anecdotal notes area
of learners who may have been able to master the Before the speaker comes to the classroom, the teacher will
concept by the end of the week with dates. tell the learners who is coming and what they will talk about.
The teacher will encourage the learners to think of some
questions they might want to ask this visitor to the
classroom.
After the speaker has chatted with the learners, the learners
would use that opportunity to ask questions and to compare
the ways they know about the weather presently.
After the guest speaker leaves, the learners would complete
the sample recording sheet for a guest speaker as provided at the
beginning of this unit, with the help of the teacher if needed.
The learner might also help the teacher write a Thank You
note for the guest speaker.
Additional Resources
All resources to support the Inclusive Learning Strategies in this week are embedded in the ILS.
Useful Content for the Teacher
Next Generation Science Standards (https://www.nextgenscience.org/sites/default/files/AllDCI.pdf)
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies are open-ended
(rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies.
88
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies are open-ended
(rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies.
89
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
V. WEEK FIVE
Essential Question: Is the weather important?
Question for Week Five: How do people protect themselves and their belongings from the weather?
Language Arts – Plans for the Unit (5 weeks)
The teacher will be observing for children’s Concepts of Print. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for a list of
Concepts of Print.
The letters/sounds c(k), e, h, r, m, d will be the focus. The teacher might do some “stand-alone” lessons to introduce the children to these
letters/sounds. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for teaching children letters/sounds.
Phonemic Awareness skills will commence and the focal point will be on initial phoneme isolation in words related to this Integrated Unit,
such as “rain”. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for engaging learners in phonemic awareness
skills
The high frequency (sight) words it, not, run, up, we, away, find, help, here, jump, little, my will be the focus. The teacher might do some
“stand-alone lessons” to introduce these words. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for teaching
high frequency words.
The teacher is encouraged to find opportunities to emphasize those letters/sounds/phonemes/high frequency words with the
children throughout the ILS for the unit.
90
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Introduction to Week Five:
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist Language Arts, Science, and Social Studies: Read
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, Aloud
others and with oral stories and information 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and
sharing. conversation with the learners. Before:
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to The teacher will begin the week by placing a sign on
interact with a variety of audiences with the wall or the board with the motto: Be prepared;
sensitivity and respect not scared
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher The teacher will read the motto and explain to the
and children who have diverse interests, learners that it means being ready for anything that
backgrounds and languages might happen, so that we won’t have to be afraid. The
1.5 become aware of how effective listening teacher will discuss with learners some situations where
enhances understanding it is important to be prepared such as; a storm or
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard hurricane, no power/electricity, a fire, etc.
English develops, share their thoughts, Then, the teacher will inform learners that they will be
feelings and questions about engaging events, listening to a story which tells about being prepared for
stories and conversations with increasing bad weather.
confidence*
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
sharing stories or experiences* Strategies for suggestions of how to enhance the
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and children’s development of Language Arts skills through
language structures to enhance their a Read Aloud/Viewing experience.
communication
During:
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing The learners will listen to the story being read aloud –
Clifford And the Big Storm
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist https://youtu.be/7qeL4LWWT4Y?feature=shared
genres and text forms* for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.5,
2.4 develop understanding and application of 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 2.10 and 2.11 based on observation and As the story is being read to the learners, the teacher
the Concepts of Print conversation with the learners. will pause occasionally to discuss how the characters in
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose the story are getting prepared and staying safe for the
and variety of texts that are read or read to storm.
them
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
environmental print and pictorial information
91
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies Language Arts– Product After:
to visualize, predict and connect
2.9 demonstrate understanding by The children’s drawings and sentences will provide When the story is done, the learners will talk about
responding to read-alouds with images, the teacher with assessment data on the Writing and their favourite parts of the story. The teacher may feel
model making, discussions, or temporary Representing SCOs. it is necessary to point out that in a real storm, no one
writing. would be able to go back to their houses and try to do
2.10 connect words and images in pre- the things that Clifford did!
emergent and emergent level texts to
background knowledge
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high The children will draw a picture, and write a sentence
frequency words of personal importance, to fit the idea of “Be prepared; not scared”.
such as names and pre-emergent level high-
frequency words
Language Arts - Writing and
Representing
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing The teacher will enter information into the checklist
and writing for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.5, 3.7
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case and 3.8 based on observation and conversation with
letters of the alphabet the learners.
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
shapes
3.8 spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation
3.4.3 understand that it is important to know The teacher will enter information into the checklist
if severe weather is coming so people can for Weather and Climate Outcomes 3.4.3, 3.4.4,
prepare for it 3.4.5 and 3.4.6 based on observation and
3.4.4 understand that it is important to know conversation with the learners.
if severe weather is coming so people can
respond to it
3.4.5 understand what is meant by the motto:
Be prepared; not scared
92
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.4.6 list one kind of severe weather that
might happen where they live
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
Thinking
3.7 describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.9. appreciate the importance of taking for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcomes 3.7 and 3.9
safety precautions in some weather based on observation and conversation with the
conditions (V) learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Social Studies, and Science:
Picture Scenarios and Video
1.2 engagement in sharing the experiences of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
others and with oral stories and information for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The learners will be shown various pictures of people
sharing. 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and outside in the weather. The teacher will ask the learners
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners. to say how the people in the pictures are protecting
interact with a variety of audiences with themselves from the weather. Also, the teacher will ask
sensitivity and respect the learners to say besides what they are wearing, what
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher can they do so they will not get hurt. For example;
and children who have diverse interests, walking carefully, staying off wet rocks, or staying
backgrounds and languages inside if you don’t have to go out when it rains.
1.5 become aware of how effective listening Drinking lots of water and staying in the shade as much
enhances understanding as possible when it is sunny and hot outside. Covering
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard their faces when it is windy/ dusty outside. The teacher
English develops, share their thoughts, will note learners’ responses.
feelings and questions about engaging events,
stories and conversations with increasing Examples of Pictures
confidence*
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences*
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
language structures to enhance their
communication
93
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing The teacher will ask the learners if they know what
severe weather means. The teacher will explain that
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist severe weather is a dangerous weather condition. Such
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.5, as the conditions in a storm or hurricane, which can
2.4 develop understanding and application of 2.7, 2.14 and 2.15 based on observation and cause loss of life and damage to property.
the Concepts of Print conversation with the learners.
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose The teacher will play a video (see link below).
and variety of texts that are read or read to https://www.youtube.com/live/2CZU82ImlEc?si=fE
them yifRBSPJEslGcj
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
environmental print and pictorial information After viewing the video for a few seconds, the learners
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter will be asked to talk about what they observed. Also,
names and letter sounds, beginning with the learners will discuss if they have ever seen or heard
those of personal importance of this type of severe weather, and how they think they
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode can prepare for it.
upcoming words in emergent level passages
The teacher may ask the children the question for the
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation week:
How do people protect themselves and their belongings from the
3.4.3 understand that it is important to know The teacher will enter information into the checklist weather?
if severe weather is coming so people can for Weather and Climate Outcomes 3.4.3, 3.4.4,
prepare for it 3.4.5 and 3.4.6 based on observation and In particular, the teacher may ask how children and
3.4.4 understand that it is important to know conversation with the learners. their families protect their belongings from heavy rain.
if severe weather is coming so people can
respond to it The teacher should make a list of ways to protect
3.4.5 understand what is meant by the motto: belongings from heavy rain. This would be a Shared
Be prepared; not scared Writing experience. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes
3.4.6 list one kind of severe weather that and Guide for Effective Strategies for suggestions to
might happen where they live enhance Language Arts skills during this experience.
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
Thinking
3.7 describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcomes 3.7 and 3.9
94
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.9. appreciate the importance of taking based on observation and conversation with the
safety precautions in some weather learners.
conditions (V)
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Social Studies, and Science: Guest
Speaker
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.4, 1.5, The teacher will bring in a Fisherman from the
others and with oral stories and information 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and community to discuss with the learners about his work,
sharing. conversation with the learners. and how important the weather is to him. The
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher fisherman will also talk about how he prepares for the
and children who have diverse interests, weather and how the motto- Be prepared; Not Scared
backgrounds and languages applies to him. The fisherman will talk to learners
1.5 become aware of how effective listening about listening to the advice of the weather report and
enhances understanding not being able to go out to sea in some weather
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard conditions, The fisherman will also say how he protects
English develops, share their thoughts, his boat and other belongings from severe weather.
feelings and questions about engaging events,
stories and conversations with increasing
confidence* Before the speaker comes to the classroom, the teacher
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when will tell the learners who is coming and what they will
sharing stories or experiences* talk about. The teacher will encourage the learners to
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and think of some questions they might want to ask this
language structures to enhance their visitor to the classroom.
communication
After the speaker has chatted with the learners, the
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing learners would use that opportunity to ask questions.
2.4 develop understanding and application of The teacher will enter information into the checklist After the guest speaker leaves, the learners would
the Concepts of Print for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.4, 2.5, 2.9, complete the sample recording sheet for a guest speaker as
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose 2.10 and 2.11 based on observation and provided at the beginning of this unit, with the help of
and variety of texts that are read or read to conversation with the learners. the teacher if needed.
them
2.9 demonstrate understanding by
The learner might also help the teacher write a Thank
responding to read-alouds with images,
You note for the guest speaker.
95
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
model making, discussions, or temporary
writing. Language Arts– Product
2.10 connect words and images in pre-
emergent and emergent level texts to The children’s Response to the guest Speaker will
background knowledge provide the teacher with assessment data on the
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high Writing and Representing SCOs.
frequency words of personal importance,
such as names and pre-emergent level high-
frequency words
Language Arts - Writing and
Representing
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing The teacher will enter information into the checklist
and writing for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.5, 3.7
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case and 3.8 based on observation and conversation with
letters of the alphabet the learners.
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
shapes
3.8 spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation
3.4.3 understand that it is important to know The teacher will enter information into the checklist
if severe weather is coming so people can for Weather and Climate Outcomes 3.4.3, 3.4.4,
prepare for it 3.4.5 and 3.4.6 based on observation and
3.4.4 understand that it is important to know conversation with the learners.
if severe weather is coming so people can
respond to it
3.4.5 understand what is meant by the motto:
Be prepared; not scared
3.4.6 list one kind of severe weather that
might happen where they live
96
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
Thinking
3.7 describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.8 observe and record different weather for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcomes 3.7, 3.8
conditions (S) and 3.9 based on observation and conversation with
3.9. appreciate the importance of taking the learners.
safety precautions in some weather
conditions (V)
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Science, and Social Studies:
Teacher Show and Tell
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.4, 1.5, The teacher will bring an Emergency Preparedness Kit
others and with oral stories and information 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and to show learners. The kit will include; a flashlight, extra
sharing. conversation with the learners. batteries, a first aid kit, water bottles, a blanket, a small
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher portable radio, extra cash, some non-perishable food
and children who have diverse interests, items, a waterproof bag to place valuables or important
backgrounds and languages documents, and a change of clothes.
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
enhances understanding Emergency Kit Prediction Activity
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard Instead of showing the Emergency Kit immediately,
English develops, share their thoughts, start by placing it in a mystery bag or box and asking
feelings and questions about engaging events, learners to predict what might be inside. To spark
stories and conversations with increasing ideas, you might ask: “What items would we need if we
confidence* couldn't get to a store or had to stay safe at home?”
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when Encourage learners to think of different situations
sharing stories or experiences* where they might need specific items (e.g., if the lights
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and went out, if it was cold, etc.).
language structures to enhance their
communication Show the learners the items in the kit, one at a time.
The learners will name each item from the emergency
kit and say how those items help in an emergency.
97
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing Then, the teacher will ask the learners what other items
they can include in the kit.
2.4 develop understanding and application of The teacher will enter information into the checklist For example, shoes, medicine, and eyeglasses.
the Concepts of Print for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.4, 2.11 and
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high 2.14 based on observation and conversation with
frequency words of personal importance, the learners. Reflection Discussion: “Why do we need these
such as names and pre-emergent level high- items?”
frequency words After revealing and discussing each item, ask learners
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter open-ended questions like, “How could this help us in
names and letter sounds, beginning with an emergency?” or “What would happen if we didn’t
those of personal importance have this item?” This will encourage them to think
critically about each item’s purpose and importance.
Language Arts - Writing and
Representing Afterward, the learners will draw their emergency
preparedness kit, and the teacher will help them label
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing The teacher will enter information into the checklist their drawings.
and writing for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.5, 3.7
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case and 3.8 based on observation and conversation with
letters of the alphabet the learners.
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
shapes Language Arts– Product
3.8 spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly The children’s work on the Emergency Kit drawing
and labelling will provide the teacher with
assessment data on the Writing and Representing Emergency supplies
SCOs.
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation
3.4.3 understand that it is important to know The teacher will enter information into the checklist
if severe weather is coming so people can for Weather and Climate Outcomes 3.4.3, 3.4.4,
prepare for it 3.4.5 and 3.4.6 based on observation and
3.4.4 understand that it is important to know conversation with the learners.
if severe weather is coming so people can
respond to it
98
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.4.5 understand what is meant by the motto:
Be prepared; not scared
3.4.6 list one kind of severe weather that
might happen where they live
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
Thinking
3.9. appreciate the importance of taking The teacher will enter information into the checklist
safety precautions in some weather for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcome 3.9 based
conditions (V) on observation and conversation with the learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Science, and Social Studies:
Creating a Stormy Night, Safety Drills and Sirens
1.1 listen to music, conversation and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
environmental sounds for personal for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.1, 1.2, 1.5,
enjoyment 1.6, 1.7 and 1.8 based on observation and The teacher will help the children to re-create the
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, conversation with the learners. experience of a stormy night. Some learners will
engagement in sharing the experiences of volunteer to play musical instruments; such as drums
others and with oral stories and information or containers, shak-shaks, cymbals or metal lids, wind
sharing. chimes, and rain sticks to create a stormy night. The
1.5 become aware of how effective listening learners will identify the various sounds that are
enhances understanding represented in a storm from their instruments, while
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation the other learners will explain how they will prepare
impact meaning and mood themselves when such sounds are heard. Then learners
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard will switch roles and do the same.
English develops, share their thoughts, The learners can also describe the sounds as loud or
feelings and questions about engaging events, soft, and fast or slow.
stories and conversations with increasing The learners will name their favourite sound and their
confidence most disliked sound, if any.
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences The teacher will ask the learners if they know what
drills are. The learners will be given opportunities to
practice some safety response drills by following the
instructions of the teacher. The teacher will explain that
99
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation there are different drills for different emergencies, such
as those caused by the effects of severe weather.
3.4.3 understand that it is important to know
if severe weather is coming so people can The teacher will enter information into the checklist One drill can be done by a family at home, when the
prepare for it for Weather and Climate Outcomes 3.4.3, 3.4.4, parents/caregivers help the children to learn about
3.4.4 understand that it is important to know 3.4.5 and 3.4.6 based on observation and places at home that they can use as a safe place if there
if severe weather is coming so people can conversation with the learners. is a storm or hurricane. When families and children
respond to it and people at a school practice what to do in an
3.4.5 understand what is meant by the motto: emergency, they are following the motto: Be Prepared;
Be prepared; not scared Not Scared.
3.4.6 list one kind of severe weather that
might happen where they live The teacher will also discuss the use of sirens as a
warning mechanism due to severe weather conditions,
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Social Studies – Observation and Conversation The teacher will show the learners a picture of a siren
Thinking and explain how it is used to alert people that it is time
to evacuate or leave an area because there is a
3.9. appreciate the importance of taking The teacher will enter information into the checklist dangerous weather situation approaching. The teacher
safety precautions in some weather for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcome 3.9 based will play the audio of a siren for the learners to listen
conditions (V) on observation and conversation with the learners. to. After, the teacher will ask the learners if drills and
sirens are important.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Science, and Social Studies: Be
Prepared: Video Presentation
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity,
The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of
for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will ask the learners the question for the
others and with oral stories and information
1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.10 based on observation week: How do people protect themselves and their
sharing.
and conversation with the learners. belongings from the weather? The learners who may
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to
have already memorized the motto by now will be
interact with a variety of audiences with
asked to say it aloud: Be Prepared, Not Scared. The
sensitivity and respect
teacher will explain to the learners that they will be
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher
viewing a short video on severe weather preparedness
and children who have diverse interests,
(see the link below).
backgrounds and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
https://youtu.be/aEkAzbM4_HU?si=fT7wRrw_2JOU
enhances understanding
-iry
100
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation From the video, the learners will identify all the
impact meaning and mood preparedness tips they observed. The learners will be
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard asked to give other ways people can protect
English develops, share their thoughts, themselves, their animals, or their belongings which
feelings and questions about engaging events, were not included in the video.
stories and conversations with increasing
confidence The teacher can help them come up with those tips.
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when For example, trim branches on trees or cut them down,
sharing stories or experiences place pets inside, or let them loose if possible. Repair
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness broken fences, if you live close to a river or sea, you
activities and word play to discriminate may have to move away until the storm passes, and
between various sounds in their environment, secure vehicles in garages or somewhere away from
letters of the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful trees or electric poles.
sound patterns
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and After, the teacher will ask the learners to draw one way
language structures to enhance their they can help their family prepare for a storm or
understanding of how to communicate ideas hurricane. The learners will show and talk about their
with purpose and focus drawings to the class.
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
2.4 develop understanding and application of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
the Concepts of Print for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.4, 2.11 and
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high 2.14 based on observation and conversation with
frequency words of personal importance, the learners.
such as names and pre-emergent level high-
frequency words
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with
those of personal importance
Language Arts - Writing and
Representing
The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing
for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.5, 3.7
and writing
101
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case and 3.8 based on observation and conversation with
letters of the alphabet the learners.
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
shapes
3.8 spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation
3.4.3 understand that it is important to know The teacher will enter information into the checklist
if severe weather is coming so people can for Weather and Climate Outcomes 3.4.3, 3.4.4,
prepare for it 3.4.5 and 3.4.6 based on observation and
3.4.4 understand that it is important to know conversation with the learners.
if severe weather is coming so people can
respond to it Science– Product
3.4.5 understand what is meant by the motto:
Be prepared; not scared The children’s drawings will provide the teacher
3.4.6 list one kind of severe weather that with assessment data on the Science SCO 3.4.5
might happen where they live
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
Thinking
3.7 describe various weather conditions (K) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.9. appreciate the importance of taking for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcomes 3.7 and 3.9
safety precautions in some weather based on observation and conversation with the
conditions (V) learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Science and Arts/Crafts: Building
a Shelter
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will ask the question for the week: How do
others and with oral stories and information 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.10 based on observation people protect themselves and their belongings from
sharing. and conversation with the learners. the weather? The teacher will hold a discussion with
the children about what might happen if there is too
102
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to much sunlight and heat on their bodies, or on some of
interact with a variety of audiences with their belongings.
sensitivity and respect
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher The teacher will explain that the children will be
and children who have diverse interests, building a model of a shelter that is used to keep
backgrounds and languages people, animals, and things safe from the sunlight.
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
enhances understanding The learners can choose the type of shelter they will
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation build and the reason for building it. Examples of
impact meaning and mood shelters are houses, kennels, tents, schools, and
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard churches.
English develops, share their thoughts,
feelings and questions about engaging events, The learners will select materials from the teacher’s
stories and conversations with increasing Arts/Crafts table to create their shelters. The teacher is
confidence encouraged to let the children start to build their
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when shelters, then stop the class. Ask all the children to
sharing stories or experiences step away from their work and tell about any problems
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness they are having or how they have figured out how to
activities and word play to discriminate solve a problem (e.g. to get the walls of their shelter to
between various sounds in their environment, stand up).
letters of the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful
sound patterns After this discussion, all the children may return to
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and their building with some new ideas of how to solve any
language structures to enhance their problems they might be having.
understanding of how to communicate ideas
with purpose and focus When all the shelters are completed, the learners will
label them with the help of the teacher and place them
Science – Weather and Climate Science – Observation and Conversation on display for other learners and teachers, as well as
parents, to view.
3.2.1 explain why people might want to The teacher will enter information into the checklist
reduce the warming effect of the sun for Weather and Climate Outcomes 3.2.1, 3.2.2,
3.2.2 name one thing people can build to 3.2.3, 3.2.4, 3.2.5 and 3.2.6 based on observation
minimize the warming effect of the sun and conversation with the learners.
3.2.3 explain one thing that people might do
to solve problems like the warming effect of
the sun
103
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.2.4 tell one way that the child may protect
themselves and their belongings from the
sun, or the rain
3.2.5 design a structure that will keep the rain
or sun off their play things at their house
3.2.6 build a structure that will keep the rain
or sun off their play things at their house
End of Week Five Concluding Event – End of Week Five, and End of
the Integrated Unit
Reassessing Previous Checklists Language Arts, Science, Social Studies,
Mathematics
The teacher might want to use the assessment
strategy tools used throughout the week to reassess The teacher will review the essential question for the
learners for new knowledge/improvements. unit by asking the learners: Is the Weather Important?
The children will be reminded of the answers they gave
Teacher will make notes in the anecdotal notes area at the beginning of the unit, and asked to consider if
of learners who may have been able to master the they have more ideas now.
concept by the end of the week with dates.
The teacher will take the children on a Gallery Walk to
remind them of all the experiences they had during the
5 weeks. In this way, the teacher will prepare the
children to be “tourist guides” for their family
members, or other adults from the school, or children
from another class.
Family members, or other adults from the school, or
children from another class will be invited to come for
a Celebration of Learning. Each child will take a few
visitors around the room and explain what they
learned.
The session might end with a cake or another special
treat to celebrate “Being Prepared; Not Scared”.
104
Kindergarten Curriculum – Weather
Additional Resources
What to Pack in your Emergency Kit | Be Prepared, Not Scared (youtube.com)
Storm is Coming! By Heather Tekavec & Margaret Spengler (youtube.com)
Flooding Explanation- Learn about Flood- Video for kids (youtube.com)
🔥 Fire Safety for Kids | Fire Drill at School | Fire Safety Awareness Week | Twinkl USA (youtube.com)
How To Survive A House Fire ? | Fire Safety Education for Kids | The Dr Binocs Show | Peekaboo Kidz - YouTube
How to Call 911 - Life Skills for Kids! (youtube.com)
Useful Content for the Teacher
Next Generation Science Standards (https://www.nextgenscience.org/sites/default/files/AllDCI.pdf)
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
Fire Drill Rules Social Story (with Visuals for ELLs) (youtube.com)
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies
are open-ended (rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for
Effective Strategies.
105
