November 2024
OHPC KINDERGARTEN
CELEBRATIONS
INTEGRATED UNIT #3 JANUARY - FEBRUARY 4 WEEKS
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Wee k 1
What are some
festivals or
celebrations
celebrated with
my family?
Integrated Unit on
Week 4
Celebrations
What do I like Week 2
about What do I like Does every
Celebrations family celebrate
about
with my family? the same festivals
Celebrations with
in the same way?
We ek 3
What are the
specia l foods,
decoratio ns, events
we expe rience in
my famil y for these
celebr ations?
2
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Table of Contents
Introduction to Celebrations Integrated Unit ......................................................................................................................................... 4
Essential Question: “What Do I Like About Celebrations With My Family?” .................................................................................... 6
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Linked to Inclusive Learning Strategies in this Integrated Unit...................................................... 7
Overview and Preparation ...................................................................................................................................................................... 10
Sample Letter to Parents/Caregivers ..................................................................................................................................................... 11
Sample Recording Sheet After a Guest Speaker or Field Trip ............................................................................................................. 12
Detailed Four-Week Plan ........................................................................................................................................................................ 13
I. WEEK ONE ................................................................................................................................................................................ 13
II. WEEK TWO ............................................................................................................................................................................... 28
III. WEEK THREE .......................................................................................................................................................................... 42
IV. WEEK FOUR ............................................................................................................................................................................. 57
3
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Introduction to Celebrations Integrated Unit
The Kindergarten Curriculum consists of 6 documents:
• Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies
• Integrated Unit # 1 – Belonging
• Integrated Unit #2 – Weather
• Integrated Unit #3 – Celebrations
• Integrated Unit #4 – Plants and Animals
• Integrated Unit #5 – Games
The Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies document provides the framework for the delivery of the curriculum. Teachers must
examine this document prior to teaching this Unit to have a thorough understanding of the learning outcomes for Kindergarten, to teach the Integrated
Unit effectively and assess learner progress.
The Integrated Topics have been chosen to meet the learning outcomes for Language Arts, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies. No one Integrated
Unit contains all outcomes. Rather, they are spread across the Integrated Units. The five Integrated Topics are: Belonging, Celebrations, Weather,
Plants and Animals and Games with each having its own curriculum guide. This document contains the Learning Outcomes and Inclusive Learning
and Assessment Strategies that will be taught in the Celebrations Integrated Unit. The following table highlights the letters, sounds, words and specific
concepts in mathematics that are designated to be taught in each of the Integrated Units.
First IU Topic Second IU Topic Third IU Topic Fourth IU Topic Fifth IU Topic
Integrated Unit Topic Belonging Weather Celebrations Plants and Animals Games
Proposed Sequence for s, a, t, i, p, n c(k), e, h, r, m, d g, o, u, l, f, b z, w, y, x j, qu, v
Language Arts Letters and
Sounds
Proposed sequence for Pre-primer words Pre-primer words Primer words Primer words Primer words
Language Arts Sight Words
(loosely following Dolch sight a, and, big, can, go, I, in, it, not, run, up, we, one, three, two, four, all, am, at, be, but, said, where, she,
words) is, me, see, the, to away, find, help, here, look, make, play, did, do, get, he, like, they, was, went, will,
4
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
First IU Topic Second IU Topic Third IU Topic Fourth IU Topic Fifth IU Topic
jump, little, my you, yellow, blue, no, on, please, ran, yes, eat, good, have,
red, brown, black, say into, new, now,
white, come, down there, this, with
Proposed Sequence for Strand 1 Strand 1 Strand 1 Strand 1 Strand 1
Math Skills (refer to Strand 3, 6 Strand 3, 6 Strand 3, 6 Strand 2 Strand 2
outcomes for Kindergarten Strand 4 Strand 3, 6 Strand 5
Mathematics in this document) Strand 3, 6
Teaching and learning through Integrated Units provides engaging, authentic, and relevant opportunities for children to learn knowledge, skills, and values
in Language Arts, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies. The children experience learning as a whole and they see “academic” knowledge and skills
being applied to topics that are part of their lived experiences. Where appropriate, teachers may find ways that Health and Physical Well-being, Arts and
Crafts, Music, and Additional Languages may be a part of the Integrated Units.
Important Note
The intent of this unit is to teach the meaning of celebrations and to encourage understanding and acceptance of diversity.
With our increasing multi-cultural communities, it is difficult to anticipate the religious and cultural backgrounds of all
children. However, it is important that teachers are aware of their learners’ religious and cultural backgrounds and are
careful not to make assumptions so that this diversity is respected. This is achieved through the communication with
parents that is emphasised throughout this Integrated Unit. Through discussion with parents, teachers are encouraged to be
familiar with the celebrations which are part of their family lives. The teachers will then be able to modify any of the
Inclusive Learning Strategies described in this Unit so that all the children in the class feel included.
5
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Essential Question: “What Do I Like About Celebrations With My Family?”
The Essential Question provides the over-arching focus throughout the unit. Teachers may start the unit by asking their learners the question (and
perhaps create a chart with the learners’ answers). Teachers and children will revisit the question at the end of the unit and consider what they have
learned.
The Essential Question should be posted in the classroom and referred to frequently. If a visitor enters the room, it should be obvious what the children
are learning about. If a visitor/parent/administrator asks the children what they are learning about, the children should be able to readily answer.
Essential Question: What do I like about Celebrations with my family?
Weekly Questions:
Week 1: What are some festivals or celebrations celebrated with my family?
Week 2: Does every family celebrate the same festivals in the same way?
Week 3: What are the special foods, decorations events/activities we experience in my family for these celebrations?
Week 4: What do I like about celebrations with my family?
6
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Linked to Inclusive Learning Strategies in this Integrated Unit1
Language Arts: These outcomes are taken from the OHPC Kindergarten Curriculum and Assessment Guidelines document and have been distributed to fit the weekly questions
in this Integrated Unit.
SCO Strand 1: Listening and Speaking
1.1 Listen to music, conversation and environmental sounds for personal enjoyment
1.2 Demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in sharing the experiences of others and with oral stories and information sharing.
1.3 Use social listening and speaking skills to interact with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and respect
1.4 Interact and collaborate with the teacher and children who have diverse interests, backgrounds and languages
1.5 Become aware of how effective listening enhances understanding
1.6 Observe how tone, fluency and intonation impact meaning and mood
1.7 Use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English develops, share their thoughts, feelings and questions about engaging events, stories and
conversations with increasing confidence
1.8 Develop increasing clarity and focus when sharing stories or experiences
1.9 Engage in active phonological awareness activities and word play to discriminate between various sounds in their environment, letters of the
alphabet, rhyme and meaningful sound patterns
1.10 Develop and apply vocabulary and language structures to enhance their understanding of how to communicate ideas with purpose and focus
SCO Strand 2: Reading and Viewing
2.1 Interact meaningfully with a wide range of genres and text forms
2.3 Connect background knowledge to the titles and pictures of fiction and nonfiction passages to build a foundation of understanding
2.4 Develop understanding and application of the Concepts of Print
2.5 Develop knowledge about the purpose and variety of texts that are read or read to them
2.6 Browse through a variety of images, and nonfiction material in pre-emergent and emergent level passages, or passages of interest, to discover
information.
2.7 Demonstrate understanding of some environmental print and pictorial information
2.8 Begin to apply comprehension strategies to visualize, predict and connect
2.9 Demonstrate understanding by responding to read-alouds with images, model making, discussions, or temporary writing
1 Note: All Kindergarten Curriculum Outcomes are available in the OHPC Kindergarten Curriculum and Assessment Guidelines document. An individual Integrated
Unit does not contain all of the outcomes for the entire curriculum.
7
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
SCO Strand 2: Reading and Viewing
2.11 Recognise and use a variety of high frequency words of personal importance, such as names and pre-emergent level high-frequency words
2.12 Participate in shared reading and use the meaning and flow of the language to anticipate upcoming words
2.13 Begin to demonstrate fluency and phrasing during shared reading, independent and guided reading of emergent level passages
2.14 Identify an increasing number of letter names and letter sounds, beginning with those of personal importance
2.15 Use known letter sounds to decode upcoming words in emergent level passages
SCO Strand 3: Writing and Representing
3.1 Use shared ideas to co-construct stories
3.2 Assign meaning to experimental drawing and writing
3.3 Begin expressive writing to share ideas and real and imagined topics
3.4 Use peer collaboration and classroom tools to assist in writing process
3.5 Learn to print the upper and lower case letters of the alphabet
3.6 Connect spoken language(s) to written language and other representations (e.g. drawings)
3.7 Connect phonological awareness to letter shapes
3.8 Spell name and some words of personal importance correctly
Mathematics: These outcomes are taken from the OHPC Kindergarten Curriculum and Assessment Guidelines document and have been distributed to fit the weekly questions
in this Integrated Unit.
SCO Strand 1: Number Sense
1.1.1 Say the number sequence to 10 by 1s
1.1.8 Count with meaning to 10, by building quantities
1.1.9 Count with meaning to 10, by matching quantity and numeral
1.2.1 Represent a given number up to 10 using a variety of concrete models, including 5 and 10 frames
1.2.2 Answer the question: How many are in the set? Using the last number counted in a set
SCO Strand 3: Pattern and Relationship
3.1.1 Create simple repeating patterns (2 elements)
3.1.2 Extend simple repeating patterns (2 elements)
3.1.3 Copy a given repeating pattern
3.1.4 Extend a variety of given repeating patterns to two more repetitions
3.1.6 Identify and describe a repeating pattern in the classroom, the school, and outdoors
SCO Strand 4: Geometrical Thinking
4.2.1 Identify and describe shapes (2-D = squares, circles, triangles, 3-D = cubes, cones, and spheres).
4.2.2 Describe objects in the environment using names of shapes and describe the relative positions of these objects using terms such as above,
8
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
SCO Strand 4: Geometrical Thinking
below, beside, in front of, behind, and next to.
4.2.3 Correctly name shapes regardless of their orientations or overall size (2-D = squares, circles, triangles, 3-D = cubes, cones, and spheres).
SCO Strand 5: Measurement
5.1.2 Classify objects and count the number of objects in each category
SCO Strand 6: Data Management and Probability
6.1.1 Collect simple sets of data in the class and school environment using observation.
6.1.2 Describe data classification.
6.1.3 Use counting to determine the number of objects in a group.
6.1.4 Describe the results of classification and data collection activities.
Science: This Integrated Unit does not have any specific science outcomes assigned.
Social Studies: These outcomes are taken from the OHPC Kindergarten Curriculum and Assessment Guidelines document and have been distributed to fit the weekly questions
in this Integrated Unit.
SCO Strand 1: Myself – Historical and Cultural Thinking
1.2.1 Name one religious and one national festival celebrated in their country. (K)
1.2.2 Understand the significance and importance of religious and national festivals.(S)
1.2.3 Appreciate that their country has different celebrations and traditions. (V)
1.2.4 Identify customs (food, music, dance language) associated with these celebrations (K)
1.2.5 Make presentations on customs associated with these celebrations (S)
1.2.6 Appreciate the diversity of customs and take pride in this (V)
9
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Overview and Preparation
Preparation of the Room
Teachers are encouraged to display the Essential Question for the Integrated Unit on a bulletin board or the wall.
Resources
Teachers are encouraged to look through the entire plan for the Integrated Unit on Celebrations (below) and gather resources needed to teach
this unit.
Possible guest speakers and field trip(s)
When preparing for this unit, teachers are encouraged to consider: What/who is in the school/neighbourhood to help us learn about
Celebrations? Before any guest speaker comes to the class, the children will be guided to think of questions to ask him/her. After the guest speaker
leaves, the children will complete a sheet that shows what they learned (in pictures and words, with help). Sample of that sheet is provided on Page 10 of
this document.
Letter Introducing the New Unit to Parents/Families
One way to find out who might come into the classroom as a guest speaker is to send a note home (and circulate in the school) telling what the
unit will be about and asking if anyone knows someone who could come into the classroom. In the letter, describe the focus of the Integrated Unit, ask
for specific resources (if appropriate), provide some examples for guest speakers, such as “someone who has….”, “someone who knows about…”.
Sample letter is provided on Page 9 of this document.
Consider possible play connections/materials (some possibilities are listed below)
Art/craft materials
Paint easel
Water table
Sand table
Toys connected to the topic
Blocks
Dress-ups
Puzzles
10
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Sample Letter to Parents/Caregivers
School logo?
Date
Dear Parents and Caregivers,
On Monday, (date), we will be starting our second Integrated Unit of study. We will be learning all about “Celebrations” and we will be
thinking about the question “What do I like about Celebrations with my family?” This unit of study will be the focus in our classroom until (date).
We are wondering if any of you have a particular interest, or experience with Celebrations and Festivals and if you could come into our class
one afternoon to tell us about it. Perhaps you could share a special tradition, special food, special decorations or other events you do with your
family as part of this celebration or festival.
Or, perhaps you know someone else in the community who might be willing to come into our class to help us learn more about local or
national celebrations or festivals.
If you can help us out, please contact _______________, phone: _______________, and we will find a day and time for you, or someone
you might suggest, to visit our class.
Meanwhile, please ask your child about what he or she is learning about Celebrations and Festivals, and enjoy some discussions about this
topic at home!
Thank you so much,
(Teacher)
11
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Sample Recording Sheet After a Guest Speaker or Field Trip
What I learned from ___ (place for guest speaker’s name, or location of field trip) ________________________
(Place for the child to do a drawing based on the guest speaker’s visit)
(lines for child to write a word or two, probably with assistance from the teacher)
___________________________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________________________
12
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Detailed Four-Week Plan
I. WEEK ONE
Essential Question: What do I like about Celebrations with my family?
Question for Week One: What are some festivals or celebrations celebrated with my family?
Language Arts – Plans for the Unit (4 weeks)
The teacher will be observing for children’s Concepts of Print. Please see the Useful Content for the Teacher below for a list of Concepts of Print.
The letters/sounds g, o, u, l, f, b will be the focus. The teacher might do some “stand-alone” lessons to introduce the children to these letters/sounds.
Please see the “Useful Content for the Teacher” below for many ideas for teaching children letters/sounds.
Phonemic Awareness skills will commence and the focal point will be on initial phoneme isolation in words related to this Integrated Unit, such as fun,
girl, boy, laugh, understand, over. Please see the “Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies” for many ideas to engage learners in phonemic
awareness skills.
The high frequency (sight) words one, three, two, four, look, make, play, you, yellow, blue, red, brown, black, white, come, down will be the focus. The
teacher might do some “stand-alone lessons” to introduce these words. Please see the “Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies” for many
ideas for teaching high frequency words.
The teacher is encouraged to find opportunities to emphasize those letters/sounds/phonemes/high frequency words with the children
throughout the ILS for the unit.
13
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Gathering Assessment Data and Record-keeping
The SCOs and ILS for this unit are directly linked. The learners learn and demonstrate development on the SCOS in the ILS. The teacher
gathers assessment data on each of the SCOs (during the ILS). The Assessment data is gathered through Observation, Conversation and
Products, as set out in the IAS column.
The teacher will use the master checklist (hard copy or digital) included in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies to record data collected
about children’s progress in achieving the SCOs. The teacher will observe the children and will listen to the children’s responses or the teacher will
arrange for the children to create a “product” to gather evidence of the children’s development of the SCO attitudes, skills, and knowledge.
The teacher will use a consistent scale in the checklist:
Is the child easily meeting the outcome (+)? Is the child meeting the outcome (=)? Does the child need more practice (-)?
The teacher will note the date of the observation/conversation, and the teacher may also add some comments for additional clarification
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Introductory Event: Unit Question: What do I like about
Celebrations with my family?
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in The teacher will enter information into the checklist
sharing the experiences of others and with oral for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, Language Arts related to the Unit topic: Question for
stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.10 based on observation and Week One: What are some festivals or celebrations
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to interact conversation with the learners. celebrated with my family?
with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and
respect NOTE: If there are Jehovah Witness children in the class,
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and the teacher will need to modify this ILS. The teacher must
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds not assume that every child celebrates their birthday.
and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening Role Play/Video followed by Discussion
enhances understanding
1.7 Use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English The teacher will organize and celebrate a surprise birthday
develops, share their thoughts, feelings and party with the class (pretend). The classroom will be set up
questions about engaging events, stories and for a Birthday Party with real party hats, music, decorations,
conversations with increasing confidence food etc. The teacher can solicit the assistance and perhaps
14
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when some contributions from the parents without the children’s
sharing stories or experiences knowledge. Perhaps the party could be for a special stuffed
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness toy that is in the classroom, or a mascot.
activities and word play to discriminate between
various sounds in their environment, letters of the After the party, the teacher can discuss with the children.
alphabet, rhyme and meaningful sound patterns What did we celebrate today? What is a celebration? Do
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language you celebrate your birthday in some way? What happens
structures to enhance their understanding of how to on your birthday?
communicate ideas with purpose and focus
The teacher may show a video or read a book or tell a story
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing: about a surprise birthday party, and then have a discussion
with the children.
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, Suggested Links:
2.3 connect background knowledge to the titles and 2.8, 2.9 and 2.14 based on observation and Clifford’s Birthday Party - Video
pictures of fiction and nonfiction passages to build conversation with the learners. Happy Birthday Cupcake – Read Aloud Book
a foundation of understanding
2.4 develop understanding and application of the Discussion after the book:
Concepts of Print What did you see in the book? Do you have some of the
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and same ways to celebrate your birthday? What was different
variety of texts that are read or read to them in the book we read/saw?
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to
visualize, predict and connect Before, during and after the story, the teacher may
2.9 demonstrate understanding by responding to incorporate some mini-lessons. For example, the teacher
read-alouds with images, model making, may help the children to identify and reinforce the /u/
discussions, or temporary writing. sound using words from the story – Happy Birthday
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter names Cupcake. (cupcake, muffin, sun, lunch, just, but, much,
and letter sounds, beginning with those of personal crumble, ketchup, surprise). Learners can listen for the
importance sound in words, identify the location/position of the sound
in words and discriminate sound from other sounds.
Language Arts - Writing and Representing: Language Arts – Product (Please refer to the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
Strategies for further ideas to incorporate skill development
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing and The picture that the child draws and describes will alongside a read-aloud).
writing provide the information about the child’s
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools to development regarding LA Writing and Further Discussion:
assist in writing process Representing outcomes What other festivals or special events do you celebrate in
15
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case letters of your family? What are some things used in the celebrations?
the alphabet The teacher will enter information into the checklist What do you like about celebrations with your family?
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written language for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.4,
and other representations (e.g. drawings) 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and What celebrations do you enjoy best with your family?
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter shapes conversation with the learners. Why? The teacher will make a list on chart paper, or the
3.8 spell name and some words of personal board.
importance correctly
The teacher will keep track of learners’ answers, in order to
build upon learner knowledge and interest in future ILS.
Learners will draw a picture of a celebration/festival that
they celebrate with their family and name the type of
celebration. Learners will state what their family is
celebrating, and will print that word (or sentence) on their
paper. The teacher will assist each child, as necessary.
As an additional opportunity to consider birthday
celebrations, the read-aloud video “Happy Birthday Mrs.
Millie!” could be shown and discussed with the children.
This book provides a wonderful opportunity to find and
discuss rhyming words (SCO: 1.9 engage in active
phonological awareness activities and word play to
discriminate between various sounds in their environment,
letters of the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful sound
patterns).
HAPPY BIRTHDAY, MRS. MILLIE! 🎂 - Birthday
celebration follow along reading book | Fun Stories Play
(youtube.com)
16
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Social Studies - Video Presentation
Showing Different Festivals or Celebrations
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in The teacher will enter information into the checklist
sharing the experiences of others and with oral for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will review with the children that some
stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and celebrations are not just about something that happened in
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to interact conversation with the learners. their family. Some celebrations are religious and some are
with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and national festivals. The teacher will print the words “national”
respect and “religious” on a chart. (This is an opportunity for Shared
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and Writing – please consult the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds Effective Strategies for ways that the teacher may include the
and languages children in determining the letters necessary for the words
1.5 become aware of how effective listening “national” and “religious”).
enhances understanding
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English The teacher will show video/videos as examples depicting
develops, share their thoughts, feelings and questions different celebrations (religious and national). Please see
about engaging events, stories and conversations video examples in the Additional Resources section below.
with increasing confidence Learners observe and discuss the celebrations highlighted in
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when sharing the video/videos. How can you identify a religious or
stories or experiences national festival?
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language
structures to enhance their understanding of how to Discussion Questions about Different Families
communicate ideas with purpose and focus Celebrating Different Festivals and Why:
Language Arts - Writing and Representing: What celebrations did you see in the videos? Where did these
celebrations take place? Who took part in the celebrations?
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written language The teacher will enter information into the checklist Why do we have those celebrations? Which of these do you
and other representations (e.g. drawings) for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.6 and 3.9 celebrate with your family? Why do different families
3.9 assign meaning to experimental drawing and based on observation and conversation with the celebrate different festivals? Which is your favourite
writing learners. celebration? Why?
Mathematics - Measurement Mathematics - Product Group Work: Learners will be given pictures of national and
5.1.2. classify objects and count the number of The collage that the learners create will provide religious festivals. They will observe pictures in their
objects in each category evidence for the teacher that the learners are able to groups, then sort pictures as religious or national. They will
classify objects. The teacher will observe the count the number of pictures in each group. They will then
learners’ ability to count the objects (up to 10). share with the class. Others will have an opportunity to agree
if festivals were sorted correctly.
17
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Mathematics - Observation and Conversation
The teacher will enter information into the checklist The groups of learners will be given paper and glue to create
for Measurement Outcome 5.1.2 based on a collage using the pictures sorted (Religious and National
observation and conversation with the learners. Celebrations) and they will indicate the number of pictures
in each group. They will print the words “national” and
Social Studies – Historical and Cultural Social Studies – Product “religious” on the paper, or perhaps the word “celebrations”.
Thinking
Learners respond orally to Exit Slip and responses
1.2.1 name one religious and one national festival are recorded by the teacher.
celebrated by their family (K)
1.2.3 appreciate that their family and country have Oral Exit Slips:
different ways to celebrate from other families and
countries, and understand that some families may
Today’s lesson
choose not to celebrate some occasions (V)
1.2.6 appreciate the diversity of family customs and
was…….
take pride in this (V) Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
The teacher will enter information into the checklist
for MyseIlf –l Heisatorricnal eandd C…ult…ura…l Th..in king
Outcomes 1.2.1, 1.2.3 and 1.2.6 based on
observation and conversation with the learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Math, and Social Studies – Learning
Centres
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in The teacher will enter information into the checklist
sharing the experiences of others and with oral for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will review the idea of national and religious
stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and celebrations during a large group discussion.
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to interact conversation with the learners.
with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and The teacher will set up the classroom with various centres
respect depicting different celebrations (religious and national) with
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and materials and labels (E.g. Christmas Corner – labels:
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds Christmas tree, lights, foods etc.). The class is divided into
and languages small groups of 4-6 and learners are given the opportunity to
1.5 become aware of how effective listening visit the different centres and explore the displays –
enhances understanding manipulating materials, sharing thoughts and ideas,
18
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English exploring materials, trying on costumes/garments etc. The
develops, share their thoughts, feelings and questions teacher moves around to each centre and encourages
about engaging events, stories and conversations conversation by asking questions as learners interact with the
with increasing confidence materials and discuss with peers. The teacher may also use
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when sharing various materials (particularly unfamiliar items) to
stories or experiences demonstrate their use
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language
structures to enhance their understanding of how to OR
communicate ideas with purpose and focus
Each small group will be assigned a specific centre where the
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing learners will explore the display/materials, discuss with their
peers guided by the teacher. Each group will then share with
2.4 develop understanding and application of the The teacher may want to create a checklist of the the whole class on the celebration that their group explored.
Concepts of Print. Concepts of Print, and keep track of which
2.6 browse through a variety of images, and concepts each child understands and applies. Please After the exploration at the learning centres, the teacher may
nonfiction material in pre-emergent and emergent see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective hold a discussion with the full group:
level passages, or passages of interest, to discover Strategies for additional information and a list of the
information. Concepts of Print. What celebrations did you learn about? What can you tell
about this celebration? Where did these celebrations take
The teacher will enter information into the checklist place? Who took part in the celebrations? Can you name
for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.4 and 2.6 some things/items that are used in this celebration? Why do
based on observation and conversation with the we have these celebrations? Which of these do you
learners. celebrate? Which is your favourite celebration? Why? For
example: how many learners celebrate birthdays with their
family? How many learners like carnival? (Learners count
Mathematics - Number Sense Mathematics – Observation and Conversation and teachers record number of learners., making a list on
chart paper or on the board.)
1.1.1 say the number sequence to 10 by 1s The teacher will enter information into the checklist
1.1.8 count with meaning to 10, by building for Number Sense Outcomes 1.1.1, 1.1.8, 1.1.9 and The teacher will encourage the children to count along with
quantities 1.2.2 based on observation and conversation with her/him. The teacher will point out the numerals and have
1.1.9 count with meaning to 10, by matching quantity the learners. children repeat.
and numeral
1.2.2 answer the question, How many are in the set? Information/data collected can be placed in a simple
using the last number counted in a set pictograph which learners will learn about collecting data,
representing data using pictorial representation and also read
the data presented. This question about favourite
19
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Mathematics - Data Management and celebrations is a good example to be used for this purpose.
Probability
Sorting and Classifying Data: Counting
6.1.1 collect simple sets of data in the class and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
school environment using observation. for Data Management and Probability Outcomes Who likes celebrating Christmas with their family? Let’s
6.1.2 describe data classification 6.1.1, 6.1.2 and 6.1.3 based on observation and count and shade the number of boxes.
6.1.3 use counting to determine the number of conversation with the learners.
objects in a group.
Social Studies: Historical and Cultural Thinking Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
1.2.1 name one religious and one national festival The teacher will enter information into the checklist Boys
celebrated by their family (K) for Myself – Historical and Cultural Thinking Girls
1.2.2 understand the significance and importance of Outcomes 1.2.1 and 1.2.2 based on observation and
these two religious and national festivals to their conversation with the learners
family (S)
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Social Studies –Resource Person
and Thank You Note
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in The teacher will enter information into the checklist
sharing the experiences of others and with oral for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, Note: Before the Resource person comes, the teacher will
stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and have a discussion with the children about questions they
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to interact conversation with the learners. might have for the visitor. The Resource person may be an
with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and adult who works in the school, a parent, a community
respect person.
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds Presentation by Resource Person
and languages Invite a parent/resource person to come and set up the
1.5 become aware of how effective listening classroom for an actual celebration that is different from the
enhances understanding ones commonly known to children such as Diwali or a
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English celebration that persons of other races such as Chinese
develops, share their thoughts, feelings and questions celebrate. The teacher will help the children realize that
20
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
about engaging events, stories and conversations celebration can be national or religious. Children identify the
with increasing confidence type of celebration.
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when sharing
stories or experiences During the visit, the teacher will encourage the children to
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language ask questions, and the teacher will support the Resource
structures to enhance their understanding of how to person who is presenting to young children.
communicate ideas with purpose and focus
Discussion Questions (after the presentation)
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing What did you see? What are they used for? What did we learn
The teacher will enter information into the checklist about celebrations today? Why do we have this celebration?
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of genres for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.11 and Is this a national or religious celebration? Why? What are
and text forms 2.14 based on observation and conversation with the some things used during this celebration? What other
2.4 develop understanding and application of the learners. festivals do you celebrate in your family?
Concepts of Print Children will respond to the presentation by completing a
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high frequency response sheet, with the teacher’s assistance.
words of personal importance, such as names and
pre-
emergent level high-frequency words What I learned from ……… (place for
guest speaker’s name)
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter names
(Place for the child to do a drawing based
and letter sounds, beginning with those of personal
on the guest speaker’s visit)
importance
Language Arts - Writing and Representing Language Arts: Product (lines for child to write a word or two,
probably with assistance from the teacher)
…………………………………………
3.1 use shared ideas to co-construct stories The teacher will have evidence of the Writing and
…………………………………………
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing and Representing LA outcomes from the response sheet
…………………………………………
writing completed after the guest speaker’s presentation, ……………………
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and real and from the children’s participation in creating the
and imagined topics Thank You Card.
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools to Shared Writing: Thank You Note/Card
assist in writing process
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case letters of The teacher will enter information into the checklist Brainstorming
the alphabet for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.1, 3.2, Ask children for help to create a class thank-you note for the
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written language 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation resource person. Brainstorm with children what they want to
and other representations (e.g. drawings) and conversation with the learners. say thank you for and words or phrases to use in the thank-
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter shapes you note. Record their ideas – words, phrases, and sentences
21
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.8 spell name and some words of personal on chart paper while saying the responses as you write them.
importance correctly Ask learners to help spell words, especially the initial
consonants.
Social Studies – Historical and Cultural Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
Thinking Drafting
The teacher will enter information into the checklist Have the children choose their favourite ideas to develop
1.2.1 name one religious and one national festival for Myself – Historical and Cultural Thinking into a thank-you note. Record the text on large paper folded
celebrated by their family (K) Outcomes 1.2.1, 1.2.2, 1.2.3 and 1.2.6 based on as a thank-you card.
1.2.2 understand the significance and importance of observation and conversation with the learners
these two religious and national festivals to their Publishing
family (S) Fold card paper in two and invite pairs of learners to
1.2.3 appreciate that their family and country has decorate the cover and write the text. Then invite learners to
different ways to celebrate from other families and sign their names in the card.
countries, and understand that some families may
choose not to celebrate some occasions (V)
1.2.6 appreciate the diversity of family customs and
take pride in this (V)
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Social Studies and Language Arts: Celebration
Scrapbook and Presenting
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in The teacher will enter information into the checklist
sharing the experiences of others and with oral for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher provides materials for learners. Using pictures,
stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and drawings, and labelling, children create a scrap book
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to interact conversation with the learners. depicting a religious or national celebration that their family
with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and participates in.
respect Tips for Creating the Scrapbook:
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and • Scrapbook should be three pages including the
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds cover page.
and languages • Children will decorate the cover page.
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
• One page should highlight a religious or national
enhances understanding
celebration that their family participate in. Each
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English
page must include pictures, drawings and labels.
develops, share their thoughts, feelings and questions
Children share their scrapbook with the class and talk about
about engaging events, stories and conversations
the importance of the festivals to their family. Children can
22
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
with increasing confidence display the scrapbooks in reading corner.
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when sharing
stories or experiences
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language This scrapbook and presentation will help the class to re-
structures to enhance their understanding of how to consider the question for Week One:
communicate ideas with purpose and focus “What are some festivals or celebrations celebrated with my
family?”
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of genres The teacher will enter information into the checklist
and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.11 and
2.4 develop understanding and application of the 2.14 based on observation and conversation with the
Concepts of Print learners.
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high frequency
words of personal importance, such as names and
pre-
emergent level high-frequency words
2.14 Identify an increasing number of letter names
and letter sounds, beginning with those of personal
Importance
Language Arts - Writing and Representing Language Arts - Product (scrapbook)
3.1 use shared ideas to co-construct stories The teacher may want to use learners’ scrapbook to
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing and gather information of learners’ progress on the
writing Writing and Representing Outcomes.
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and real
and imagined topics The teacher will also enter information into the
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools to checklist for Writing and Representing Outcomes
assist in writing process 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case letters of observation and conversation with the learners.
the alphabet
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written language
and other representations (e.g. drawings)
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter shapes
3.8 spell name and some words of personal
23
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
importance correctly
Social Studies – Myself – Historical and Cultural Social Studies - Product
Thinking The scrapbook and the children’s response after the
presentation will provide information about the
1.2.1 name one religious and one national festival children’s understanding of the Social Studies
celebrated by their family (K) outcomes.
1.2.2 understand the significance and importance of
these two religious and national festivals to their Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
family (S) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
1.2.3 appreciate that their family and country has for Myself – Historical and Cultural Thinking
different ways to celebrate from other families and Outcomes 1.2.1, 1.2.2, 1.2.3 and 1.2.6 based on
countries, and understand that some families may observation and conversation with the learners
choose not to celebrate some occasions (V)
1.2.6 Appreciate the diversity of family customs and
take pride in this (V)
End of Week One: End of Week One: Learning Centres and Discussions
with Grade 1 class
Reassessing Previous Checklists
Social Studies and Language Arts
The teacher will want to use the assessment strategy
tools used throughout the week to reassess learners The focus of this ILS is to return to the question of the week:
for new knowledge/improvements. What are some festivals or celebrations celebrated with my
family?
The teacher will make notes in the anecdotal notes
area of learners who may have been able to master Invite the Grade 1 class to visit the Kindergarten class to
the concept by the end of the week with dates. learn about celebrations by visiting the learning centres
depicting different festivals or celebrations. Encourage
groups of children to tell the Grade 1 about festivals or
celebrations as they tour all the centres.
24
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Additional Resources
Stories, Videos and Books about Festivals:
The Christmas Story:
https://youtu.be/zl2HVhwqnMs?si=mnMWjyx67R9C7_WE
The Chinese New Year Story
https://youtu.be/gdF5hjI1S14?si=5cEfspr7f6aZ5AUb
Happy Birthday Song | Gracie's Corner | Nursery Rhymes + Kids Songs (youtube.com)
CLIFFORD'S BIRTHDAY PARTY by Norman Bridwell (youtube.com)
Birthday PARTY book| Read aloud by little girl Clover (youtube.com)
RELIGIOUS & NATIONAL FESTIVALS
Christmas:
https://images.app.goo.gl/2ymPmj39xYh6A1pm9
https://images.app.goo.gl/uhDtHNdnpm6yfLto8
Diwali:
https://images.app.goo.gl/533FuyJAPiQkG7HC9
https://images.app.goo.gl/dpx2VuQJ9MNtYxyd8
25
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Useful Content for the Teacher
Celebrations
• Birthdays Christmas (Religious)
• Carnivals (National)
• Easter R
• Mother’s Day & Father’s Day (National)
• Family Reunions
• Baby Showers
• Births
• Christenings (Religious)
• Gender Reveals
• Anniversaries
• Weddings (Religious)
• Baptisms (Religious)
• Heritage Day (National)
• Independence Day (National)
• Emancipation Day (National)
Celebrations
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zvtaqA6TTAQ
Picture Book – Festivals and Celebrations
https://images.app.goo.gl/1uPVRYNCgvhBoKnbA
26
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Items Used At Religious & National Festivals
List of items:
Christmas lights, Christmas trees, Snowmen, reindeer, stockings
Carnival Masks, Carnival Costumes
Chinese lanterns, Chinese dragon
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
Actual items/pictures of items that are used in a specific religious festival and a specific national festival. Learners will use the pictures to create a poster
of a religious or national festival or use the actual items to create a religious or national festival corner.
27
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
II. WEEK TWO
Essential Question: What do I like about Celebrations with my family?
Question for Week Two: Does every family celebrate festivals/celebrations in the same way?
Language Arts – Plans for the Unit (4 weeks)
The teacher will be observing for children’s Concepts of Print. Please see the Useful Content for the Teacher below for a list of Concepts of Print.
The letters/sounds g, o, u, l, f, b will be the focus. The teacher might do some “stand-alone” lessons to introduce the children to these letters/sounds.
Please see the “Useful Content for the Teacher” below for many ideas for teaching children letters/sounds.
Phonemic Awareness skills will commence and the focal point will be on initial phoneme isolation in words related to this Integrated Unit, such as fun,
girl, boy, laugh, understand, over. Please see the “Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies” for many ideas to engage learners in phonemic
awareness skills.
The high frequency (sight) words one, three, two, four, look, make, play, you, yellow, blue, red, brown, black, white, come, down will be the focus. The
teacher might do some “stand-alone lessons” to introduce these words. Please see the “Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies” for many
ideas for teaching high frequency words.
The teacher is encouraged to find opportunities to emphasize those letters/sounds/phonemes/high frequency words with the children
throughout the ILS for the unit.
28
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Introduction to Week Two: Language Arts and
Social Studies
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, KWL Chart for this Integrated Unit
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.8 and 1.9 based on observation and
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners. The teacher will remind the children of conversations
interact with a variety of audiences with and activities from Week One, looking at some of the
sensitivity and respect charts that were created and some of the work the
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher children did (e.g. scrapbooks).
and children who have diverse interests,
backgrounds and languages. The teacher and learners will complete a KWL Chart on
1.5 become aware of how effective listening celebrations/festivals (K = What do I already know
enhances understanding. about celebrations? W=What do I want to learn about
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when celebrations? L= What have I learned about celebrations.
sharing stories or experiences Fill in the K and the W for this ILS. As the unit
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness progresses, go back to the chart and fill in some
activities and word play to discriminate sentences for the “L”.
between various sounds in their environment,
letters of the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful
sound patterns Video Presentation about Mexican tradition
The teacher may start by asking if there is a celebration
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing in their own families when the girls turn 15 years of age.
Then the teacher may explain that in some countries
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist there is a celebration when children turn into young
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.5, adults. The teacher will show the children a video
2.2 develop questions when browsing through 2.8, 2.9, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14 and 2.15 based on showing the Mexican Quinceanera (different to what the
passages of interest observation and conversation with the learners. children are accustomed to).
2.3 connect background knowledge to the titles https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VDIpCZ5c7qo
and pictures of fiction and nonfiction passages After watching the video, the teacher may ask the
to build a foundation of understanding children what they remember from the video. The
2.4 develop understanding and application of teacher may show the video a second time, stopping to
the Concepts of Print explain or discuss certain aspects.
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and The teacher will encourage the children to talk about the
variety of texts that are read or read to them clothes, foods and events of the Quinceanera
29
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to celebration.
visualize, predict and connect *
2.9 demonstrate understanding by responding The teacher will write a few sentences on chart paper,
to read-alouds with images, model making, describing the Mexican Quinceanera. This is a Shared
discussions, or temporary writing. Writing activity. Later, the chart may be used as a Shared
2.11 recognise and use a variety of high Reading activity. (Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and
frequency words of personal importance, such Guide for Effective Strategies for specific ideas to enhance
as names and pre-emergent level high- learning through these strategies).
frequency words
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the Learners will draw pictures to depict a specific
meaning and flow of the language to anticipate celebration that is a focus in their family. Each learner
upcoming words will briefly share their picture with the whole class.
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and The learners will select a specific celebration and talk
phrasing during shared reading, independent about the way they celebrate is similar and different from
and guided reading of emergent level passages how other learners celebrate.
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with those The teacher will ask questions in order to make a
of personal importance connection and introduce the new focus question –
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode Does every family celebrate festivals/celebrations in
upcoming words in emergent level passages the same way?
Language Arts - Writing and Representing
3.1 use shared ideas to co-construct stories The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.1, 3.6 and
language and other representations (e.g. 3.7 based on observation and conversation with the
drawings) learners.
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
shapes
Social Studies – Myself – Historical and Social Studies – Product
Cultural Thinking
1.2.3 appreciate that their family and country The picture that the children draw, and the
has different ways to celebrate from other information they share with the class will provide the
families and countries, and understand that teacher with information regarding Social Studies
30
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
some families may choose not to celebrate Curriculum Outcomes 1.2.3 and 1.2.6
some occasions (V)
1.2.6 appreciate the diversity of family customs Social Studies - Observation and Conversation
and take pride in this (V) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
for Myself – Historical and Cultural Thinking
Outcomes 1.2.3 and 1.2.6 based on observation and
conversation with the learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Mathematics, and Social Studies –
Shared Reading
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will remind the children that Christmas is a
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.8 and 1.9 based on observation and religious celebration and question as what makes it a
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners. religious celebration. Ask if all the children in the class
interact with a variety of audiences with celebrate Christmas. (If not, have a brief discussion about
sensitivity and respect why, and the importance of respecting diversity in
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and celebrations).
children who have diverse interests,
backgrounds and languages. Bear Stays up for Christmas
1.5 become aware of how effective listening https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1RsMvJ604UQ
enhances understanding.
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when Explain that the class will be watching a read-aloud and
sharing stories or experiences* finding out if Christmas is celebrated in a different way in
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness the book, from how the children celebrate Christmas.
activities and word play to discriminate between
various sounds in their environment, letters of Show children the cover of the book, read the title of the
the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful sound book and name the authors. Point out to learners that
patterns good readers try to think out what the story might be
about before they actually read.
Language Arts - Reading & Viewing
Invite children to talk about the picture on the cover of
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist the book and tell what they think the book will be about.
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, Point out that the setting is different to our context.
2.2 develop questions when browsing through 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 2.11, 2.12, 2.14 and 2.15 based on Activate background knowledge about bears and winter.
passages of interest observation and conversation with the learners. Teacher records the learners’ ideas on what the book will
2.3 connect background knowledge to the titles be about on chart paper. (Shared Writing – please see the
31
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
and pictures of fiction and nonfiction passages Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies).
to build a foundation of understanding
2.4 develop understanding and application of Encourage learners to watch the video with you to find
the Concepts of Print out if their predictions are correct.
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and
variety of texts that are read or read to them The teacher and learners read/watch the story together
2.6 browse through a variety of images, and and encourage the learners to join in where they can
nonfiction material in pre-emergent and especially for words they know (especially predicting the
emergent level passages, or passages of interest, rhyming words). The teacher may pause the video and
to discover information. read the words on the page. The teacher points to the
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some words using a sweeping motion from left to right and top
environmental print and pictorial information to bottom. During reading, on specific pages identified
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to before reading, the teacher highlights words in the text,
visualize, predict and connect. reread the sentence where the word is used, talk about the
2.9 demonstrate understanding by responding letters, and the meaning of the word. Stop and invite
to read-aloud with images, model making, children to check their predictions about what the book is
discussions, or temporary writing about.
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high
frequency words of personal importance, such
as names and pre-emergent level high- The teacher will ask the children what were the Christmas
frequency words traditions that Bear and his friends used? Do the children
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the in the class do some of the same traditions for Christmas?
meaning and flow of the language to anticipate Which ones? The teacher will emphasize that not
upcoming words everyone celebrates Christmas, and, not everyone
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter celebrates Christmas with the same traditions.
names and letter sounds, beginning with those
of personal importance Word Study – you, make, down
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages The teacher presents the three words on flash cards.
Reread the sentence in the book where the words are used,
Mathematics - Number Sense Mathematics – Observation and Conversation and pause for the children to give the word, make a
sentence using the word and then question learners:
1.1.1 say the number sequence to 10 by 1s The teacher will enter information into the checklist How many letters are in “you”, “make” and “down”?
1.1.8 count with meaning to 10, by building for Number Sense Outcomes 1.1.1, 1.1.8, 1.1.9, 1.2.1 What letter does each word begin with?
quantities and 1.2.2 based on observation and conversation with
1.1.9 count with meaning to 10, by matching the learners. The teacher may show the children the story Bear Stays
32
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
quantity and numeral Up For Christmas a second time. The teacher will invite
1.2.1 represent a given number up to 10 using a the children to talk about pictures/illustrations. As
variety of concrete models, including 5 and 10 children move from page to page, they identify bear’s
frames friends and count the number of bear’s friends on page.
1.2.2 answer the question: How many are in the Teachers will ask the learners to record the number on
set? using the last number counted in a set. chart paper and tell the names of Bear’s friends. (The
teacher will go over the chart with the children – Shared
Mathematics - Data Management and Reading).
Probability The teacher will enter information into the checklist
6.1.1 Collect simple sets of data in the class and for Data Management and Probability Outcomes Example: Counting and Writing Number
school environment using observation. 6.1.1, 6.1.2, 6.1.3 and 6.1.4 based on observation and Page Number of Name of Bear’s
6.1.2 Describe data classification conversation with the learners. Number Bear’s Friends Friends
6.1.3 Use counting to determine the number of 2 3 wren, raven, mole
objects in a group.
6.1.4 Describe the results of classification and
data collection activities.
Social Studies – Myself – Historical and Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
Cultural Thinking The teacher asks questions:
1.2.1 Name one religious and one national The teacher will enter information into the checklist Who are bear’s friends?
festival celebrated by their family (K) for Myself – Historical and Cultural Thinking How many friends are on page 2?
1.2.2 Understand the significance and Outcomes 1.2.1, 1.2.2, 1.2.3 and 1.2.6 based on
Who are the friends on page 2?
importance of these two religious and national observation and conversation with the learners
Which page has the most friends? Which page has the
festivals to their family (S) least friends?
1.2.3 Appreciate that their family and country How many friends in all?
has different ways to celebrate from other Which animal is your favourite friend? Why?
families and countries, and understand that The teacher will ask if the children have friends who help
some families may choose not to celebrate some them to celebrate sometimes? Which celebrations?
occasions (V)
• Children are given material – playdough, number
1.2.6 Appreciate the diversity of family customs
cards, pencil, crayon, and paper.
and take pride in this (V)
Based on the chart about Bear’s friends, children draw
and colour bear’s friends from one page, write the
number or use play dough to show how many friends
and select the corresponding number card.
33
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Mathematics and Social Studies:
Picture Sort Game
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, A set of ten (10) pictures that are related to different
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and celebrations will be placed in two boxes (one for each
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners. team). Two sets of containers will be labelled with the
interact with a variety of audiences with words “Religious” and “National”. Learners will be
sensitivity and respect divided into two teams. They will then compete to pull
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher the pictures from the boxes and place them in the
and children who have diverse interests, appropriate containers. For example, a Christmas tree
backgrounds and languages placed in the container labelled “Religious”, a flag would
1.5 become aware of how effective listening be placed in the container labelled “National”. After
enhances understanding some time, the children count the number of pictures in
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard each box. They could compare to see if each team
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings sorted the pictures in the same way.
and questions about engaging events, stories
and conversations with increasing confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
language structures to enhance their
understanding of how to communicate ideas
with purpose and focus
Mathematics – Number Sense Mathematics – Observation and Conversation
1.1.8 count with meaning to 10, by building The teacher will enter information into the checklist
quantities. for Number Sense Outcome 1.1.8 based on
observation and conversation with the learners.
Mathematics – Data Management and
Probability
6.1.3 use counting to determine the number of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
objects in a group. for Data Management and Probability Outcomes
6.1.4 describe the results of classification and 6.1.3 and 6.1.4 based on observation and
34
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
data collection activities. conversation with the learners.
Social Studies – Myself – Historical and Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
Cultural Thinking
The teacher will enter information into the checklist
1.2.1 name one religious and one national for Myself – Historical and Cultural Thinking
festival celebrated by their family (K) Outcome 1.2.1 based on observation and conversation
with the learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Social Studies: Learning about
Diwali
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will tell the children that they will be
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and listening to a story about Diwali. Ask who knows about
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners. that celebration. Tell the children that they may learn
interact with a variety of audiences with about the celebration by listening and watching the
sensitivity and respect video.
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher
and children who have diverse interests, Binny's Diwali By Thrity Umrigar | Kids Read Aloud
backgrounds and languages Book | Diwali Festival Read Aloud | Multicultural
1.5 become aware of how effective listening (youtube.com)
enhances understanding https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hgnO1M6yitE
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings Please see Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
and questions about engaging events, stories Strategies for suggestions of how conduct a Read Aloud.
and conversations with increasing confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when The teacher will play the video a second time, pausing
sharing stories or experiences and asking the questions below, encouraging the children
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and to consider answers to the questions by hearing the story
language structures to enhance their and looking at the pictures in the book.
understanding of how to communicate ideas
with purpose and focus Discussion:
What is the name of the festival that Binny celebrated?
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing What is Diwali? Do you celebrate Diwali with your
family? Is there a similar celebration that you celebrate
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist with your family? Do you think you would love to
35
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.5, celebrate Diwali? Do you think that everyone/every
2.2 develop questions when browsing through 2.8, 2.9, 2.11 and 2.14 based on observation and family celebrate Diwali the same way?
passages of interest conversation with the learners.
2.3 connect background knowledge to the titles 1. Diwali is a Festival of _______. The teacher may ask
(a) darkness
and pictures of fiction and nonfiction passages some questions such as
(b) light
to build a foundation of understanding (c) magic shown on this sheet.
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and 2. The lamps used in Diwali are called (This should not be
_________.
variety of texts that are read or read to them given to the children
(a) diyas
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to (b) candles to complete).
(c) torches
visualize, predict and connect
3. Dad bought mom a ______ to wear
2.9 demonstrate understanding by responding on Diwali.
to read-alouds with images, model making,
(a) dress
discussions, or temporary writing. (b) hat
(c) sari
2.11 recognise and use a variety of high
4. Why do you think Binny’s mind
frequency words of personal importance, such went blank? ____________
as names and pre-emergent level high-
frequency words Guided Discussion
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter The teacher will ask questions in order to make a
names and letter sounds, beginning with those connection and review the focus question for the week–
of personal importance Does every family celebrate festivals/celebrations in
the same way?
Language Arts - Writing and Representing
Children will draw a picture depicting their favourite part
3.1 use shared ideas to co-construct stories of the story and add words, phrases or a sentence to
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing The teacher will enter information into the checklist their picture.
and writing for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.1, 3.2, 3.3,
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and Prepare for a Show & Tell Presentation
real and imagined topics conversation with the learners. Learners will be informed of this upcoming activity,
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools when they will share with the rest of the class how they
to assist in writing process celebrate a particular festival or special event. They will
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case be just like Binny in the story about Diwali! They will
letters of the alphabet bring items or props relating to a celebration they love
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written and dress up for the particular celebration and share any
language and other representations (e.g. other information relating to it. They may bring
drawings) photographs to share, as well. A few children could
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter share each day, or the children might be invited to share
36
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
shapes on the last day for this week. The children could also be
3.8 spell name and some words of personal scheduled to share any time in the weeks for this
importance correctly Integrated Unit. The teacher may want to send a note
home explaining this Show and Tell and asking
Social Studies – Myself – Historical and Social Studies – Product parents/family members to help the child prepare.
Cultural Thinking
1.2.3 appreciate that their family and country The picture that the children draw, and the
have different ways to celebrate from other information they share with the class will provide the
families and countries, and understand that teacher with information regarding Myself - Historical
some families may choose not to celebrate and Cultural Thinking 1.2.3 and 1.2.6
some occasions (V)
1.2.6 appreciate the diversity of family customs Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
and take pride in this (V) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
for Myself – Historical and Cultural Thinking
Outcomes 1.2.3 and 1.2.6 based on observation and
conversation with the learners
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Social Studies: Role Play and
Exploration Centres
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will set up five centres for children to
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.7 and 1.8 based on observation and explore.
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners. a) One centre will contain materials depicting Diwali.
interact with a variety of audiences with Learners will engage in a Role Play where they will
sensitivity and respect dress like persons who celebrate Diwali (wear saris,
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher lehengas, etc.) and engage in the activities that
and children who have diverse interests, Diwali involves (lighting diya lamps etc.).
backgrounds and languages.
1.5 become aware of how effective listening b) books about celebrations to browse
enhances understanding.
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard c) a picture depicting Diwali to colour
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
and questions about engaging events, stories d) craft materials to make decorations and decorate
and conversations with increasing confidence classroom. The children will be shown pictures of
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when the designs made from chalk during Diwali (as
37
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
sharing stories or experiences shown in the read-aloud book) and then they could
colour one of their own designs.
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
e) create models of persons celebrating Diwali or an
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist item used during Diwali. For example, diyas made
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, from play doh or paper cut-outs of someone
2.2 develop questions when browsing through 2.5 and 2.7 based on observation and conversation wearing a sari or a lehenga.
passages of interest with the learners. If the teacher has a sari available for the children to see,
2.3 connect background knowledge to the titles the children could find patterns in the shapes or colours
and pictures of fiction and nonfiction passages in the trim. Children describe what they see.
to build a foundation of understanding
2.4 develop understanding and application of The exploration centres could be available for the
the Concepts of Print children for a few days. Each day, after time spent in the
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and centres, the teacher will gather the group and have a
variety of texts that are read or read to them discussion relating the centre activities to the Social
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some Studies outcomes: 1.2.3, and 1.2.6.
environmental print and pictorial information
Social Studies – Myself – Historical and Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
Cultural Thinking
1.2.3 appreciate that their family and country The teacher will enter information into the checklist
have different ways to celebrate from other for Myself – Historical and Cultural Thinking
families and countries, and understand that Outcomes 1.2.3 and 1.2.6 based on observation and
some families may choose not to celebrate conversation with the learners
some occasions (V)
1.2.6 appreciate the diversity of family customs
and take pride in this (V)
End of Week Two: End of Week Two: Social Studies and Language
Arts
Reassessing Previous Checklists
Show and Tell or Resource Person
The teacher will want to use the assessment strategy The focus of this ILS is to return to the question of the
tools used throughout the week to reassess learners week: Does every family celebrate festivals/celebrations in the same
for new knowledge/improvements. way?
38
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The teacher will make notes in the anecdotal notes KWL
area of learners who may have been able to master The teacher and learners will review what they put on the
the concept by the end of the week with dates. KWL chart, add information in the “L - Learn” column
of the KWL chart.
Engage in a Show & Tell Presentation
The children had been asked earlier in the week to bring
items or props relating to a celebration they love and be
prepared to share with the rest of the class how they
celebrate this celebration. A few children will share on
the last day for this week. Or, if many children are able
to share, the teacher could help the children set up
stations for others to visit (rather than presenting to the
full group).
Guided Discussion
The teacher will ask questions in order to make a
connection and review the focus question for the week–
Does every family celebrate festivals/celebrations in
the same way?
OR
Have a resource person visit the classroom and make a
presentation on a celebration/festival. The classroom
would be set up depicting aspects of the festival.
Children would observe, interact with the materials, ask
questions, wear costumes and share their experiences.
The resource person would talk about how different
families/countries celebrations may be similar or
different.
The children could be provided with materials and make
an item associated with this celebration – costume, mask,
prop for a Calypso song etc.
39
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The children should fill in a response sheet after a guest
speaker (see sample above).
Additional Resources / Videos about various celebrations around the world
Binny's Diwali By Thrity Umrigar | Kids Read Aloud Book | Diwali Festival Read Aloud | Multicultural (youtube.com)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OTn2bMkMGL4&t=4s
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wN_iC3bAVqI
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g7Ei78g65cU
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/142356038212132840/
Useful Content for the Teacher
Eid al-Adha (Feast of the Sacrifice)
Eid al-Fitr (End of Ramadan) (Syria/ Islamic faith)
Dominica: Carnival (discoverdominica.com)
Syria Holidays and Festivals (iexplore.com)
https://creator.nightcafe.studio/creation/PvY1ujuP06Lp4aPvXN5C
https://pixabay.com/images/search/diyas/
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=by0Hmqp_otw
https://www.twinkl.co.uk/resource/au-h-25797-what-is-my-history-and-how-do-i-know-kwl-grid
40
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
Cody's Crazy Christmas by Andrea Realpe
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-xu3cGwe6NM
MERRY CHRISTMAS MR MOUSE Book
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ae_U0xfg-UM
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/142356038212132840/
41
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
III. WEEK THREE
Essential Question: What do I like about Celebrations with my family?
Question for Week Three: What are the special foods, decorations, events we experience in my family for these celebrations?
Language Arts – Plans for the Unit (4 weeks)
The teacher will be observing for children’s Concepts of Print. Please see the Useful Content for the Teacher below for a list of Concepts of Print.
The letters/sounds g, o, u, l, f, b will be the focus. The teacher might do some “stand-alone” lessons to introduce the children to these letters/sounds.
Please see the “Useful Content for the Teacher” below for many ideas for teaching children letters/sounds.
Phonemic Awareness skills will commence and the focal point will be on initial phoneme isolation in words related to this Integrated Unit, such as fun,
girl, boy, laugh, understand, over. Please see the “Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies” for many ideas to engage learners in phonemic
awareness skills.
The high frequency (sight) words one, three, two, four, look, make, play, you, yellow, blue, red, brown, black, white, come, down will be the focus. The
teacher might do some “stand-alone lessons” to introduce these words. Please see the “Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies” for many
ideas for teaching high frequency words.
The teacher is encouraged to find opportunities to emphasize those letters/sounds/phonemes/high frequency words with the children
throughout the ILS for the unit.
42
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Social Studies – Introduction to Week
three
1.1 listen to music, conversation and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
environmental sounds for personal enjoyment for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, Field Trip or Celebration Display
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement 1.4, 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and
in sharing the experiences of others and with conversation with the learners. The teacher and learners may visit a family home (pre-arranged)
oral stories and information sharing. to observe a family celebration such as Diwali or the teacher may
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to invite a resource person (parent) to the school to showcase a
interact with a variety of audiences with family celebration. They could set up the classroom area as if
sensitivity and respect hosting the real event and give learners the experience of that
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher family celebration.
and children who have diverse interests,
backgrounds and languages Interaction/discussion
1.5 become aware of how effective listening Learners are encouraged to ask questions to learn the names of
enhances understanding various decorations, food/dishes, clothing, musical instruments
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard and other items that may be unfamiliar. Learners are exposed to
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings new vocabulary to describe the way things look and taste.
and questions about engaging events, stories
and conversations with increasing confidence What is the name of this dish? What is it made with? What is the
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when reason for having these decorations? Who did you learn this
sharing stories or experiences celebration from? Is this a religious celebration or a national
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and celebration?
language structures to enhance their
understanding of how to communicate ideas Group Work – Picture Collage
with purpose and focus Learners will work in small groups to create a picture collage
depicting the family celebration that they had experience of
during the field trip or class display. Learners are given picture
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing Language Arts: Product cut-outs from online or old magazines which they select and
paste on construction paper. Or, the children may draw some of
2.11 recognise and use a variety of high The group collages provide the teacher with examples the items they remember. The more advanced learners can
frequency words of personal importance, such of children’s skill development in LA outcomes from categorize the pictures as foods and decorations while the early
as names and pre-emergent level high- Reading and Viewing, Writing and Representing. levels can make one big collage. Learners are encouraged to label
frequency words items and write simple sentences about their creation, with the
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter The teacher will enter information into the checklist teacher support when necessary.
names and letter sounds, beginning with those for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.11 and 2.14
43
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
of personal importance based on observation and conversation with the Groups will have the opportunity to share their collage with the
learners. class.
Language Arts - Writing and Representing
The teacher will enter information into the checklist The teacher will lead a discussion about the question for the
3.1 use shared ideas to co-construct stories for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, week:
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and What are the special foods, decorations, events we experience in
and writing conversation with the learners. my family for these celebrations?
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and
real and imagined topics Throughout the ILS for the week the teacher will always bring
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools the children back to thinking about the special foods, decorations
to assist in writing process events in their own family (compare and contrast).
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case
letters of the alphabet
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written
language and other representations (e.g.
drawings)
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
shapes
3.8 spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly
Social Studies – Myself – Historical and Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
Cultural Thinking
The teacher will enter information into the checklist
1.2.4 identify customs (food, decoration, for Myself – Historical and Cultural Thinking
special events) associated with these Outcome 1.2.4 based on observation and
celebrations in their family (K) conversation with the learners
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Art and Social Studies – Read Aloud about a
Wedding Celebration
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement
in sharing the experiences of others and with The teacher will enter information into the checklist Book Title: Maisy goes to a Wedding by Lucy Cousins
oral stories and information sharing. for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8ICAcllAoD4
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and The teacher will display the cover of the book, identify and read
interact with a variety of audiences with conversation with the learners. the name of the title, author and illustrator. Briefly have the
sensitivity and respect children talk about the cover of the book and what they think
44
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher will happen in the story. The teacher will make note of the
and children who have diverse interests, children’s responses.
backgrounds and languages Invite children to talk about how they celebrate weddings with
1.5 become aware of how effective listening their families. Invite children to talk about foods, decorations and
enhances understanding events such as the reception or party.
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard The teacher points out that good listeners help themselves
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings understand the story by thinking about what happens in the story
and questions about engaging events, stories and try to guess what will happen next. They also ask questions
and conversations with increasing confidence about things that happen in the story – Does that make sense?
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences
Tip: Preview the book before you read it
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
aloud and note pages where you will ask
language structures to enhance their
understanding of how to communicate ideas for predictions.
with purpose and focus
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing Read the story, pausing at strategic points for children to predict
what will happen next (children can also draw their predications)
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist and to check their predictions with what actually happened in the
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, story.
2.3 connect background knowledge to the titles 2.7, 2.8, 2.9 and 2.11 based on observation and
and pictures of fiction and nonfiction passages conversation with the learners. Pg. 2 – What do you think Maisy will wear?
to build a foundation of understanding The teacher will model think aloud to help the children to
2.4 develop understanding and application of practice similar habits.
the Concepts of Print
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and
Tip: Think Aloud – It is a form of modelling.
variety of texts that are read or read to them
It allows learners to see and hear how a
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
reader uses strategies.
environmental print and pictorial information
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to
visualize, predict and connect
2.9 demonstrate understanding by responding I am trying to guess what Maisy will wear. It is a wedding and people
to read-alouds with images, model making, usually wear fancy/pretty clothes. I think she might wear a pretty dress with
discussions, or temporary writing. flowers and frills.
2.11 recognise and use a variety of high
frequency words of personal importance, such
45
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
as names and pre-emergent level high- Responding after Reading
frequency words After reading the teacher asks this question:
How is this wedding similar or different to one you attended?
Social Studies – Myself – Historical and Social Studies – Observation and Conversation What is the same? What is different?
Cultural Thinking Responses are noted on chalk board. (Please see the Curriculum
Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for suggestions about
1.2.4 identify customs (food, decoration, The teacher will enter information into the checklist Shared Writing.)
special events) associated with these for Myself – Historical and Cultural Thinking In groups of two’s and three’s, children will talk about a wedding
celebrations in their family (K) Outcome 1.2.4 based on observation and - how they might plan a wedding for a family member.
conversation with the learners What special foods would you make?
How will you decorate the church or places?
What should happen at the wedding?
Each small group will share what was discussed with the large
group. The teacher will help the children to understand that
some ways to celebrate are the same, but also some ways are
different.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Art, Mathematics and Social Studies –
Decorations for Celebrations
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, Re-visiting the book: Maisy goes to a Wedding by Lucy Cousins
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8ICAcllAoD4
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners.
interact with a variety of audiences with In pairs, learners share what they remember that the story is
sensitivity and respect about. Then, in large group, the teacher will point out to the
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher learners that we can remember what happened in a story by
and children who have diverse interests, looking at the pictures or illustrations. Children and teacher
backgrounds and languages browse through the book (without audio track) to observe the
1.5 become aware of how effective listening pictures and talk about what they see.
enhances understanding
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard The teacher will show the children the story one more time and
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings ask them to focus their attention on the decorations noting the
and questions about engaging events, stories different shapes and patterns. The teacher can show the children
and conversations with increasing confidence the triangle flags and identify the patterns made with the
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when decorations. The teacher and learners discuss what a pattern
sharing stories or experiences means and the importance of patterns. The teacher and learners
46
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and explore ABAB patterns using materials in the classroom. The
language structures to enhance their teacher may demonstrate how to make an ABAB pattern with
understanding of how to communicate ideas two colours.
with purpose and focus
Product
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing Children are given materials - different coloured triangles, paper
strips, glue and strings. The learners will use the triangles to
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist create 2-colour patterns. The teacher will help the children to
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, attach the triangles to the string, and then put them up to
2.3 connect background knowledge to the titles 2.7, 2.8 and 2.9 based on observation and conversation decorate the classroom.
and pictures of fiction and nonfiction passages with the learners.
to build a foundation of understanding
2.4 develop understanding and application of
the Concepts of Print
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and
variety of texts that are read or read to them
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
environmental print and pictorial information
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to
visualize, predict and connect
2.9 demonstrate understanding by responding
to read-alouds with images, model making,
discussions, or temporary writing.
Mathematics - Geometrical Thinking Mathematics – Product
4.2.1 identify and describe shapes (2-D = Given materials, children select shapes, create a
squares, circles, triangles, 3-D = cubes, cones, pattern decoration for a celebration.
and spheres).
4.2.2 describe objects in the environment using Mathematics – Observation and Conversation
names of shapes and describe the relative
positions of these objects using terms such as The teacher will enter information into the checklist
above, below, beside, in front of, behind, and for Geometrical Thinking Outcomes 4.2.1, 4.2.2 and
next to. 4.2.3 based on observation and conversation with the
4.2.3 correctly name shapes regardless of their learners.
47
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
orientations or overall size (2-D = squares,
circles, triangles, 3-D = cubes, cones, and
spheres).
Mathematics - Pattern and Relationship
3.1.1 create simple repeating patterns (2 The teacher will enter information into the checklist
elements) for Pattern and Relationship 3.1.1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, 3.1.4
3.1.2 extend simple repeating patterns (2 and 3.1.6 based on observation and conversation with
elements) the learners.
3.1.3 copy a given repeating pattern
3.1.4 extend a variety of given repeating
patterns to two more repetitions
3.1.6 identify and describe a repeating pattern
in the classroom, the school, and outdoors
Social Studies – Myself – Historical and Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
Cultural Thinking
1.2.4 identify customs (food, decoration, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
special events) associated with these for Myself – Historical and Cultural Thinking
celebrations in their family (K) Outcome 1.2.4 based on observation and
conversation with the learners
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Social Studies – Important jobs During
a Celebration
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The learners had been asked to come to school with 2-3 items or
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and pictures of items that they have used for a family celebration
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners. recently. If some learners are waiting to show and tell about the
interact with a variety of audiences with foods, decorations and events of the specific celebrations, this
sensitivity and respect ILS could start with some sharing.
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher
and children who have diverse interests, The teacher will let the children know that they will be listening
backgrounds and languages to another story about a wedding. The teacher could ask the
48
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.5 become aware of how effective listening children if they know what a “ring bearer” is and if any of them
enhances understanding had ever done that job during a wedding.
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation
impact meaning and mood “The Ring Bearer”
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SgjmpdUIQhQ
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
and questions about engaging events, stories (Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies
and conversations with increasing confidence for steps for the teacher to use during a Read Aloud).
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences After the reading, the teacher will print this sentence on a chart
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and or the board:
language structures to enhance their
understanding of how to communicate ideas “Mama’s having a wedding and Jackson has an important job to
with purpose and focus do.”
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing Printing the sentence with the children’s help is a Shared
Reading/Shared Writing activity. (Please see the Curriculum
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for ways to enhance the
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, literacy skills during this time.)
2.3 connect background knowledge to the titles 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 2.11, 2.14 and 2.15 based on observation
and pictures of fiction and nonfiction passages and conversation with the learners. Ask the children what was one important job that Jackson had to
to build a foundation of understanding do.
2.4 develop understanding and application of
the Concepts of Print The book may be shown again, and children will listen to what
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and Jackson has to do. The teacher may print a sentence, or make a
variety of texts that are read or read to them list of what Jackson has to do. The class may discuss all the
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some preparations – foods, decorations, clothing – that are part of a
environmental print and pictorial information wedding celebration.
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to
visualize, predict and connect Story Quilt – Children will design a four-block story quilt with
2.9 demonstrate understanding by responding paper. The squares can depict four scenes in sequence of the
to read-alouds with images, model making, story. The pictures will include the food, decorations, jobs,
discussions, or temporary writing. clothing that were part of the story. The teacher may print the
2.11 recognise and use a variety of high words: food, decorations, jobs, clothing on the board, and the
frequency words of personal importance, such children may label their drawings (as they are able).
as names and pre-emergent level high-
49
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
frequency words
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with those
of personal importance
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages
Language Arts - Writing and Representing Language Arts - Product
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing The 4 block story quilt, depicting various scenes from
and writing a story, or from Show and Tell, will provide the
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case teacher will evidence of the children’s development of
letters of the alphabet the Writing and Representing outcomes.
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written
language and other representations (e.g. The teacher will enter information into the checklist
drawings) for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.5, 3.6,
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and conversation
shapes with the learners and the written product the children
3.8 spell name and some words of personal create.
importance correctly
Social Studies – Myself – Historical and Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
Cultural Thinking
1.2.4 identify customs (food, decoration, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
special events) associated with these for Myself – Historical and Cultural Thinking
celebrations in their family (K) Outcomes 1.2.4 and 1.2.5 based on observation and
1.2.5 make presentations on family customs conversation with the learners
associated with these celebrations (S)
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Social Studies – Diwali - Interactive
Writing: Sharing the Pen
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement
in sharing the experiences of others and with The teacher will enter information into the checklist All about Diwali – The teacher will re-read book/story from
oral stories and information sharing. for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, week two. The children will tell what they remember about the
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to Diwali festival. The teacher will ask the children to consider
50
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
interact with a variety of audiences with 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and foods, decorations, and other customs associated with this
sensitivity and respect conversation with the learners. celebration, as they experience the book a second time.
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher
and children who have diverse interests, The teacher will explain that the group will be making a poster to
backgrounds and languages explain about Diwali, so that people in the school can learn about
1.5 become aware of how effective listening it. The teacher and learners brainstorm ideas for writing about
enhances understanding what they have learnt about Diwali. The teacher provides guided
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard questions to help learners focus on specific areas for each detail.
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings There is a display of pictures depicting various aspects of the
and questions about engaging events, stories celebration as well. The teacher demonstrates/models how to
and conversations with increasing confidence compose the topic sentence. The teacher questions and draws
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when ideas and information from learners during this process. The
sharing stories or experiences teacher may ask, “What kind of celebration is Diwali? (National
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and or Religious?). Learners identify pictures that shows the kind of
language structures to enhance their celebration. Learners are encouraged to use pictures to paste on
understanding of how to communicate ideas chart next to topic sentence. So our topic sentence can be:
with purpose and focus Diwali is a festival of lights. The teacher records ideas using a
graphic organizer on a flip chart.
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
The teacher will make relevant connections to letter sounds and
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist to high frequency words as she records ideas. (Please see the
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for more
2.2 develop questions when browsing through 2.5, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14 and 2.15 based suggestions about Shared Reading and Shared Writing).
passages of interest on observation and conversation with the learners.
2.3 connect background knowledge to the titles
and pictures of fiction and nonfiction passages
to build a foundation of understanding
2.4 develop understanding and application of
the Concepts of Print
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and
variety of texts that are read or read to them
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
environmental print and pictorial information
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to
visualize, predict and connect
2.9 demonstrate understanding by responding
51
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
to read-alouds with images, model making, For example:
discussions, or temporary writing. TITLE: All about Diwali
2.11 recognise and use a variety of high
frequency words of personal importance, such
as names and pre-emergent level high-
frequency words
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the
meaning and flow of the language to anticipate
upcoming words
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and
phrasing during shared reading, independent
and guided reading of emergent level passages
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with those
of personal importance
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages
Language Arts - Writing and Representing Language Arts: Product
3.1 use shared ideas to co-construct stories The writing that the small group, and then the pair of
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing learners produce will provide the teacher with
and writing information about several of the Language Arts
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and outcomes.
real and imagined topics The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.1, 3.2, 3.3,
to assist in writing process 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case conversation with the learners.
letters of the alphabet
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written
language and other representations (e.g.
Learners work in three groups and they will be asked to compose
drawings)
one sentence for Detail 1, 2, or 3. The group will use a guided
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
question, and the teacher will have printed a related picture that
shapes
depicts the answer. The group is encouraged to write their
3.8 spell name and some words of personal
sentence explaining what the picture is depicting (invented
importance correctly
spelling). Each group has the opportunity to paste their picture
52
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
and write their sentence to fill in details 1, 2 and 3. As a whole
class, learners share ideas for the conclusion sentence – identify
picture and write sentence.
Social Studies – Myself – Historical and Social Studies – Observation and Conversation In pairs, children will draw a picture to depict Diwali Festival.
Cultural Thinking Children then add a word or a sentence to the picture using
invented or phonetic spelling, or other classroom tools. Learners
1.2.4 Identify customs (food, decoration, The teacher will enter information into the checklist are encouraged to use their knowledge of sight words and
special events) associated with these for Myself – Historical and Cultural Thinking phonetic skills to write their sentences.
celebrations in their family (K) Outcome 1.2.4 based on observation and
conversation with the learners
---------------------------------------
---------------------------------------
---------------------------------------
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Lan-g--u-a--g-e- -A--r-t-s-,- M---a-t-h--e-m--a-t-i-c-s--, -a-n--d- -S-o-cial Studies –
Decorations and- F--o-o--d- -
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement
in sharing the experiences of others and with The teacher will enter information into the checklist Learning Centres
oral stories and information sharing. for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, In small groups, the learners will revisit the various learning
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and centres established in week one and interact with the items
interact with a variety of audiences with conversation with the learners. associated with that celebration – decorations, foods, and other
sensitivity and respect. items (the teacher may make changes by adding new
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher materials/items). The teacher will circulate to the groups and
and children who have diverse interests, provide support and the teacher may question learners to
backgrounds and languages. highlight key math concepts. Learner count different types of
1.5 become aware of how effective listening food and decorations for each celebration. Each group will be
enhances understanding given the opportunity to share with the large group/whole class
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard the special foods, decorations and other items that are unique to
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings the celebration.
53
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
and questions about engaging events, stories
and conversations with increasing confidence DISCUSSION
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when How are the celebrations similar or different?
sharing stories or experiences How are the decorations similar and different?
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and Are the items the same or different from what your family uses?
language structures to enhance their
understanding of how to communicate ideas The teacher and learners complete this table during the
with purpose and focus discussion.
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing Celebration Similar Different
2.4 develop understanding and application of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
the Concepts of Print for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.4, 2.5, 2.7, 2.8, Learners may also talk about foods that taste sweet or spicy or
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14 and 2.15 based on observation favourite foods.
variety of texts that are read or read to them and conversation with the learners.
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some Interactive Game: Using a Mystery Box
environmental print and pictorial information
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to The teacher presents a mystery box filled with items. Learners are
visualize, predict and connect invited to pull an item from the box which they name, tell or
2.11 recognise and use a variety of high identify the celebration it is associated with and what it is used
frequency words of personal importance, such for. Learners are encouraged to find other learners who have
as names and pre-emergent level high- items of the same celebration.
frequency words Or
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the Learners select an item and with the sound of music they dance
meaning and flow of the language to anticipate around and find persons who have items associated with a
upcoming words particular celebration and form a group. Learners give reasons for
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and having the various persons in their group.
phrasing during shared reading, independent
and guided reading of emergent level passages
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with those
of personal importance
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages
54
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Mathematics - Number Sense Mathematics – Observation and Conversation
1.1.1 say the number sequence to 10 by 1s The teacher will enter information into the checklist
1.1.8 count with meaning to 10, by building for Number Sense Outcomes 1.1.1, 1.1.8 and 1.2.2
quantities based on observation and conversation with the
1.2.2 answer the question: How many are in learners.
the set? using the last number counted in a set
Social Studies: Myself – Historical and Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
Cultural Thinking
1.2.4 identify customs (food, decoration, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
special events) associated with these for Myself – Historical and Cultural Thinking
celebrations in their family (K) Outcome 1.2.4 based on observation and
conversation with the learners
End of Week Three: End of Week Three: Social Studies – Hosting a Family
Celebration
Reassessing Previous Checklists
Culminating activity for the week – emphasis on the week’s
The teacher will want to use the assessment strategy question: What are the special foods, decorations, events we
tools used throughout the week to reassess learners experience in my family for these celebrations?
for new knowledge/improvements.
Learners and parents collaborate to plan and host an event at
The teacher will make notes in the anecdotal notes school where families show and tell about a celebration in their
area of learners who may have been able to master house. Learners can be grouped for these activities; each group
the concept by the end of the week with dates. select a family celebration that they will showcase along with their
parents. The school’s population will be invited to view the
display and sample some of the dishes exhibited. The
kindergarten learners are expected to engage ‘visitors’ to their
booths in conversation sharing information about the foods,
decorations and events of the celebrations.
55
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Additional Resources
Lilly’s Big Day
Ellie the Flower Girl
Book – Violet Makes a Pattern
The Ring Bearer
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SgjmpdUIQhQ
Useful Content for the Teacher
Unless otherwise indicated here, useful content to support the Inclusive Learning Strategies in this week is embedded in the ILS.
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E8Rx4aBBnYw
Birthday Party
https://www.uniteforliteracy.com/unite/celebrations/book?BookId=185
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
Language Art & Social Studies:
Learners are given the opportunity to use the sentences from the graphic organizer to arrange into a paragraph or booklet. Learners are
encouraged to add pictures to decorate.
Early level: Learners arrange pictures to sequence the ideas for their paragraph and give an oral presentation. (this can be done in a small
group or individually)
56
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
IV. WEEK FOUR
Essential Question: What do I like about Celebrations with my family?
Question for Week Four: What do I like about Celebrations with my family?
Language Arts – Plans for the Unit (4 weeks)
The teacher will be observing for children’s Concepts of Print. Please see the Useful Content for the Teacher below for a list of Concepts of Print.
The letters/sounds g, o, u, l, f, b will be the focus. The teacher might do some “stand-alone” lessons to introduce the children to these letters/sounds.
Please see the “Useful Content for the Teacher” below for many ideas for teaching children letters/sounds.
Phonemic Awareness skills will commence and the focal point will be on initial phoneme isolation in words related to this Integrated Unit, such as fun,
girl, boy, laugh, understand, over. Please see the “Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies” for many ideas to engage learners in phonemic
awareness skills.
The high frequency (sight) words one, three, two, four, look, make, play, you, yellow, blue, red, brown, black, white, come, down will be the focus. The
teacher might do some “stand-alone lessons” to introduce these words. Please see the “Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies” for many
ideas for teaching high frequency words.
The teacher is encouraged to find opportunities to emphasize those letters/sounds/phonemes/high frequency words with the children
throughout the ILS for the unit.
57
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Introduction to Week 4:
Language Arts, Mathematics, and Social Studies –
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist Week 4 Question: “What do you like about
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, celebrations with your family?”
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.10 based on observation and
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners. Think, Pair, Share
interact with a variety of audiences with
sensitivity and respect What do you like about
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and celebrations with your family?
children who have diverse interests,
backgrounds and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
enhances understanding
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings Learners will be asked to think about celebrations
and questions about engaging events, stories and discussed in this unit. They will think about what they like
conversations with increasing confidence about celebrating these festivals with their families. (Each
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when learner will put on their thinking caps provided, indicating
sharing stories or experiences to the group that before they respond they must think
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness about the question and how they would like to respond).
activities and word play to discriminate between Timer can be used for each response.
various sounds in their environment, letters of
the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful sound Learners will then share with a partner their thoughts on
patterns the question. Partners will write one word on paper
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language provided about what their partner likes best about
structures to enhance their understanding of celebrating with their families e.g. food, dressing up, gifts,
how to communicate ideas with purpose and music, spending time, dancing. (inventive/ phonemic
focus spellings are acceptable).
The teacher will then have each partner share with the
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing class what was shared with them during peer sharing.
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist As the children are telling what they like best about
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.5, 2.7, celebrations with their family, the teacher will begin a list.
2.4 develop understanding and application of the 2.8, 2.11, 2.12, 2.14 and 2.15 based on observation and For example, if a child says “Decorations”, the teacher will
Concepts of Print conversation with the learners. put this on the list, with one child’s name next to it. Then,
58
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and if another child says, “Decorations”, the teacher will add
variety of texts that are read or read to them that child’s name next to that part of the list. Eventually,
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some there will be a list of aspects that the children like, and all
environmental print and pictorial information children’s names will be next to one of those aspects. The
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to teacher will go over the list with the children, counting
visualize, predict and connect how many children like which aspects of celebrations, and
2.11 recognise and use a variety of high printing the number next to the names on the list. For
frequency words of personal importance, such as example: Decorations: Tony, Elvira, Samtha (3). The
names and pre-emergent level high-frequency teacher can ask the children what aspect of celebrations is
words most popular in the class?
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the
meaning and flow of the language to anticipate Post Card:
upcoming words Learners will create a post card. They will use
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter inventive spelling as well as phonemic skills to write one
names and letter sounds, beginning with those sentence about what they like about celebrating with their
of personal importance families. They will draw/ paste pictures showcasing what
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode they like best about celebrating.
upcoming words in emergent level passages
Language Arts: Writing and Representing
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
writing for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.3, 3.4,
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and
real and imagined topics conversation with the learners.
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools to
assist in writing process
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case letters
of the alphabet
3.6 Connect spoken language(s) to written
language and other representations (e.g.
drawings)
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
shapes
3.8 Spell name and some words of personal
59
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
importance correctly
Mathematics - Data Management and Mathematics – Observation and Conversation
Probability
6.1.1 Collect simple sets of data in the class and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
school environment using observation. for Data Management and Probability Outcomes
6.1.2 Describe data classification. 6.1.1, 6.1.2, 6.1.3 and 6.1.4 based on observation and
6.1.3 Use counting to determine the number of conversation with the learners.
objects in a group.
6.1.4 Describe the results of classification and
data collection activities.
Social Studies – Myself – Historical and Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
Cultural Thinking
1.2.4 identify customs (food, decoration, special The teacher will enter information into the checklist
events) associated with these celebrations in for Myself – Historical and Cultural Thinking
their family Outcomes 1.2.4, 1.2.5 and 1.2.6 based on observation
1.2.5 make presentations on family customs and conversation with the learners
associated with these celebrations (S)
1.2.6 appreciate the diversity of family customs
and take pride in this (V)
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Social Studies and Language Arts – Carnival Parade
1.1 listen to music, conversation and The teacher will choose some clips from videos of local or
environmental sounds for personal enjoyment The teacher will enter information into the checklist national Carnival parades to show the children. Please
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, find some examples in the Additional Resources, below.
in sharing the experiences of others and with 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation
oral stories and information sharing. and conversation with the learners. Guided Questions:
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to • What did you see in the parade?
interact with a variety of audiences with • Where would you see persons dress like this?
sensitivity and respect
• What celebration was displayed?
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and
• Do you go to this celebration with your family?
children who have diverse interests,
60
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
backgrounds and languages • Who usually takes part in a Carnival parade?
1.5 become aware of how effective listening • Is it a religious or national celebration?
enhances understanding
• Why do we celebrate Carnival?
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation
• Are children allowed in Carnival bands?
impact meaning and mood
• Has anyone ever taken part in a Carnival parade
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
before?
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
and questions about engaging events, stories and • How does your family participate in carnival?
conversations with increasing confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when The teacher will show the book, Ninny at Carnival, and
sharing stories or experiences ask the children to notice all the preparations, decorations,
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language costumes and music.
structures to enhance their understanding of
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yVCcDbEvh98
how to communicate ideas with purpose and
focus
The teacher could show one of the video clips again, or
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing play a tape of some local music, and invite the children to
dance around the classroom, in time with the music.
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist Then, children may be put into small groups. Each child
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, in the group may take a turn being the leader, and the
2.3 connect background knowledge to the titles 2.7, 2.8 and 2.9 based on observation and conversation other children in the group will be asked to follow the
and pictures of fiction and nonfiction passages with the learners. dance moves of the leader.
to build a foundation of understanding
2.4 develop understanding and application of the
Concepts of Print
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and
variety of texts that are read or read to them
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
environmental print and pictorial information
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to
visualize, predict and connect
2.9 Demonstrate understanding by responding
to read-alouds with images, model making,
discussions, or temporary writing.
61
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Social Studies – Myself – Historical and
Cultural Thinking
1.2.1 name one religious and one national
festival celebrated by their family
1.2.2 understand the significance and importance
of these two religious and national festivals to
their family
1.2.3 appreciate that their family and country has
different ways to celebrate from other families
and countries, and understand that some families
may choose not to celebrate some occasions
1.2.4 identify customs (food, decoration, special
events) associated with these celebrations in
their family
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Mathematics and Social Studies -
Carnival Showcase and Role Play
1.1 listen to music, conversation and
environmental sounds for personal enjoyment The teacher will enter information into the checklist The teacher will create a Carnival Booth with the
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, assistance of parents and community persons who are
in sharing the experiences of others and with 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation involved in Carnival.
oral stories and information sharing. and conversation with the learners.
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to Learners will visit the Carnival Booth and explore
interact with a variety of audiences with materials on display, labels, ask questions, observe
sensitivity and respect demonstrations of the use of various materials to develop
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and understanding of the different aspects of mass.
children who have diverse interests,
backgrounds and languages Learners will work in pairs, selecting materials to depict
1.5 become aware of how effective listening one aspect of mass which they will role play to the whole
enhances understanding class.
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation
impact meaning and mood The teacher will show an incomplete pictograph (listing
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard various aspects of carnival) and learners will show their
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings favourite aspect of mass by placing a smiley face cut-out
and questions about engaging events, stories and on the pictograph.
62
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
conversations with increasing confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when The teacher will question the learners about the data
sharing stories or experiences collected on the pictograph. Which part of carnival is
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language most popular? How many learners voted for each part of
structures to enhance their understanding of carnival?
how to communicate ideas with purpose and
focus Learners will share about their choices, guided by
questions from the teacher:
Mathematics - Data Management and Mathematics – Observation and Conversation • What do you like most about this mass?
Probability • What do you think you can add to this mass to
make it better?
6.1.1 Collect simple sets of data in the class and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
school environment using observation. for Data Management and Probability Outcomes
6.1.2 Describe data classification. 6.1.1, 6.1.2, 6.1.3 and 6.1.4 based on observation and
6.1.3 Use counting to determine the number of conversation with the learners.
objects in a group.
6.1.4 Describe the results of classification and
data collection activities.
Social Studies – Myself – Historical and Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
Cultural Thinking
1.2.3 appreciate that their family and country has The teacher will enter information into the checklist
different ways to celebrate from other families for Myself – Historical and Cultural Thinking
and countries, and understand that some families Outcomes 1.2.3 and 1.2.4 based on observation and
may choose not to celebrate some occasions conversation with the learners
1.2.4 identify customs (food, decoration, special
events) associated with these celebrations in
their family
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Social Studies - Video
presentations – Learning more about Carnival
1.1 listen to music, conversation and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
environmental sounds for personal enjoyment for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.1, 1.2, 1.3,
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement 1.4, 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and The teacher will show the children several short videos to
in sharing the experiences of others and with conversation with the learners. review different aspects of mass highlighting the various
63
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
oral stories and information sharing. costumes, and other materials and competitions. See the
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to Additional Resources to find videos about the Short-Knee,
interact with a variety of audiences with Jab Jab, stilt-walkers, and Pan competitions. The teacher
sensitivity and respect may choose to show a video with no sound, or to show
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and only a short part of a video.
children who have diverse interests,
backgrounds and languages The teacher will pose riddles (Who am I?) to the children.
1.5 become aware of how effective listening For example:
enhances understanding My costume is very colourful
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard With mirrors on the collars
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings And willows on my ankles
and questions about engaging events, stories and Who am I?
conversations with increasing confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences The teacher may share the book, “To Carnival!” by
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language Babtiste Paul.
structures to enhance their understanding of
how to communicate ideas with purpose and https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y_Q8SnITH1A
focus
After experiencing the book, the teacher and children may
Language Arts: Reading and Viewing say what they recognize from other discussions about
Carnival (costumes, a parade, food).
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist Learners could be placed in small groups and presented
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, with sealed boxes which they choose one. In the box is
2.2 develop questions when browsing through 2.5, 2.7, 2.8 and 2.9 based on observation and one item associated with one aspect of mass and some
passages of interest conversation with the learners. small familiar objects which they are encouraged to use to
2.3 connect background knowledge to the titles enhance the item.
and pictures of fiction and nonfiction passages
to build a foundation of understanding OR
2.4 develop understanding and application of the
Concepts of Print The children may create their own costume or materials
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and using given items and paper – a paper model.
variety of texts that are read or read to them
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
environmental print and pictorial information
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to
64
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
visualize, predict and connect
2.9 demonstrate understanding by responding to
read-alouds with images, model making,
discussions, or temporary writing.
Social Studies – Myself – Historical and Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
Cultural Thinking
1.2.3 appreciate that their family and country has The teacher will enter information into the checklist
different ways to celebrate from other families for Myself – Historical and Cultural Thinking
and countries, and understand that some families Outcomes 1.2.3 and 1.2.4 based on observation and
may choose not to celebrate some occasions conversation with the learners
1.2.4 identify customs (food, decoration, special
events) associated with these celebrations in
their family
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Social Studies: Carnival Village
1.1 listen to music, conversation and The teacher will enter information into the checklist Prior to this activity, the learners will select the aspect of
environmental sounds for personal enjoyment for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, Carnival they would like to portray and parents will
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement 1.4, 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and support by providing the necessary costume/materials
in sharing the experiences of others and with conversation with the learners. they will need.
oral stories and information sharing.
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to Drama - Kiddies Carnival Frolic
interact with a variety of audiences with
sensitivity and respect
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and
children who have diverse interests,
backgrounds and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
enhances understanding
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
and questions about engaging events, stories and
conversations with increasing confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
65
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
sharing stories or experiences
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language The school yard will be transformed into a Carnival village.
structures to enhance their understanding of Learners will parade in their costumes while being
how to communicate ideas with purpose and entertained by Carnival music (steel pan, calypso, soca,
focus groovy). Parents and other stakeholders will assist with
food stalls and managing the learners during the event.
Popular soca and calypso artists will be invited to perform
and interact with the learners.
End of Week Four: Unit Wrap Up - Video Presentations and Playing
Charades
Reassessing Previous Checklists
Review the Essential Question of the Unit: What do I like
The teacher will want to use the assessment strategy about celebrations with my family?
tools used throughout the week to reassess learners
for new knowledge/improvements. Have children look at a slide show depicting different
celebrations (might be pictures of children and family or
Teacher will make notes in the anecdotal notes area pictures taken during the duration of the unit). Children
of learners who may have been able to master the will select their favourite picture and talk about the
concept by the end of the week with dates. celebration. Learners are encouraged to use correct terms
to describe the type of celebration – religious or national.
Encourage children to act out their experiences or what
they have seen of a celebration/festival by using gestures,
movements and expression but no words (charades). The
other learners must guess what the celebration is (remind
children to observe quietly so they can recognize the
details). Learner then describe what he or she did.
In small groups learners create a scrapbook about the
various celebrations explored by drawing, using picture
cutouts, and writing words or sentences.
KWL
The teacher and learners will review what they put on the
KWL chart earlier in this unit, and add information in the
66
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
“L - Learn” column of the KWL chart.
OR
The teacher can engage learners in creating a language
experience story – the carnival frolic, parade of the
masquerader, birthday party, or diwali celebration.
Additional Resources
Aspects of Carnival
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rdQuQIBtr0k
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=48Q8Iizs1qg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FDnRVKohuIU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=StcwePqVd2c
https://discoverdominica.com/en/events/1/mas-domnik-the-real-mas (good photos of costumes)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C1N8xSmfThc (Grenada - lots of close-up pictures of costumes)
https://www.youtube.com/shorts/pi1NgGDJejQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CK-JRVWIio4
Jab Jab
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CtgEyxfF0Qk
Short Knee and Wild Indian
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FkELESn3ae4
Pan Competition
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9rn9kyFIkUk
Carnival Mask Template
https://www.twinkl.com.mt/resource/carnival-mask-colouring-sheet-t-tp-2675958
67
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Useful Content for the Teacher
History on Caribbean Carnival
https://escales.ponant.com/en/caribbean-carnival/
Caribbean Carnival
by Jillian Powell (Author)
Books
To Carnival!: A Celebration in St Lucia
by Baptiste Paul (Author), Jana Glatt (Illustrator)
https://www.teacherspayteachers.com/Product/Caribbean-Carnival-Coloring-Page-6770152
https://coloringpagesonly.com/pages/carnival-coloring-pages
https://www.rainbowcoloringpages.com/festivals-holidays/carnival/carnival-mask-3/
Caribbean Carnival
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8JF-JBas8rc
Children’s Carnival
https://youtu.be/mJYG-A0mwYo?si=1aZh9bAqusoLTBXH
Books
To Carnival!: A Celebration in St Lucia
by Baptiste Paul (Author), Jana Glatt (Illustrator)
Jump Up! A Story of Carnival
Written and illustrated by Ken Wilson-Max
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies are
open-ended (rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
Strategies.
68
Kindergarten Curriculum – Celebrations
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies are
open-ended (rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
Strategies.
69
