November 2024
OHPC KINDERGARTEN
PLANTS AND ANIMALS
INTEGRATED UNIT #4 MARCH - APRIL 5 WEEKS
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Week 1
How do plants and
animals make a
difference to me?
Week 2
Week 5
What do plants
Can we do some
and animals need
things so the
environment is not to survive?
changed so much by
humans?
Integrated Unit on
Plants and A nimals
How do pla nts and
animals make a
difference to me
and my w orld?
Week 4
Can plants and
Week 3
animals change
Where do plants
the place where
and animals live
they live?
and why do they
live there?
2
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Table of Contents:
Introduction to Plants and Animals Integrated Unit .............................................................................................................................. 4
Essential Question: “How Do Plants and Animals Make a Difference to Me and My World?” ........................................................ 6
Summary of Curriculum Connections for Integrated Unit on Plants and Animals ............................................................................. 7
Overview and Preparation ...................................................................................................................................................................... 11
Sample Letter to Parents/Caregivers ..................................................................................................................................................... 12
Sample Recording Sheet After a Guest Speaker or Field Trip ............................................................................................................. 13
I. WEEK ONE .................................................................................................................................................................................... 14
II. WEEK TWO ................................................................................................................................................................................... 37
III. WEEK THREE ............................................................................................................................................................................. 51
IV. WEEK FOUR ................................................................................................................................................................................. 68
V. WEEK FIVE ................................................................................................................................................................................... 84
3
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Introduction to Plants and Animals Integrated Unit
The Kindergarten Curriculum consists of 6 documents:
• Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies
• Integrated Unit # 1 – Belonging
• Integrated Unit #2 – Weather
• Integrated Unit #3 – Celebrations
• Integrated Unit #4 – Plants and Animals
• Integrated Unit #5 – Games
The Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies document provides the framework for the delivery of the curriculum. Teachers must
examine this document prior to teaching this Unit to have a thorough understanding of the learning outcomes for Kindergarten, to teach the Integrated
Unit effectively and assess learner progress.
The Integrated Topics have been chosen to meet the learning outcomes for Language Arts, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies. No one Integrated
Unit contains all outcomes. Rather, they are spread across the Integrated Units. The five Integrated Topics are: Belonging, Celebrations, Weather,
Plants and Animals and Games with each having its own curriculum guide. This document contains the Learning Outcomes and Inclusive Learning
and Assessment Strategies that will be taught in the Plants and Animals Integrated Unit. The following table highlights the letters, sounds, words and
specific concepts in mathematics that are designated to be taught in each of the Integrated Units.
First IU Topic Second IU Topic Third IU Topic Fourth IU Topic Fifth IU Topic
Integrated Unit Topic Belonging Weather Celebrations Plants and Animals Games
Proposed Sequence for s, a, t, i, p, n c(k), e, h, r, m, d g, o, u, l, f, b z, w, y, x j, qu, v
Language Arts Letters and
Sounds
4
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
First IU Topic Second IU Topic Third IU Topic Fourth IU Topic Fifth IU Topic
Proposed sequence for Pre-primer words Pre-primer words Primer words Primer words Primer words
Language Arts Sight Words
(loosely following Dolch sight a, and, big, can, go, I, in, it, not, run, up, we, one, three, two, four, all, am, at, be, but, said, where, she,
words) is, me, see, the, to away, find, help, here, look, make, play, did, do, get, he, like, they, was, went, will,
jump, little, my you, yellow, blue, no, on, please, ran, yes, eat, good, have,
red, brown, black, say into, new, now,
white, come, down there, this, with
Proposed Sequence for Strand 1 Strand 1 Strand 1 Strand 1 Strand 1
Math Skills (refer to Strand 3, 6 Strand 3, 6 Strand 3, 6 Strand 2 Strand 2
outcomes for Kindergarten Strand 4 Strand 3, 6 Strand 5
Mathematics in this document) Strand 3, 6
Teaching and learning through Integrated Units provides engaging, authentic, and relevant opportunities for children to learn knowledge, skills, and values
in Language Arts, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies. The children experience learning as a whole and they see “academic” knowledge and skills
being applied to topics that are part of their lived experiences. Where appropriate, teachers may find ways that Health and Physical Well-being, Arts and
Crafts, Music, and Additional Languages may be a part of the Integrated Units.
5
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Essential Question: “How Do Plants and Animals Make a Difference to Me and My World?”
The Essential Question provides the over-arching focus throughout the unit. Teachers may start the unit by asking their learners the question (and
perhaps create a chart with the learners’ answers). Teachers and children will revisit the question at the end of the unit and consider what they have
learned.
The Essential Question should be posted in the classroom and referred to frequently. If a visitor enters the room, it should be obvious what the children
are learning about. If a visitor/parent/administrator asks the children what they are learning about, the children should be able to readily answer.
Essential Question: How Do Plants and Animals Make a Difference to Me and My World?
Weekly questions:
Week 1: How do plants and animals make a difference to me?
Week 2: What do plants and animals need to survive?
Week 3: Where do plants and animals live and why do they live there?
Week 4: Can plants and animals change the place where they live?
Week 5: Can we do some things so the environment is not changed so much by humans?
End of Unit summary/celebration: Return to discuss the Essential Question: How do plants and animals make a difference to me and my
world?
6
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Summary of Curriculum Connections for Integrated Unit on Plants and Animals1
Language Arts: A list of LA SCOs that children will learn during this Unit will be filled in as the Writing Teams work on lessons/activities for this unit.
SCO Strand 1: Listening and Speaking
1.1 Listen to music, conversation and environmental sounds for personal enjoyment
1.2 Demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in sharing the experiences of others and with oral stories and information sharing.
1.3 Use social listening and speaking skills to interact with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and respect
1.4 Interact and collaborate with the teacher and children who have diverse interests, backgrounds and languages
1.5 Become aware of how effective listening enhances understanding
1.6 Observe how tone, fluency and intonation impact meaning and mood
1.7 Use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English develops, share their thoughts, feelings and questions about engaging events, stories and
conversations with increasing confidence
1.8 Develop increasing clarity and focus when sharing stories or experiences
1.9 Engage in active phonological awareness activities and word play to discriminate between various sounds in their environment, letters of the
alphabet, rhyme and meaningful sound patterns
1.10 Develop and apply vocabulary and language structures to enhance their understanding of how to communicate ideas with purpose and focus
SCO Strand 2: Reading and Viewing
2.1 Identify an increasing number of letter names and letter sounds, beginning with those of personal importance
2.2 Develop questions when browsing through passages of interest
2.3 Connect background knowledge to the titles and pictures of fiction and nonfiction passages to build a foundation of understanding
2.4 Develop understanding and application of the Concepts of Print
2.5 Develop knowledge about the purpose and variety of texts that are read or read to them
2.7 Demonstrate understanding of some environmental print and pictorial information
2.8 Begin to apply comprehension strategies to visualize, predict and connect
2.9 Demonstrate understanding by responding to read-alouds with images, model making, discussions, or temporary writing
2.10 Connect words and images in pre-emergent and emergent level texts to background knowledge
1 Note: All Kindergarten Curriculum Outcomes are available in the OHPC Kindergarten Curriculum and Assessment Guidelines document. An individual Integrated
Unit does not contain all of the outcomes for the entire curriculum.
7
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
SCO Strand 2: Reading and Viewing
2.11 Recognize and use a variety of high frequency words of personal importance, such as names and pre-emergent level high-frequency words
2.12 Participate in shared reading and use the meaning and flow of the language to anticipate upcoming words
2.13 Begin to demonstrate fluency and phrasing during shared reading, independent and guided reading of emergent level passages
2.14 Identify an increasing number of letter names and letter sounds, beginning with those of personal importance
2.15 Use known letter sounds to decode upcoming words in emergent level passages
SCO Strand 3: Writing and Representing
3.1 Use shared ideas to co-construct stories
3.2 Assign meaning to experimental drawing and writing
3.3 Begin expressive writing to share ideas and real and imagined topics
3.4 Use peer collaboration and classroom tools to assist in writing process
3.5 Learn to print the upper and lower case letters of the alphabet
3.6 Connect spoken language(s) to written language and other representations (e.g. drawings)
3.7 Connect phonological awareness to letter shapes
3.8 Spell name and some words of personal importance correctly
Mathematics: The following Math SCOs have been assigned to the Games Unit, although these SCOs may also be reviewed/included in other Integrated Units
SCO Strand 1: Number Sense
1.1.1 Say the number sequence to 10 by 1s
1.1.4 Say the number that comes after a given number
1.1.8 Count with meaning to 10, by building quantities
1.1.9 Count with meaning to 10, by matching quantity and numeral
SCO Strand 2: Operations with Numbers
2.1.1 Compose and decompose numbers up to 9 in a variety of ways using manipulatives, fingers and pictures (e.g. seven fingers held up, fold down
two fingers, how many are left?)
SCO Strand 3: Pattern and Relationship
3.1.1 Create simple repeating patterns (2 elements)
3.1.2 Extend simple repeating patterns (2 elements)
SCO Strand 5: Measurement
5.1.1 Classify objects according to selected attributes, e.g., size, colour, shape, texture, sound, etc.
5.1.2 Classify objects and count the number of objects in each category
8
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
SCO Strand 5: Measurement
5.2.3 Recite days of the week and months of the year in order
5.2.4 Name the different monies (coins and notes) used in the Eastern Caribbean (standard units of measure) by identifying the quantity in terms of
cents
SCO Strand 6: Data Management and Probability
6.1.1 Collect simple sets of data in the class and school environment using observation.
6.1.2 Describe data classification.
6.1.3 Use counting to determine the number of objects in a group.
6.1.4 Describe the results of classification and data collection activities.
Science: These outcomes are taken from the OHPC Kindergarten Curriculum and Assessment Guidelines document and have been distributed to fit the weekly questions in
this Integrated Unit.
SCO Strand 2: Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems: Animals, Plants, and Their Environment
2.1 - Use observations to describe patterns of what plants and animals (including humans) need to survive.
2.1.1 Understand the difference between living and non-living things
2.1.2 Understand which living things are plants and which living things are animals
2.1.3 Understand that humans are animals
2.2 - Construct an argument supported by evidence for how plants and animals (including humans) can change the environment to meet
their needs.
2.2.1 Understand what “survive” means
2.2.2 Understand that all living things need water
2.2.3 Understand plants need light to live and grow.
2.2.4 Understand that plants do not need to move around because they make their own food.
2.2.5 Understand that some plants need different things to survive than other plants.
2.2.6 Understand that all animals need food to live and grow. They obtain their food from plants or from other animals.
2.2.7 Understand that some animals need different kinds of food to survive from other animals
2.2.8 Can give a specific example of how a plant or animal can change their environment to meet their needs.
2.2.9 Can explain that we know that plants and animals can change their environment because we have evidence
2.3 - Use a model to represent the relationship between the needs of different plants or animals (including humans) and the places they
live.
2.3.1 Understand why different plants and animals live where they do (their needs are met)
2.3.2 Create a model to show where a plant or animal lives and what they find there that helps them to survive.
2.3.3 Understand the way that plants and animals depend on each other and on the environment where they live – it’s a system
9
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
SCO Strand 2: Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems: Animals, Plants, and Their Environment
2.4 - Communicate solutions that will reduce the impact of humans on the land, water, air, and/or other living things in the local
environment.
2.4.1 Understand that things that people do to live comfortably can affect the world around them.
2.4.2 Understand that we can do some things to reduce the impact of humans on the environment
2.4.3 Understand that each child can make choices to reduce their impacts on the land, water, air, and other living things.
Social Studies: These outcomes are taken from the OHPC Kindergarten Curriculum and Assessment Guidelines document and have been distributed to fit the weekly
questions in this Integrated Unit
SCO Strand 3: Myself – Spatial Thinking
3.4 Identify natural and built features of the local environment (K)
3.5 Illustrate natural and built features of the local environment (S)
10
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Overview and Preparation
Preparation of the Room
Teachers are encouraged to display the Essential Question for the Integrated Unit on a bulletin board or the wall.
Resources
Teachers are encouraged to look through the entire plan for the Integrated Unit on Plants and Animals (below) and gather resources needed to teach
this unit.
Possible guest speakers and field trip(s)
When preparing for this unit, teachers are encouraged to consider: What/who is in the school/neighborhood to help us learn about Plants and
Animals? Before any guest speaker comes to the class, the children will be guided to think of questions to ask him/her. After the guest speaker leaves,
the children will complete a sheet that shows what they learned (in pictures and words, with help). Sample of that sheet is provided on Page 11 of this
document.
Letter Introducing the New Unit to Parents/Families
One way to find out who will come into the classroom as a guest speaker is to send a note home (and circulate in the school) telling what the unit will
be about and asking if anyone knows someone who could come into the classroom. In the letter, describe the focus of the Integrated Unit, ask for
specific resources (if appropriate), and provide some examples for guest speakers, such as “someone who has….”, “someone who knows about…”
Sample letter is provided on Page 10 of this document.
Consider possible play connections/materials (some possibilities are listed below)
Art/craft materials
Paint easel
Water table
Sand table
Toys connected to the topic
Blocks
Dress-ups
Puzzles
11
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Sample Letter to Parents/Caregivers
School logo?
Date
Dear Parents and Caregivers,
On Monday, (date), we will be starting our second Integrated Unit of study. We will be learning all about “Plants and Animals” and we will be
thinking about the question “How do plants and animals make a difference to me and my world?” This unit of study will be the focus in our classroom
until (date).
We are wondering if any of you have a particular interest, or experience with plants or animals and if you could come into our class one afternoon
to tell us about it. Maybe you are a livestock/vegetables farmer or have access to vegetables or livestock around your home. We are requesting your
expertise in these areas, and we are extending an invitation to you to come to our class to share information with our children on plants and animals. Help
our children learn more about growing vegetables. Maybe you have collected photos of different plants or animals. Maybe you know a veterinarian, or,
perhaps you know someone else in the community who will be willing to come into our class to help us learn more about plants and animals and the
difference they make to our world.
If you can help us out, please contact _______________, phone: _______________, and we will find a day and time for you, or someone you
will suggest, to visit our class.
Meanwhile, please ask your child about what he or she is learning about Plants and Animals, and enjoy some discussions about this topic at home!
Thank you so much,
(Teacher)
12
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Sample Recording Sheet After a Guest Speaker or Field Trip
What I learned from ___ (place for guest speaker’s name, or location of field trip) ________________________
(Place for the child to do a drawing based on the guest speaker’s visit)
(lines for child to write a word or two, probably with assistance from the teacher)
___________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
13
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Detailed Five-week Plan
I. WEEK ONE
Essential Question: How Do Plants and Animals Make a Difference to Me and My World?
Question for Week One: How do plants and animals make a difference to me?
Language Arts – Plans for the Unit (5 weeks)
The teacher will be observing the children’s Concepts of Print. Please see the Useful Content for the Teacher below for a list of Concepts of Print.
The letters/sounds z, w, y, x will be the focus. The teacher will do some “stand-alone” lessons to introduce the children to these letters/sounds.
Please see the “Useful Content for the Teacher” below for many ideas for teaching children letters/sounds.
Phonemic Awareness skills will commence and the focal point will be on initial phoneme isolation in words related to this Integrated Unit, such as
(zoo, zucchini, watermelon, whale, extra, mix, examine, yam). Please see the “Useful Content for the Teacher” below for many ideas for engaging
learners in phonemic awareness skills
The high frequency (sight) words all, am, at, be, but, did, do, get, he, like, no, on, please, ran, say will be the focus. The teacher will do some
“stand-alone lessons” to introduce these words. Please see the “Useful Content for Teacher below” for many ideas for teaching high frequency
words.
The teacher is encouraged to find opportunities to emphasize those letters/sounds/phonemes/high frequency words with the children
throughout the ILS for the unit.
14
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Gathering Assessment Data and Record-keeping
The Specific Learning Outcomes (SCOs) and Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILSs) for this unit are directly linked. The learners learn
and demonstrate development on the SCOS in the ILS. The teacher gathers assessment data on each of the SCOs (during the ILS).
The Assessment data is gathered through Observation, Conversation and Products, as set out in the Inclusive Assessment Strategies
(IAS) column.
The teacher will use the master checklist (hard copy or digital) included in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies to record data
collected about children’s progress in achieving the SCOs. The teacher will observe the children and will listen to the children’s responses or the
teacher will arrange for the children to create a “product” to gather evidence of the children’s development of the SCO attitudes, skills, and
knowledge.
The teacher will use a consistent scale in the checklist:
Is the child easily meeting the outcome (+)? Is the child meeting the outcome (=)? Does the child need more practice (-)?
The teacher will note the date of the observation/conversation, and the teacher may also add some comments for additional clarification
15
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Introduction to the Integrated Unit: Language
Arts related to the topic: Discussion or Guest
1.2 Demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist for Speaker:
engagement in sharing the experiences of Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.7, 1.8,
others and with oral stories and information 1.9 and 1.10 based on observation and conversation with Question for the week: How do plants and
sharing. the learners. animals make a difference to me?
1.3 Use social listening and speaking skills to
interact with a variety of audiences with The teacher will want to make an additional checklist The teacher may start the unit by asking the learners
sensitivity and respect to keep track of children’s development related to what they like to eat. (Many other options: the teacher
1.4 Interact and collaborate with the teacher specific letters/sounds. See a sample below. may bring in some fruits, vegetables. Or, if food is
and children who have diverse interests, served at the school, the teacher may take the children
backgrounds and languages to the kitchen to see what is cooked there; or invite the
1.5 Become aware of how effective listening cook to the class to talk about what is cooked in the
Identifying Skills is Skill is Skill is
enhances understanding school kitchen. Or the teacher may invite a local
Letter sounds present absent emerging
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard community person who grows a small patch of
correctly
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings vegetables to come in to chat with the children).
and questions about engaging events, stories
and conversations with increasing confidence When the teacher plans for a guest to come into the
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when Z classroom, or to take the children on a little “field trip”
sharing stories or experiences within the school, the teacher will prepare the children
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness before the event. The teacher will explain what will be
activities and word play to discriminate happening and encourage the children to think about
between various sounds in their environment, W what they might learn and what questions they might
letters of the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful have. During the visit, the teacher will support the
sound patterns guest to provide age-appropriate information to the
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and children and to respond to the children’s questions.
language structures to enhance their Y After the visit, the teacher will encourage the children
understanding of how to communicate ideas to write/draw a response to what they learned (please
with purpose and focus see the form, page 11, in this document).
Discussion
As the teacher and children discuss what they like to
eat (or what foods they saw or heard about above), the
teacher may ask “where does the food come from”?
16
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts – Reading and Viewing The children may answer “from the market!”, and the
teacher may wonder, “how does that food get to the
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
market?” Eventually, a child (or the teacher) may say
genres and text forms Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 2.10,
that the chickens are grown on a farm, the eggs for the
2.4 develop understanding and application of 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2,14 and 2.15 based on observation and
cake come from the chickens, the milk for the ice
the Concepts of Print conversation with the learners.
cream come from the cow, or nuts etc. The teacher
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
will sing a version of Old MacDonald Had A Farm
environmental print and pictorial information
with the children, filling in the kinds of animals and
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to
plants that would be farmed locally. While singing the
visualize, predict and connect
song, the teacher would pause and ask, “Why does
2.9 demonstrate understanding by responding
Old MacDonald raise cows, ducks, sheep, banana
to read-alouds with images, model making,
trees, dasheen, mango? Etc.”
discussions, or temporary writing.
2.10 connect words and images in pre-
Then, the teacher should ask the question How Do
emergent and emergent level texts to
Plants and Animals Make a Difference to Me and
background knowledge
My World? (and create a chart with the learners’
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high
answers). The children would offer some information
frequency words of personal importance, such
about providing food, and then the teacher will probe
as names and pre-emergent level high-
more, such as asking if there is a plant that helps them
frequency words
to find some shade when it’s hot. This chart could be
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the
displayed in the classroom, and the teacher and
meaning and flow of the language to
children could add to the chart throughout the 5
anticipate upcoming words
weeks of the IU. While the teacher is creating the
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and
chart, some “incidental” teaching of
phrasing during shared reading, independent
letters/sounds/sight words will occur. (Please see the
and guided reading of emergent level passages
Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
suggestions to enhance Shared Writing and Shared
names and letter sounds, beginning with those
Reading experiences). After the chart is completed, the
of personal importance
children may take part in Shared Reading. The teacher
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
may add items to the chart as the 5 weeks of the
upcoming words in emergent level passages
Integrated Unit unfold.
The teacher and learners will try to think of plants and
animals with words that start with the letters/sounds
Language Arts - Writing and Representing
for this unit (y, z, w, x). Possible answers are: Plants:
17
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case Language Arts – Product (Reading Response) zucchini, watermelon yam, zabuca, yellow pepper, yard
letters of the alphabet long beans , xilacayoth squash, zucca
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written The teacher would use the drawing or the painting to assess
language and other representations (e.g. the appropriate Writing and Representing outcome(s). Animals: walrus, worm, zebra, whale, weasel,
drawings) woodpecker
3.8 spell name and some words of personal The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
importance correctly Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.5, 3.6 and 3.8 based The teacher may have pictures to show the children,
on observation and conversation with the learners. related to these letter sounds.
After this discussion, the teacher will ask the children
to draw a picture of their favorite foods. (Other
options: perhaps the teacher could have a paper plate
for the children to draw their favorite meal or have
learners match pictures of food to where it comes
from. For example, a picture of a cow matches with a
picture of a glass of milk.
https://images.app.goo.gl/XtYkjwZSTvuTiTst7)
Let learners write their names on their drawing or
worksheet. Learners can also label the items in their
pictures, with the teacher’s assistance where necessary.
The children could be invited to bring their favourite
food that starts with the focus letters, providing an
opportunity for show and tell.
18
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
19
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts – Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Mathematics, and Science-
What is the difference between living and non-
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
living things?
in sharing the experiences of others and with Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7,
oral stories and information sharing. 1.8, 1.9 and 1.10 based on observation and conversation
Before learning more about Plants and Animals, the
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to with the learners.
teacher will help the children to realize that some
interact with a variety of audiences with
things in their world are “living” and some are “non-
sensitivity and respect
living”. The teacher can use this video
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LScD4x-kEbQ
and children who have diverse interests,
to discuss the characteristics of living and non-living
backgrounds and languages
things. Pause the video for learners’ answers and give
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
clarity where necessary. The teacher will assist learners
enhances understanding
in clarifying the terms Living and Non- Living things
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation
and that plants and animals are living things.
impact meaning and mood
1.7 Use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
Take the children outside to observe and name living
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
and non-living things.
and questions about engaging events, stories
and conversations with increasing confidence
Categorizing/Classifying
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
Have learners gather items in the classroom and take
sharing stories or experiences
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness
turns listening to each other telling the differences
activities and word play to discriminate between items and themselves. (The teacher will use
between various sounds in their environment, probing questions)
letters of the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful -Can it move by itself?
sound patterns Can we move by yourself?
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and -Can it eat?
language structures to enhance their Can we eat?
understanding of how to communicate ideas -Can it grow?
with purpose and focus Can we grow?
-Can it make young ones?
Reading and Viewing
Can we make young ones?
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
genres and text forms Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.3, 2.5, 2.7, 2.8 and
20
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.3 connect background knowledge to the 2.11 based on observation and conversation with the
titles and pictures of fiction and nonfiction learners. Items are placed into circles drawn on the floor or a
passages to build a foundation of designated corner of the classroom as learners answer
understanding the questions. The teacher will tell the children that
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and items in one circle are “living” and items in the other
variety of texts that are read or read to them circle are “non-living”.
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
environmental print and pictorial information The children may think that plants cannot move. It
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to would be very helpful if the teacher could get a vine to
visualize, predict and connect allow the learners to see the movement to the sun.
2.11 Recognize and use a variety of high
frequency words of personal importance, such
as names and pre-emergent level high- (Most items gathered in the classroom will be
frequency words non-living. Teachers are asked to bring living
things for this activity. E.g. (Butterfly, worm,
Mathematics - Measurement Mathematics – Observation and Conversation snake, turtle, fish, plant, banana, fruit
vegetable…)
5.1.1 Classify objects according to selected The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
attributes, e.g., size, color, shape, texture, Measurement Outcomes 5.1.1 and 5.1.2 based on
sound, etc. observation and conversation with the learners.
5.1.2 Classify objects and count the number of
objects in each category
Science – Interdependent Relationships in
Science - Product
Ecosystems
The children will complete a worksheet and this will show
-The children will complete a worksheet of pictures
2.1.1. understand the difference between the teacher if the child understands outcome 2.1.1
living and non-living things with living and non-living things, circle, color and
count pictures of living things only
Science – Observation and Conversation https://images.app.goo.gl/kCFK7LrveL18RqLB9
The teacher will enter information into the checklist for (The teacher may need an account to access these worksheets).
Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems Outcome
2.1.1 based on observation and conversation with the
learners.
21
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts – Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Science- Class Scrapbook
and/or Individual Scrapbooks about Living and Non-
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist for Living Things
in sharing the experiences of others and with Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.7, 1.8,
oral stories and information sharing. 1.9 and 1.10 based on observation and conversation with The teacher and the children will create a scrapbook to
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to the learners. distinguish between living and non-living things,
interact with a variety of audiences with including letter sounds and names that each animal
sensitivity and respect begins with and spell the names. e.g. a-ant, d-dog, c-
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher cat, f-fish...boy. zip. Zoo, zero, yarn. Yo yo, yacht,
and children who have diverse interests, yard, window, watch wall, wallet, xylophone, x ray, x
backgrounds and languages box).(Teachers could send a note home to parents
1.5 become aware of how effective listening about the topic, asking for 5 pictures of each
enhances understanding category),
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings Group Work
and questions about engaging events, stories To complete this activity the teacher will gather all
and conversations with increasing confidence materials needed such as pictures (that parents can
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when assist with in advance - glue, marker/ pencils,
sharing stories or experiences construction paper cut -out letters/words etc. Learners
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness will be divided into small groups where they will sort
activities and word play to discriminate pictures into living and non- living things.
between various sounds in their environment, (Encourage discussion to ascertain their choices).
letters of the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful Each group/ individual within groups will work on
sound patterns decorating their scrapbook to look visually appealing.
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and The teacher will move around and assist the learners
language structures to enhance their accordingly.
understanding of how to communicate ideas
with purpose and focus Partner Writing.
Learners will then be guided to label the pictures with
the appropriate words, using letter sounds to sound
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
out words.
The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
2.4 develop understanding and application of
Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.4, 2.11, 2,14 and 2.15
the Concepts of Print
based on observation and conversation with the learners.
22
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high Each group will share their scrapbook with the class
frequency words of personal importance, such reinforcing the understanding of which things are
as names and pre-emergent level high- living and which things are non-living things.
frequency words
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter The teacher could show the children a dry local seed,
names and letter sounds, beginning with those and ask ””is it living or non living?” (This is a
of personal importance challenge question that might result in very interesting
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode discussion).
upcoming words in emergent level passages
Language Arts - Writing and Representing
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing
and writing The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7
to assist in writing process and 3.8 based on observation and conversation with the
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case learners.
letters of the alphabet
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written
language and other representations (e.g.
Drawings)
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
shapes
3.8 spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly
Science – Interdependent Relationships in
Ecosystems
Science – Observation and Conversation
2.1.1. understand the difference between
living and non-living things
The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems Outcome
23
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.1.1 based on observation and conversation with the
learners.
Language Arts – Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Science and Language Arts – Living and Non-
living things
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
in sharing the experiences of others and with Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.7, 1.8, Video, Shared Writing
oral stories and information sharing. 1.9 and 1.10 based on observation and conversation with
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to the learners. Learners will view a video clip of a frog eating bugs
interact with a variety of audiences with (only show 3-4 minutes of the video).
sensitivity and respect
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UIzHZviWXmc
and children who have diverse interests,
backgrounds and languages Brainstorm what is seen on the video. Record learners’
1.5 become aware of how effective listening answers on a chart, using a repetitive phrase such as “I
enhances understanding saw a .....” (This is a Shared Writing activity. Please
1.7 Use Home Language(s) and, as Standard see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings Strategies for suggestions of ways to enhance the
and questions about engaging events, stories experience to help children develop many different
and conversations with increasing confidence Language Arts skills).
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences After creating the list (above), the teacher may guide a
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness discussion using the following questions.
activities and word play to discriminate
between various sounds in their environment, What do you see the frog doing? (running- movement,
letters of the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful eating-Nutrition)
sound patterns How else do you know the frog is alive? (breathing)
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and What were some non-living things in the video?
language structures to enhance their
understanding of how to communicate ideas The teacher must explain that a living thing can eat
with purpose and focus and breathe, has young, and can grow. Non-living
things do not do those things.
Sorting Spree
Gather pictures of various living things (plants,
24
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
animals) and non-living things (chair, rock, book), two
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
separate containers labeled “Living” and “Non-
Living.” Each learner will be given a picture to decide
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of
The teacher will enter information into the checklist for if it's living or non-living by placing the picture into
genres and text forms
Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.5, 2.7, 2.10, one of the containers. Learners will explain their
2.4 develop understanding and application of
2.11, 2,14 and 2.15 based on observation and conversation reasoning (e.g., The dog is living because it grows. The chair is
the Concepts of Print
with the learners. non-living because it cannot move or eat…,). After sorting all
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and
pictures, review the different characteristics of living
variety of texts that are read or read to them
and non-living for reinforcement
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
environmental print and pictorial information
2.10 connect words and images in pre-
emergent and emergent level texts to
background knowledge
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high
frequency words of personal importance, such
as names and pre-emergent level high-
frequency words
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with those
of personal importance
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages
Science – Interdependent Relationships in
Ecosystems
Science – Observation and Conversation
2.1.1. understand the difference between
living and non-living things The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems Outcomes
2.1.1 based on observation and conversation with the
learners.
25
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts – Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Science - Nature Walk
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist for Which living things are plants and which living
in sharing the experiences of others and with Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, things are animals?
oral stories and information sharing. 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and conversation with
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to the learners. Help the learners distinguish between living things that
interact with a variety of audiences with are plants and living things that are animals. This can
sensitivity and respect be done by using songs like "Old MacDonald Had a
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher
Farm" to introduce vocabulary and basic information
and children who have diverse interests,
about different animals and plants. The teacher will
backgrounds and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
use plants and animals present on local farms to insert
enhances understanding while singing the song. (pigs, goats, sheep, rabbits,
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation carrots, dasheen, potatoes, banana, tomatoes, lettuce,
impact meaning and mood cabbage, mango, oranges, melon) etc. The teacher can
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
help the children to say which things are plants and
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
which things are animals.
and questions about engaging events, stories
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M3WvViAUgyg
and conversations with increasing confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
Or, instead of Old MacDonald, the teacher may use
sharing stories or experiences
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
the song ‘Looby Loo’. (I put my plants in, I put my
animals out, etc.).
language structures to enhance their
understanding of how to communicate ideas
Which living things are plants?
with purpose and focus
Take learners for a walk in the environment to see
Science – Interdependent Relationships in Science – Observation and Conversation
living and nonliving things and to look for living
Ecosystems
things that we call “plants”.
2.1.2 understand which living things are plants The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
Have learners sing the tune “Here we go around the
and which living things are animals Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems Outcome
Mulberry Bush”, as they skip around, they would name
2.2.4. Understand that plants do not need to 2.1.2 and 2.2.4 based on observation and conversation with
the plants and any non- living things that are seen
move around because they make their own the learners.
in the environment.
food.
26
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Have learners take a plant (or a leaf from a plant) back
into the classroom (where plants are available) teacher
would guide the learners on what plant to choose.
(Where plants are not available to take back, teacher provides),
Pair Groups
Each learner will work with another learner to observe
the plant or leaf they brought back to class or the one
that is provided. The teacher offers support using
through questioning (“What color is the plant?” What
shape? Any veins? Any texture? Etc. They will talk
about and give answers to the questions What is a
plant? Learners’ answers will be recorded. The teacher
would lead learners to a definition. (Plants are living
things that grow by making their own food using
sunshine and water.)
Play Dough Modeling
Learners will observe the plant or leaf and create a
model with play dough. Or the children may use paper
and scissors to create their plants. Teacher may want
to give them coloured paper and model how to cut to
create roots etc
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Science - What is an animal?
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist for Learners will observe and talk about the different
in sharing the experiences of others and with Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 animals displayed (via pictures, screen, real life animals
oral stories and information sharing. and 1.10 based on observation and conversation with the etc.) by the teacher. They will give answers to the
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to learners. question What is an animal? Learners’ answers will be
interact with a variety of audiences with recorded. The teacher would lead learners to a
sensitivity and respect definition. (Animals are living things that eat other
plants or animals for food, in order to live.)
27
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher Animal Hunt
and children who have diverse interests, Learners will identify various toy animals found in
backgrounds and languages their science corner and or have the learners hunt
1.5 become aware of how effective listening around the classroom for hidden animals according to
enhances understanding the animal sounds they hear via audio.
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings Learners will write ‘A’ next to the statement that
and questions about engaging events, stories indicates animal or ‘P’ for those that indicate plants.
and conversations with increasing confidence Each learner will have a sheet to record on. The
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when teacher will help the children to read the sentences.
sharing stories or experiences The child will put their name on the paper.
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
language structures to enhance their A…animals P…. plants
understanding of how to communicate ideas
with purpose and focus I have roots _________
I have leaves _________
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing I have legs _________
The teacher will enter information into the checklist for I have ears _________
2.4 develop understanding and application of Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.4, 2.8, 2.11 and 2.14
I have a stem _________
the Concepts of Print based on observation and conversation with the learners.
I have a nose _________
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to
visualize, predict and connect I grow in soil _________
2.11 Recognise and use a variety of high
frequency words of personal importance, such Discussion/Review questions:
as names and pre-emergent level high-
frequency words Which living things are plants and which are animals?
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with those Why do animals need food?
of personal importance
Why do plants need food?
Language Arts - Writing and Representing
The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
How does an animal get food?
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.5, 3.7 and 3.8 based
letters of the alphabet on observation and conversation with the learners. How do plants get food?
28
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter Why do animals hunt?
shapes
3.8 spell name and some words of personal Why don’t plants hunt?
importance correctly
What are plants?
Science – Interdependent Relationships in Science - Product
Ecosystems What are animals?
The teacher will have the worksheet that the children filled
2.1.2 understand which living things are plants out, to provide data of the children’s understanding of which Compare characteristics of plants and animals.
and which living things are animals things are plants and which things are animals.
Science – Observation and Conversation
The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems Outcome
2.1.2 based on observation and conversation with the
learners.
Language Arts – Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Math, and Science - Do Plants
and Animals make a difference to us for more
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist for than food
in sharing the experiences of others and with Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7,
oral stories and information sharing. 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and conversation with Connecting to real-life: The teacher asks the learners
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to the learners. to think about how plants and animals make a
interact with a variety of audiences with difference to them?
sensitivity and respect
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher Read Aloud
and children who have diverse interests, Read the book or show the video The Very Hungry
backgrounds and languages Caterpillar by Eric Carle and ask learners to identify
1.5 become aware of how effective listening different plants and animals in the story. After the
enhances understanding story, ask learners to identify the animals and the
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation plants and distinguish between them by discussing
impact meaning and mood the following questions. The very hungry caterpillar |
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard Animated Book | Read aloud (youtube.com)
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
29
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
and questions about engaging events, stories -Who in the story ate food?
and conversations with increasing confidence - Do you eat food?
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when -What food do you eat that the caterpillar eats as well?
sharing stories or experiences -Can you think of other things in nature that eat food
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and like the caterpillar? (Other animals)
language structures to enhance their -Can you think of other plants besides those in the
understanding of how to communicate ideas story? (Trees, flowers)
with purpose and focus
Question learners about the caterpillar to bring out
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
high frequency words “he” the, for, and out, look
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of
The teacher will enter information into the checklist for How do you know the caterpillar in the book is a
genres and text forms
Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.7, 2.8, male?
2.3 connect background knowledge to the
2.9, 2.10, 2.11, 2,14 and 2.15 based on observation and
titles and pictures of fiction and nonfiction
conversation with the learners. (This is a Read Aloud/Viewing experience. Please
passages to build a foundation of
refer to the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
understanding
Strategies for more ideas of ways to enhance the
2.4 develop understanding and application of
children’s Language Arts skills during this ILS).
the Concepts of Print
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and
Mathematics
variety of texts that are read or read to them
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
Learners will play a game where they match pictures of
environmental print and pictorial information
food eaten by the caterpillar to the days when the
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to
caterpillar ate them. Then they count how many items
visualize, predict and connect
the caterpillar ate in total. (This could be done with the
2.9 Demonstrate understanding by responding
full group of children, on a large chart made by the
to read-alouds with images, model making,
teacher. Or, the teacher may give the children their
discussions, or temporary writing.
own charts to fill in, while the teacher fills in the large
2.10 connect words and images in pre-
chart). The teacher will review the days of the week.
emergent and emergent level texts to
background knowledge
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high
frequency words of personal importance, such
as names and pre-emergent level high-
frequency words
30
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with those
of personal importance
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages
Mathematics – Number Sense
1.1.1 say the number sequence to 10 by 1s
1.1.4 say the number that comes after a given Mathematics – Observation and Conversation
number
The teacher will enter information into the checklist for Developing Topic- Group Work
Mathematics – Measurement Number Sense Outcomes 1.1.1 and 1.1.4 based on Learners will sit in groups. Each group will be given a
observation and conversation with the learners. mystery bag. (E.g. leaves- mint, tea bush, feather, fruit,
5.2.3 recite days of the week and months of egg, toy animal etc.) Where learners can pull different
the year in order objects relating to plants and animals and have a chit
chat surrounding how plants and animals make a
Mathematics – Data Management and The teacher will enter information into the checklist for difference to them. Learners are encouraged to ask
Probability Measurement Outcome 5.2.3 based on observation and questions. The teacher listens to their ideas and
conversation with the learners. experiences.
6.1.1. Collect simple sets of data in the class
and school environment using observation. Suggested questions to ask
6.1.2 Describe data classification. -What do we use these leaves for?
6.1.3 Use counting to determine the number The teacher will enter information into the checklist for -Where do you think these feathers come from and what do we
of objects in a group. Data Management and Probability Outcomes 6.1.1, 6.1.2 use them for?
and 6.1.3 based on observation and conversation with the -Why do we eat fruits?
Science – Interdependent Relationships in learners. -Why do you have eggs at home?
Ecosystems
The teacher could add some new ideas to the chart
2.1.2 understand which living things are plants Science – Observation and Conversation made at the beginning of the unit, about how plants
and which living things are animals and animals make a difference to us.
31
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The teacher listens to learners as they express themselves
during the mystery bag activity to observe to what extent the
learners have grasped the concept.
The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystem Outcome 2.1.2
based on observation and conversation with the learners.
Language Arts Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Math, and Science – Are Humans
Animals? Song and Dance
1.1 listen to music, conversation and The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
environmental sounds for personal enjoyment Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, Are humans animals?
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement 1.7, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.10 based on observation and Have learners sing and do actions to the song Head
in sharing the experiences of others and with conversation with the learners. shoulder, knees and toes or Chest nut toe, knee, noses, eye, love
oral stories and information sharing. Him.
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZanHgPprl-0
interact with a variety of audiences with https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aW65QZAFXd
sensitivity and respect Q
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher
and children who have diverse interests, Comparison
backgrounds and languages Display a picture of an animal (screen or on the board/
1.5 become aware of how effective listening wall)
enhances understanding Lead learners into a conversation about identifying
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation similarities between body parts of animals and body
impact meaning and mood parts of humans using learners standing and touching
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard their body parts. The body parts are recorded.
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
and questions about engaging events, stories Some incidental teaching of letters/sounds will be
and conversations with increasing confidence done as the teacher records children’s answers (Shared
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when Writing; please see Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for
sharing stories or experiences Effective Strategies for further suggestions).
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness
activities and word play to discriminate Mathematics
between various sounds in their environment, Review number sense by counting the number of body
32
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
letters of the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful parts that humans and animals have in common.
sound patterns
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
language structures to enhance their Comparing animals and humans:
understanding of how to communicate ideas
with purpose and focus Discuss with the learners:
Do they both eat?
Do you both depend on plants and animals for food?
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing Do they both make young ones?
The teacher will enter information into the checklist for Do they both grow?
2.4 develop understanding and application of Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.4, 2.7, 2.9, 2.11, 2.14 and
the Concepts of Print 2.15 based on observation and conversation with the The teacher helps the learners to deduce that:
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some learners.
environmental print and pictorial information - since animals have some similar body parts as a
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high human
frequency words of personal importance, such - since the have the same characteristics
as names and pre-emergent level high- - since humans are NOT plants
frequency words then humans are animals
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with those If the teacher wishes, the learners could sort and then
of personal importance match puzzles pieces together to complete puzzles of a
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode human and an animal
upcoming words in emergent level passages https://images.app.goo.gl/mGYmQaBnD9DQxFe87
Language Arts - Writing and Representing https://images.app.goo.gl/JgPx81ctZjQtnKYUA
The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.4 and 3.7 based on
to assist in writing process* observation and conversation with the learners.
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
shapes
Mathematics – Observation and Conversation
Mathematics – Number Sense
1.1.1 say the number sequence to 10 by 1s
33
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.1.4 say the number that comes after a given The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
number Number Sense Outcomes 1.1.1 and 1.1.4 based on
observation and conversation with the learners.
Science – Interdependent Relationships in
Ecosystems
Science – Observation and Conversation
2.1.3 understand that humans are animals
If the teacher wishes, the children could complete their own
Venn diagram, using different pictures, to show that they
understand that humans are animals.
The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems Outcome
2.1.3 based on observation and conversation with the
learners.
End of Week One: End of Week One: Language Arts and Science –
Favorite Plants and Animals
Reassessing Previous Checklists
Show and Tell
The teacher will want to use the assessment strategy tools The teacher with parents’ assistance will gather
used throughout the week to reassess learners for new pictures of learners’ pets or favorite plants where
knowledge/improvements. learners do not have a pet. The teacher complies a file
on the computer of all photos sent by parents.
The teacher will make notes in the anecdotal notes area of
learners who may have been able to master the concept by The children will be coached so that they will include:
the end of the week with dates.
-Introduction of themselves and their plant/animal.
-Sharing accurate information about their
If teachers wish, he/she could fill out an assessment plant/animal.
form for each child as they do their presentation (as -Using appropriate language to talk about their
below): plant/animals
Kindergarten Plant & Animal Show and Tell Each learner will talk about his/her pet or favorite
Assessment Checklist (for Teachers) plant as photos are projected. Learners will be
34
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Learner: _______________________ Date: encouraged to show appreciation for each other as
______________ they present.
Content
Guided Questions
-Introduce themselves and their plant/animal. How do you think our community will look without
(Yes No ) plants and animals?
-Share accurate information about their plant/animal. (Yes H o w should we treat plants and animals?
No) How do plants and animals make a difference to us for
-Use appropriate language to talk about their plant/animals more than just food? (Beauty-decoration, medicinal,
( Yes No) protection, shade, etc.)
Additional Resources
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=za5z6WRz29I
The Dr Binocs Show- Living and Non- living things
Where does food comes from?
https://youtu.be/gXJSI6n8oz8
Useful Content for the Teacher
Unless otherwise indicated here, useful content to support the Inclusive Learning Strategies in this week is embedded in the ILS.
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies
are open-ended (rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
35
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for
Effective Strategies.
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
Where does food come from?
https://youtu.be/PnSCciL_K3g
36
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
II. WEEK TWO
Essential Question: How Do Plants and Animals Make a Difference to Me and My World?
Question for Week Two: What do plants and animals need to survive?
Language Arts – Plans for the Unit (5 weeks)
The teacher will be observing for children’s Concepts of Print. Please see the Useful Content for the Teacher below for a list of Concepts of Print.
The letters/sounds z, w, y, x will be the focus. The teacher will do some “stand-alone” lessons to introduce the children to these letters/sounds.
Please see the “Useful Content for the Teacher” below for many ideas for teaching children letters/sounds.
Phonemic Awareness skills will commence and the focal point will be on initial phoneme isolation in words related to this Integrated Unit, such as
(zoo, zucchini, watermelon, whale, extra, yucca). Please see the “Useful Content for the Teacher” below for many ideas for engaging learners in
phonemic awareness skills
The high frequency (sight) words all, am, at, be, but, did, do, get, he, like, no, on, please, ran, say will be the focus. The teacher will do some
“stand-alone lessons” to introduce these words. Please see the “Useful Content for Teacher below” for many ideas for teaching high frequency
words.
The teacher is encouraged to find opportunities to emphasize those letters/sounds/phonemes/high frequency words with the children
throughout the ILS for the unit.
37
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts – Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Introduction to Week Two:
Language Arts and Science: What do plants
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity engagement in The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
and animals need to survive? What does
sharing the experiences of others and with oral Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.7,
“survive” mean?
stories and information sharing 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and conversation with
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to interact the learners.
Teachers may start the week by providing
with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and
respect multiple scenarios (video clips) to cement the
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and meaning of the concept “survive”
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds Scenario 1: Natural Disasters- Hurricanes or
and languages
earthquake or Tsunami,
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
After viewing video clippings the teacher leads
enhances understanding
the learners to how people survive natural and
1.7 use Home Language and, as Standard English
develops, share their thoughts, feelings, and other disasters.
questions about engaging events, stories and
conversation with increasing confidence. Scenario 2: Diseases, fires
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GHjgwqcj62E
sharing stories or experiences
(what is a story board?)
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language
With the use story board the teacher tells:
structures to enhance their understanding of how to
- the story of how someone went through the
communicate ideas with purpose and focus
Covid-19 pandemic and how they survived.
- the story of a fire that took place and how
Science – Interdependent Relationship in Science – Observation and Conversation
persons survive
Ecosystems
2.2.1 understand what “survive” means The teacher will enter information into the checklist for Possible definitions of the concept “survive”
2.2.2 understand that all living things need water Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems Outcomes -I must live and be healthy
2.2.1 and 2.2.2 based on observation and conversation
-To be alive
with the learners.
-To have what we need to live
-There are things around us that can hurt us but
if we stay safe, we stay alive.
38
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The children may be reminded of the motto they
learned during the Integrated Unit on Weather:
Be Prepared: Not Scared.
Learners view a video that captures humans and
animals need for water.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kzhdLvak
Y7g
Suggested Questions to guide discussion
1.Why were animals moving away?
2. Why were the animals dying?
3. ‘If there is no water, there is no life’ What does this
mean?
4. What happened to the plants?
5. What do animals need to survive?
Language Arts – Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Science: What do plants
need to survive?
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
sharing the experiences of others and with oral Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.7,
The teacher tells the learners that they are going
stories and information sharing. 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and conversation with
to start a science experiment to see how plants
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to interact the learners.
survive! Explain that two plant homes will be set
with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and
respect up and they will be observing which plant is
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and surviving and why.
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds and
languages
Modeling
1.5 become aware of how effective listening enhances
I Listen
understanding
I do
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English
develops, share their thoughts, feelings and questions I say
39
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
about engaging events, stories and conversations Setting Up Homes
with increasing confidence Cup#1: Explain that in one cup, there will be a
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when sharing
healthy plant and give it all the things we think a
stories or experiences
plant will need to grow strong. Ask the learners
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language
to guess what those things will be. (Wait for
structures to enhance their understanding of how to
communicate ideas with purpose and focus responses like sunlight, water, air)
Explain that the plant will be placed near the
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing window for lots of sunlight. We'll also make sure
The teacher will enter information into the checklist for to give it water regularly and keep it in an open
2.4 develop understanding and application of the Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.4, 2.11 and 2.14 based
area where it can get fresh air.
Concepts of Print on observation and conversation with the learners.
Cup#2 Explain that in the other cup, there will
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high frequency
be a plant, but this time, we won't give it any
words of personal importance, such as names and Language Arts – Product
pre-emergent level high-frequency words sunlight, water, or fresh air. We'll keep it in a
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter names The children will draw a picture of the plant that survived closed space away from the window.
and letter sounds, beginning with those of personal the experiment. This picture will provide examples of the
importance child’s letter formation and spelling of name.
Observation and Prediction:
What do you think will happen to the plants over
Language Arts - Writing and Representing The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
the next few days? Which plant do you think will
Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing and 3.8 based on observation and conversation with the survive better? Why? (Encourage discussion and
writing learners. guesses)
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case letters of Tell the learners to check every day on the plants
the alphabet and think about what they observe.
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written language
(These experiments would be observed over
and other representations (e.g. Drawings)
the next two days.)
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter shapes
3.8 spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly
After two days of observation and data collection
there will be a grand conversation. Learners will
be encouraged to ask questions about the
experiment. The teacher will then pose the
following questions.
40
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Mathematics – Data Management and Mathematics – Observation and Conversation Observation Corner- Who will survive?
Probability
The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
What did you notice over the two days you looked at the
6.1.1 collect simples sets of data in the class and Data Management and Probability Outcomes 6.1.1, 6.1.2
plants?
school environment using observation and 6.1.4 based on observation and conversation with the
How do the plants look?
6.1.2 describe data classification learners.
6.1.4 describe the results of classification and data Why are they looking like that?
collection activities Which one survived?
Why did the other one die or shriveled up?
Science – Interdependent Relationship in Science – Observation and Conversation What do plants need to survive?
Ecosystems
The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
Learners will draw and color the plants that
2.2.1 understand what “survive” means Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems Outcomes
survived. They will write their names on their
2.2.2 understand that all living things need water 2.2.1, 2.2.2, 2.2.3 based on observation and conversation
2.2.3. Understand plants need light to live and grow with the learners. paper and the sentence- “This plant survived!”
Language Arts – Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Science: Obstacle
Course and Poem
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
sharing the experiences of others and with oral Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6,
Poem
stories and information sharing. 1.7, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.10 based on observation and
The teacher displays the poem on a chart and has
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to interact conversation with the learners.
with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and learners repeat with actions
respect
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and Plants don't move around, that's the key (Stand
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds and still with arms at side)
languages
They make their own food, you see! (clap clap)
1.5 become aware of how effective listening enhances
Light, water, air they take (Reach arms up high,
understanding
sip, breath out fast)
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation impact
meaning and mood Healthy growth, for goodness’ sake! (Stomp
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English both feet with a smile)
develops, share their thoughts, feelings and questions
41
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
about engaging events, stories and conversations The teacher has a conversation about the poem
with increasing confidence discussing each line with specific reference to the
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when sharing
need for light to live and grow.
stories or experiences
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness activities
Shared Reading
and word play to discriminate between various
sounds in their environment, letters of the alphabet, The teacher would engage the children in shared
rhyme and meaningful sound patterns reading of the poem. Please see the Curriculum
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for
structures to enhance their understanding of how to examples of ways to enhance the children’s
communicate ideas with purpose and focus
development of LA skills through Shared
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing Reading.
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of
The teacher will enter information into the checklist for Obstacle Course
genres and text forms
Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.7, Set up an obstacle course inside or outside the
2.2 develop questions when browsing through
2.8, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14 and 2.15 based on observation classroom where learners must complete tasks
passages of interest
and conversation with the learners.
2.3 connect background knowledge to the titles and related to plant needs:
pictures of fiction and nonfiction passages to build a 1. crawl under a tunnel for "soil," (this is what
foundation of understanding the plants’ roots do)
2.4 develop understanding and application of the 2. reach for a toy sun for "sunlight" (this is what
Concepts of Print
the plants’ stems and leaves do)
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and
3. then run with a jug for “water” (this is what
variety of texts that are read or read to them
the plants’ stems do)
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
environmental print and pictorial information
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to
visualize, predict and connect
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high frequency
words of personal importance, such as names and
pre-emergent level high-frequency words
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the
meaning and flow of the language to anticipate
upcoming words
42
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and phrasing
during shared reading, independent and guided
reading of emergent level passages
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter names
and letter sounds, beginning with those of personal
importance
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode upcoming
words in emergent level passages
Science – Interdependent Relationship in Science – Observation and Conversation
Ecosystems
2.2.3. understand plants need light to live and grow. The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems Outcome
2.2.3 based on observation and conversation with the
learners.
Language Arts – Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Math and Science: Plant
Shop
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
sharing the experiences of others and with oral Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6,
Plant Shop
stories and information sharing. 1.7, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.10 based on observation and
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to interact conversation with the learners.
with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and This ILS provides many opportunities for the
respect teacher to enhance the children’s development of
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and LA skills through Shared Reading. Please see the
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds and Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies
languages
for suggestions.
1.5 become aware of how effective listening enhances
understanding
Set up a pretend plant shop with different
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation impact
meaning and mood sections labeled "Sun-loving Plants" (cacti, aloes,
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English hibiscus…) and "Shade-loving Plants" (ferns,
develops, share their thoughts, feelings and questions
43
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
about engaging events, stories and conversations Hosta...) Real plants are best but in cases where they are
with increasing confidence not available use pictures or toy plants.
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when sharing
The teacher dresses and acts like a florist,
stories or experiences
explaining to the learners what is needed by all
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness activities
plants and what some plants need, and others
and word play to discriminate between various
sounds in their environment, letters of the alphabet, may not need to survive.
rhyme and meaningful sound patterns
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language Learners are given opportunities to ask questions
structures to enhance their understanding of how to and make comments.
communicate ideas with purpose and focus
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing The teacher points learners’ attention to the signs
in the shop (Sun loving plants, Shade loving
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of
The teacher will enter information into the checklist for plants) and guides the learners to read the signs
genres and text forms
Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.7, 2.8, by decoding the words. Learners will also study a
2.3 connect background knowledge to the titles and
2.9, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14 and 2.15 based on observation chart that the teacher has made, with a list of
pictures of fiction and nonfiction passages to build a
and conversation with the learners.
foundation of understanding items and cost. The chart will include items a
2.4 develop understanding and application of the plant will need to survive, such as water, shade,
Concepts of Print sunlight, soil nutrients).
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and
variety of texts that are read or read to them
Learners will work in pairs to identify a plant and
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
"buy" the items they think their plant needs
environmental print and pictorial information
(sunlight, water, shade, air, soil nutrients, etc.).
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to
visualize, predict and connect The teacher clarifies accordingly.
2.11 Recognize and use a variety of high frequency
words of personal importance, such as names and In reading the chart and buying the items at the
pre-emergent level high-frequency words
plant shop, learners will name monies and
2.12 Participate in shared reading and use the
identify quantities in cents. (E.g. 1 shade cost 5
meaning and flow of the language to anticipate
cents and 1 sunlight costs 3 cents then 5 cents
upcoming words
and 3 cents make 8 cents; 5+3=8). They will also
44
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and phrasing count objects. This should all be done orally,
during shared reading, independent and guided with the teacher’s support.
reading of emergent level passages
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter names
The teacher will invite children to take part in
and letter sounds, beginning with those of personal
role play with the Plant Shop at various times,
importance
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode upcoming when the children have the opportunity to
words in emergent level passages choose various activities (such as drawing,
puzzles, building).
Mathematics – Operations with Numbers Mathematics – Observation and Conversation
2.1.1 compose and decompose numbers up to 9 in a The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
variety of ways using manipulatives, fingers and Operations with Numbers Outcome 2.1.1 based on
pictures observation and conversation with the learners.
Mathematics – Measurement
5.2.4 Name the different monies (coins and notes) The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
used in the Eastern Caribbean (Standard Units of Measurement Outcome 5.2.4 based on observation and
measure) by identifying the quantities in terms of conversation with the learners.
cents.
Mathematics – Data Management and
Probability
6.1.3.use counting to determine the number of The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
objects in a group Data Management and Probability Outcome 6.1.3 based
on observation and conversation with the learners.
45
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Science – Interdependent Relationship in Science – Observation and Conversation
Ecosystems
2.2.5 Understand that some plants need different The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
things to survive than other plants. Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems Outcome
2.2.3 based on observation and conversation with the
learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Science: Animals Need
Food: Videos and Discussion
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
sharing the experiences of others and with oral Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.7,
Review the video of the frog eating bugs (see ILS
stories and information sharing. 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and conversation with
in Week One), question learners on what the
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to interact the learners.
with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and frog (and the eagle) are doing to stay
respect alive/survive.
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds and Write responses on the board.
languages
Why is the frog hunting the insects?
1.5 become aware of how effective listening enhances
Why is the eagle hunting the frog?
understanding
Why do animals need food?
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English
develops, share their thoughts, feelings and questions What other things do animals need to survive/live?
about engaging events, stories and conversations (Food, water, shelter, air).
with increasing confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when sharing Revisit the story of The Hungry Caterpillar.
stories or experiences
Learners will name the different foods that the
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language
caterpillar ate.
structures to enhance their understanding of how to
communicate ideas with purpose and focus
The teacher and the children will continue to
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
think about different animals and they will
consider if each animal gets food from animals
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of
The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
genres and text forms or from plants or from both animals and plants.
Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.7, 2.8, 2.11,
46
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.4 develop understanding and application of the 2.12, 2.13, 2.14 and 2.15 based on observation and
Concepts of Print conversation with the learners. The teacher will show the children a chart (like
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
below), and the teacher will demonstrate how to
environmental print and pictorial information
put a picture, or a word, in each column to show
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to
how a specific animals gets food. (Sample
visualize, predict and connect
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high frequency provided for “cow”, “eagle” and “human”).
words of personal importance, such as names and
pre-emergent level high-frequency words Food from animals Food from plants
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the
eagle cow
meaning and flow of the language to anticipate
human human
upcoming words
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and phrasing
during shared reading, independent and guided Picture Collage
reading of emergent level passages Each learner will be given a paper with the chart
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter names (as above). Learners would use pictures of
and letter sounds, beginning with those of personal
animals and place these animals under the type
importance
of food they eat. The children may do this all
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode upcoming
together, with the teacher leading or the learners
words in emergent level passages
may do this in small groups or individually.
Language Arts - Writing and Representing
What if a child suggests an animal and the group
3.2 Assign meaning to experimental drawing and The teacher will enter information into the checklist for do not know if that animal eats food from
writing Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7
animals, plants or both? This would be an
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools to and 3.8 based on observation and conversation with the
opportunity for the teacher to model how to
assist in writing process learners.
look up information in a book or on the internet.
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case letters of
the alphabet
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written language
and other representations (e.g. drawings) This ILS provides many opportunities for the
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter shapes teacher to enhance the children’s development of
3.8 Spell name and some words of personal
LA skills through Shared Reading and Shared
importance correctly
Writing. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and
47
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Guide for Effective Strategies for explanation and
Science – Interdependent Relationships in suggestions.
Ecosystems
Science – Observation and Conversation
2.2.6 understand that all animals need food to live
and grow. They obtain their food from plants or
from other animals The teacher will enter information into the checklist for
2.2.7 understand that some animals need different Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems Outcome
kinds of food to survive from other animals 2.2.6 , 2.2.7 based on observation and conversation with
the learners.
End of Week Two: End of Week Two: Language Arts, Science,
and Art: Weird and Wonderful Pets
Reassessing Previous Checklists
The teacher will discuss with the children the
The teacher will want to use the assessment strategy tools
Science SCOs they have learned about this week.
used throughout the week to reassess learners for new
The group will do a Gallery Walk around the
knowledge/improvements.
room, reading the charts and looking at work
that will be displayed. They will think again
The teacher will make notes in the anecdotal notes area of
about the way to answer the week’s question:
learners who may have been able to master the concept by
What do plants and animals need to survive?
the end of the week with dates.
The teacher will ask who has pets and then ask
about the different foods their pets will eat.
Children will wonder: "Why do cats eat meat,
but rabbits eat carrots?"
What would happen if their pet ate the wrong
kind of food?
48
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The children will begin to realize that some
animals need different kinds of food than other
animals to survive.
Each child will have a piece of paper and will
make a drawing of a “weird and wonderful pet”.
The teacher will encourage the children to use
their imaginations. After the drawings are
finished and colored, each child will have the
opportunity to show his/her “Weird and
Wonderful Pet” and will explain to the class why
this pet would be so fun to have, plus what the
pet would eat, and how the child would have to
take care of it.
Additional Resources
Natural disasters - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OFZXxb3FNkw
How animals survive- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MpaeMTlfdbE
Useful Content for the Teacher
Creating story boards online- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AB_X3yIATz4&list=PLPYtDmVJpyoVb1tsAtEHZgJrO_7ylWpg3
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies are open-ended
(rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies.
49
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies are open-ended
(rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies.
50
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
III. WEEK THREE
Essential Question: How Do Plants and Animals Make a Difference to Me and My World?
Question for Week Three: Where do plants and animals live and why do they live there?
Language Arts – Plans for the Unit (5 weeks)
The teacher will be observing for children’s Concepts of Print. Please see the Useful Content for the Teacher below for a list of Concepts of Print.
The letters/sounds z, w, y, x will be the focus. The teacher will do some “stand-alone” lessons to introduce the children to these letters/sounds.
Please see the “Useful Content for the Teacher” below for many ideas for teaching children letters/sounds.
Phonemic Awareness skills will commence and the focal point will be on initial phoneme isolation in words related to this Integrated Unit, such as
(zoo, zucchini, watermelon, whale, extra, yucca). Please see the “Useful Content for the Teacher” below for many ideas for engaging learners in
phonemic awareness skills
The high frequency (sight) words all, am, at, be, but, did, do, get, he, like, no, on, please, ran, say will be the focus. The teacher will do some
“stand-alone lessons” to introduce these words. Please see the “Useful Content for Teacher below” for many ideas for teaching high frequency
words.
The teacher is encouraged to find opportunities to emphasize those letters/sounds/phonemes/high frequency words with the children
throughout the ILS for the unit.
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Introduction to Week Three: Language Arts,
Science
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher may start with a poem “At My Home”
51
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
others and with oral stories and information 1.5, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.10 based on observation and At my home we love
sharing. conversation with the learners. At my home we hug
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to At my home we play
interact with a variety of audiences with And scoot on the rug.
sensitivity and respect At my house we eat
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher At my house we sleep
and children who have diverse interests, At my house we walk
backgrounds and languages With no shoes on our feet.
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
enhances understanding After listening to the poem, the teacher questions
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard learners as to what we refer to as a house. Have the
English develops, share their thoughts, learners give a short description of where they live.
feelings and questions about engaging events, What kinds of things do the children do at their house?
stories and conversations with increasing Do they get the things they need to survive (refer back
confidence to discussions in Week Two: food, water, shelter)
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences The teacher may repeat the poem, as a Shared Reading
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness experience, pointing out high frequency words,
activities and word play to discriminate letters/sounds, rhyming words, etc. (Please see the
between various sounds in their environment, Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies or
letters of the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful further tips to make a Shared Reading experience as
sound patterns effective as possible).
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
language structures to enhance their Discussion Points:
understanding of how to communicate ideas
with purpose and focus Where do humans live and why do they live there?
in houses, tents, yachts, skyscrapers, caves…
Country- lands for farming
Town-for jobs
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing Seaside-fishing and recreation
Mountains-agriculture
2.4 develop understanding and application of The teacher will enter information into the checklist Desert-natural resources
the Concepts of Print for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.4, 2.11, 2.12,
52
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high 2.13, 2.14 and 2.15 based on observation and
frequency words of personal importance, conversation with the learners. Let the children know that the question for this week
such as names and pre-emergent level high- is. Where do plants and animals live and why do they live there?
frequency words Ask the children to name what plants they know
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the (teacher may make a list). Ask the children to name
meaning and flow of the language to what animals they know (teacher may make another
anticipate upcoming words list). (This is a Shared Writing experience: please see
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for
phrasing during shared reading, independent further ideas to make this experience helpful for
and guided reading of emergent level developing children’s skills in Language Arts). Ask the
passages children why those plants live where they do, and why
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter those animals live where they do. The teacher may
names and letter sounds, beginning with help the children to realize that the plants and animals
those of personal importance live where they can survive: food, water, shelter.
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages
Game
Language Arts - Writing and Representing
Learners go outside and play the game “rabbit in a
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools The teacher will enter information into the checklist hole”. Before going out to play the game, the teacher
to assist in writing process for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.4 and 3.7 will ask:
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter based on observation and conversation with the What is the name of the animal in the game?
shapes learners. Where does this animal live? Why does this animal live there?
Science – Interdependent Relationships Science – Observation and Conversation https://theinspiredtreehouse.com/rabbit-hole/ Or any other
in Ecosystems game that depicts animals’ homes.
2.3.1 understand why different plants and The teacher will enter information into the checklist Another game the children might play is “Skip to
animals live where they do (their needs are for Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems my Lou”, with plants and animals:
met) Outcome 2.3.1 based on observation and
conversation with the learners. The teacher may start, as an example, and children may
join when they have an idea.
53
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
I live in a home, where do you live? (X3)
Skip to my lou my darling.
I live in a forest. Who am I? (X3)
Skip to my lou my darling
Then pause for answers...
I live in water who am I (X3)
Skip to my lou my darling.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Mathematics, and Science –
Habitats
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will print the word “Habitat” on a large
others and with oral stories and information 1.5, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.10 based on observation and piece of paper (leaving lots of room for the children to
sharing. conversation with the learners. draw pictures on the paper later in the ILS). The
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to teacher will point out letters/sounds to help the
interact with a variety of audiences with children read and remember the word. The teacher will
sensitivity and respect explain that “habitat” means where something lives and
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher survives.
and children who have diverse interests,
backgrounds and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening Learners will view a video about habitats and engage in
enhances understanding discussion about the different places where animals and
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard plants live.
English develops, share their thoughts,
feelings and questions about engaging events, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9_a68jGhJVc
stories and conversations with increasing
confidence After viewing the video, the teacher will ask the
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when children what habitats they saw and what animals and
sharing stories or experiences plants they saw living in those habitats. The teacher
54
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness will make a table (see below) of the habitats, and print
activities and word play to discriminate the animals and plants in a column underneath each
between various sounds in their environment, habitat word (e.g. desert – list of animals that live
letters of the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful there). The teacher may show the video a second time,
sound patterns so children may find additional information. The
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and teacher may then ask the children if they know of more
language structures to enhance their animals or plants that they could add to each of the
understanding of how to communicate ideas habitats.
with purpose and focus
Desert Grasslands Forest Water
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
camels flowers
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.5,
2.4 develop understanding and application of 2.9, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14 and 2.15 based on Total
the Concepts of Print observation and conversation with the learners.
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose Mathematics: The teacher will help the children count
and variety of texts that are read or read to the number of animals and plants in each group. To
them make sure the children understand the graph, the
2.9 demonstrate understanding by responding teacher can ask a few children some questions, such as:
to read-alouds with images, model making, how many plants and animals live in the water?
discussions, or temporary writing.
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high The teacher can show the children the large piece of
frequency words of personal importance, paper with the word “Habitats”, and then can print the
such as names and pre-emergent level high- question “Where do we live?” under the word
frequency words “habitats”.
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the
meaning and flow of the language to The teacher will ask the children to draw lots of plants
anticipate upcoming words and animals on the big piece of paper with the word
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and “Habitats – Where do we live?” – The plants and
phrasing during shared reading, independent animals do not need to match any particular habitat.
and guided reading of emergent level The children can be encouraged to draw large plants
passages and animals and to fill the entire paper with colorful
55
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter images of living things. The children may also be
names and letter sounds, beginning with encouraged to label their drawings with the names of
those of personal importance the living things (with support from the teacher).
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages The large mural can be posted in the classroom, and
the children may play a game of pointing to one of the
Language Arts - Writing and Representing Language Arts – Product plants or animals and answering the question “Where
do we live?”
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing The children will label their drawings of plants and
and writing animals for the mural. These labels will provide The teacher might create a sheet with pictures of
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and examples of the child’s letter formation, letter/sound animals and pictures of habitats, for the children to
real and imagined topics connection and spelling of name. The teacher may match the animals to their habitats.
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case want to create a checklist to keep note of the
letters of the alphabet children’s progress on the Writing and Representing
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written SCOs.
language and other representations (e.g.
drawings) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.3,
shapes 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and
3.8 spell name and some words of personal conversation with the learners.
importance correctly
Mathematics – Data Management and Mathematics – Observation and Conversation
Probability
6.1.3 use counting to determine the number The teacher will enter information into the checklist
of objects in a group for Data Management and Probability Outcome
6.1.3 based on observation and conversation with
the learners.
56
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Science – Interdependent Relationships Science – Observation and Conversation
in Ecosystems
2.3.1 understand why different plants and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
animals live where they do (their needs are for Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems
met) Outcome 2.3.1 based on observation and
conversation with the learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Science: Where can I live?
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist Read Aloud –
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
others and with oral stories and information 1.5, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.10 based on observation and Strategies to enhance the development of many
sharing. conversation with the learners. Language Arts skills through this Read Aloud
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to experience.
interact with a variety of audiences with
sensitivity and respect Learners will listen to a story I Can't Live Here
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher
and children who have diverse interests, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zt1jvQUal4w
backgrounds and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening Guided Questions
enhances understanding 1. Why was the little polar bear sad? ( His mother
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard Language Arts – Product said they have to find a new home)
English develops, share their thoughts, 2. Where did they stop first? ( forest)
feelings and questions about engaging events, The children will write a sentence under their 3. Why was the forest not suitable for a little
stories and conversations with increasing drawing. This will provide examples of the child’s polar bear? (The stream was not deep enough to
confidence letter formation and spelling of name. swim)
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when 4. What was the little polar bear’s concern about
sharing stories or experiences living in the desert? (It was too hot)
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness 5. Why could the Polar bears could not live at the
activities and word play to discriminate lake? (They would not find the right kind of fish to
between various sounds in their environment, eat.)
6. Where did they eventually live and why?
57
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
letters of the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful The teacher uses learners' responses to introduce the
sound patterns points that animals need: food, water, shelter, so that
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and they can survive. Animals and plants live where their
language structures to enhance their needs are met, so they can survive.
understanding of how to communicate ideas
with purpose and focus As a response to the story and discussion, the children
will draw a picture of one place that the polar bears
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing thought about living, but that place would not be good
The teacher will enter information into the checklist for them. The children will complete a sentence under
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, their picture, “I can’t live here.” The teacher will ask
genres and text forms 2.4, 2.5, 2.9, 2.11, 2.14 and 2.15 based on each child, while they are working, why the polar bear
2.2 develop questions when browsing observation and conversation with the learners. could not live there. This conversation will provide
through passages of interest information to the teacher about the child’s
2.3 connect background knowledge to the understanding of the Science SCOs.
titles and pictures of fiction and nonfiction
passages to build a foundation of
understanding
2.4 develop understanding and application of
the Concepts of Print
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose
and variety of texts that are read or read to
them
2.9 demonstrate understanding by responding
to read-alouds with images, model making,
discussions, or temporary writing.
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high
frequency words of personal importance,
such as names and pre-emergent level high-
frequency words
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with
those of personal importance
58
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages
Language Arts - Writing and Representing
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing The teacher will enter information into the checklist
and writing for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.3,
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and
real and imagined topics conversation with the learners.
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case
letters of the alphabet
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written
language and other representations (e.g.
drawings)
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
shapes
3.8 spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly
Science – Interdependent Relationships
in Ecosystems
Science – Observation and Conversation
2.3.1 understand why different plants and
animals live where they do (their needs are
met) The teacher will enter information into the checklist
for Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems
Outcome 2.3.1 based on observation and
conversation with the learners.
59
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Science: Plants and Animals
depend on each other
1.1 listen to music, conversation and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
environmental sounds for personal for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, Learners will sing along with the song: “The Green
enjoyment 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation Grass grows round and round…”And The Green
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, and conversation with the learners. Grass Grew All Around | + More Kids Songs | Super
engagement in sharing the experiences of Simple Songs (youtube.com)
others and with oral stories and information
sharing. After watching the video and singing along, the teacher
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to will make a list (with the help of the children) of each
interact with a variety of audiences with element in the song and draw arrows between the
sensitivity and respect elements. The class will watch the video again, and
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher stop to give the teacher the chance to do the writing -
and children who have diverse interests, to make sure the list is complete!
backgrounds and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening Green grass – hole – tree – branch - twig– nest – bird -
enhances understanding egg
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation
impact meaning and mood The teacher will explain that plants and animals depend
1.7 Use Home Language(s) and, as Standard on their habitat, but they also depend on each other.
English develops, share their thoughts, So in the song, the bird depended on the tree to have
feelings and questions about engaging events, twigs, and a safe space to have a nest.
stories and conversations with increasing
confidence Teacher Led Discussion
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when The teacher will explain to the learners how plants and
sharing stories or experiences animals depend on each other and the environment
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and where they live
language structures to enhance their Plants Give Animals Food: "Plants, like trees and
understanding of how to communicate ideas flowers, grow in the ground. They make food from sunlight, water,
with purpose and focus and the air. Some animals, like birds, rabbits, and even some
bugs, eat the leaves, fruits, and seeds that plants make. Can you
imagine a rabbit munching on a carrot? That's a plant helping
an animal!"
60
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Science – Interdependent Relationships Science – Observation and Conversation Plants Give Animals Homes: "Plants also give animals
in Ecosystems places to live. Birds build their nests in trees, and bees make their
hives in flowers. Even big animals like bears will live near lots of
2.3.1 understand why different plants and The teacher will enter information into the checklist plants in a forest. So, plants are like homes for many animals!"
animals live where they do (their needs are for Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems Animals Help Plants: "Animals help plants too! When
met) Outcomes 2.3.1 and 2.3.3 based on observation and bees visit flowers to get nectar, they carry pollen from one flower to
2.3.3 understand the way that plants and conversation with the learners. another. This helps the flowers make seeds and grow new plants.
animals depend on each other and on the And when animals eat fruits, they spread the seeds around, which
environment where they live – it’s a system helps new plants grow in different places."
Environment Is Important: "Plants and animals live in
different environments like forests, ponds, and mountains. These
environments give them everything they need to live. Plants need
sunlight, water, and soil. Animals need food, water, and a safe
place to live. If we take care of the environment, we help plants
and animals stay healthy and happy!"
The teacher will set up a “Web of Life” game for the
children:
https://www.amnh.org/explore/ology/biodiversity/w
eb-of-life/activity-instructions
Or, the teacher will simplify the game by making cards
(with picture and words). The children may sit in a
circle and choose one card; say what is on the card, and
tell what that plant or animal needs to survive. For
example, one card will have a butterfly on it, and the
child would say that the butterfly needs food from a
plant; or another card will have a flower on it, and the
child would say that the flower needs a bee to help
move the pollen. The other children and the teacher
could help each other to play this game.
61
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Science: Plants and Animals live
in an “environment”
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher can remind the children what they have
others and with oral stories and information 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and learned about plants and animals depending on each
sharing. conversation with the learners. other. The plants and animals who live in the same
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to place make up an “environment”.
interact with a variety of audiences with
sensitivity and respect Plants and animals need each other:
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher
and children who have diverse interests, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VTHTYExiDpM
backgrounds and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening The teacher may show this video to the children,
enhances understanding stopping several times to write on a chart, so everyone
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard will remember what they are learning. For example,
English develops, share their thoughts, stop the video and write: “Animals depend on plants
feelings and questions about engaging events, for food”, or “Animals depend on plants for shelter”,
stories and conversations with increasing etc.
confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when This is a Shared Writing experience. Please consult the
sharing stories or experiences Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and suggestions to help children develop skills in Language
language structures to enhance their Arts through this Shared Writing.
understanding of how to communicate ideas
with purpose and focus After the video, the teacher can review what was
written, and what they all learned from this video.
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
The teacher will ask the children to create a diagram to
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist show one plant or animal depending on another plant
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.3, 2.4, or animal. The teacher will show the children how to
2.3 connect background knowledge to the 2.5, 2.7, 2.9, 2.11, 2.14 and 2.15 based on draw an arrow between the plant and the animal to
titles and pictures of fiction and nonfiction observation and conversation with the learners. show that they are connected. For example, the child
might draw a tree and a bird, and put an arrow between
62
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
passages to build a foundation of the tree and the bird to show that the bird depends on
understanding the tree. The child will be asked to label the diagram,
2.4 develop understanding and application of and so will print the words “tree” and “bird” (for
the Concepts of Print example), with support from the teacher, if necessary.
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose
and variety of texts that are read or read to
them
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
environmental print and pictorial information
2.9 demonstrate understanding by responding
to read-alouds with images, model making,
discussions, or temporary writing.
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high
frequency words of personal importance,
such as names and pre-emergent level high-
frequency words
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with
those of personal importance
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages
Language Arts - Writing and Representing Language Arts – Product
3.2 Assign meaning to experimental drawing The children will label their diagrams. These labels
and writing will provide examples of the child’s letter formation,
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case letter/sound connection and spelling of name.
letters of the alphabet
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written
language and other representations (e.g.
drawings)
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
shapes
63
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.8 spell name and some words of personal The teacher will enter information into the checklist
importance correctly for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.5,
3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and
conversation with the learners.
Science – Interdependent Relationships Science – Product
in Ecosystems
2.3.3 understand the way that plants and The children will make diagrams to show they
animals depend on each other and on the understand at least one connection between plants
environment where they live – it’s a system and animals.
Science – Observation and Conversation
The teacher will enter information into the checklist
for Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems
Outcome 2.3.3 based on observation and
conversation with the learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Science: Making a model of a
habitat
1.1 listen to music, conversation and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
environmental sounds for personal enjoyment for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, To review, the teacher poses the question ‘Why do you
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation think plants and animals live where they do?
engagement in sharing the experiences of and conversation with the learners.
others and with oral stories and information Responses are recorded on a concept map completed
sharing. by the teacher.
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to
interact with a variety of audiences with
sensitivity and respect
64
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher
and children who have diverse interests,
backgrounds and languages Food and Water Breeding site
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
enhances understanding
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation
impact meaning and mood
Why do plants and animals
live where they do?
1.7 Use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
English develops, share their thoughts,
feelings and questions about engaging events,
stories and conversations with increasing Weather Shelter and
confidence Conditions Protection
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
language structures to enhance their Making a model: Pair work
understanding of how to communicate ideas
with purpose and focus Learners will work with a partner over several days to
make a model of a habitat: one place where plants and
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing animals (humans) live that meets their needs. The
partners will need to agree which habitat they will
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist create and which animals and plants they will put in
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.7, their habitat. The children will create their model on a
2.4 develop understanding and application of 2.8, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14 and 2.15 based on piece of cardboard, using play dough, construction
the Concepts of Print observation and conversation with the learners. paper, etc.
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
environmental print and pictorial information The teacher will assist the children by asking them what
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies challenges they are having, and if they have found some
to visualize, predict and connect good solutions. The teacher will call all the children
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high together to discuss challenges and solutions, and then
frequency words of personal importance, invite the children to work some more on their model.
such as names and pre-emergent level high-
frequency words
65
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the
meaning and flow of the language to
anticipate upcoming words
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and
phrasing during shared reading, independent
and guided reading of emergent level
passages
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with
those of personal importance
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages
Science – Interdependent Relationships Science – Product
in Ecosystems
The children’s models of a habitat, what they include
2.3.2 create a model to show where a plant or in that habitat, will show they understand Science
animal lives and what they find there that SCO 2.3.2.
helps them to survive.
Science – Observation and Conversation
The teacher will enter information into the checklist
for Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems
Outcome 2.3.2 based on observation and
conversation with the learners.
End of Week Three: End of Week Three: Language Arts and Science:
Presenting Models of Habitats
Reassessing Previous Checklists
The teacher will want to use the assessment strategy The teacher and children will prepare an invitation to
tools used throughout the week to reassess learners send to parents/caregivers, other adults in the school,
for new knowledge/improvements. or another class of learners in the school.
66
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Teacher will make notes in the anecdotal notes area Each pair of learners will stand by their model and will
of learners who may have been able to master the share information about it to the visitors. The visitors
concept by the end of the week with dates. will circulate around the room to see all the models of
the habitats.
The children will be answering the question for the
week: Where do plants and animals live and why do they live
there?
Additional Resources
All resources to support the Inclusive Learning Strategies in this week are embedded in the ILS.
Useful Content for the Teacher
Unless otherwise indicated here, useful content to support the Inclusive Learning Strategies in this week is embedded in the ILS.
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies are open-
ended (rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
Strategies.
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies are open-
ended (rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
Strategies.
67
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
IV. WEEK FOUR
Essential Question: How Do Plants and Animals Make a Difference to Me and My World?
Question for Week Four: Can plants and animals change the place where they live (the environment)?
Language Arts – Plans for the Unit (5 weeks)
The teacher will be observing for children’s Concepts of Print. Please see the Useful Content for the Teacher below for a list of Concepts of Print.
The letters/sounds z, w, y, x will be the focus. The teacher will do some “stand-alone” lessons to introduce the children to these letters/sounds.
Please see the “Useful Content for the Teacher” below for many ideas for teaching children letters/sounds.
Phonemic Awareness skills will commence and the focal point will be on initial phoneme isolation in words related to this Integrated Unit, such as
(zoo, zucchini, watermelon, whale, extra, yucca). Please see the “Useful Content for the Teacher” below for many ideas for engaging learners in
phonemic awareness skills
The high frequency (sight) words all, am, at, be, but, did, do, get, he, like, no, on, please, ran, say will be the focus. The teacher will do some
“stand-alone lessons” to introduce these words. Please see the “Useful Content for Teacher below” for many ideas for teaching high frequency
words.
The teacher is encouraged to find opportunities to emphasize those letters/sounds/phonemes/high frequency words with the children
throughout the ILS for the unit.
68
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Introduction to Week Four: Language Arts and
Science: How do plants change the environment?
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, Setting the Scene
others and with oral stories and information 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and The teacher will tell the learners to imagine a vibrant
sharing. conversation with the learners. forest. Birds are chirping, leaves are rustling, and
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to flowers are blooming. The forest is full of life and
interact with a variety of audiences with activity. Every plant and animal in this forest plays a
sensitivity and respect special role in making the environment the way it is.
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher The teacher poses the question: Can plants and
and children who have diverse interests, animals change the place where they live?
backgrounds and languages (Environment)
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
enhances understanding Language Arts – Product The teacher probe learners to respond and waits.
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard The teacher may ask who says “no” and who says
English develops, share their thoughts, The children’s drawings and printing will show their “yes”. Count the number of children.) Ask the
feelings and questions about engaging events, development of the Writing and Representing SCOs. children why they say “yes” – what are they thinking
stories and conversations with increasing about? Why do they say “no” – what are they
confidence thinking about? The teacher will let the children
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when know how important their thinking is. Also, that as
sharing stories or experiences we learn more, they may change their thinking, and
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and that’s what learning is all about.
language structures to enhance their
understanding of how to communicate ideas The teacher will tell the children they are going to
with purpose and focus watch a video that may change their ideas about how
plants can change the environment.
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
Video: Play -Pause -Share
Learners will view a video. The teacher will stop the
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range The teacher will enter information into the checklist
video at various parts, inviting questions and posing
of genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.5, 2.7,
questions, to bring out the various ways that plants
2.4 develop understanding and application of 2.8, 2.9, 2.11, 2.14 and 2.15 based on observation and
can change their environment. Below are suggested
the Concepts of Print conversation with the learners.
times to pause.
69
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose https://youtu.be/xydZuMEyKig?si=9mRI0yVu
and variety of texts that are read or read to w1xFnsVM
them
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some Q and A session
environmental print and pictorial (0.6.0- 0.14 s)
information Q- what do we mean when we say the environment?
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies A- Everything around a living thing
to visualize, predict and connect (Question to find out if they remember what is a living thing)
2.9 Demonstrate understanding by
responding to read-alouds with images, (0.15- 0.22 s)
model making, discussions, or temporary Q- How can tree roots change their environment?
writing. A- They can grow strong and even break apart
2.11 Recognize and use a variety of high concrete.
frequency words of personal importance,
such as names and pre-emergent level high- (0.23-0.38 s)
frequency words Q- What about the branches and leaves, how can they change
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter the environment?
names and letter sounds, beginning with A- They provide shade that keeps the ground
those of personal importance cool and provide a home for some animals.
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages (0.50-1.24 s)
Q- How can a fallen tree change the environment?
A- It can become a home to small animals
Language Arts - Writing and
(Review habitat)
Representing
The children will be asked to draw a picture that
3.2 Assign meaning to experimental drawing The teacher will enter information into the checklist
shows one way that a plant can change the
and writing for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.3, 3.5,
environment. It could be something that was learned
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and
from the video, or, it could be something that was
and real and imagined topics conversation with the learners.
mentioned in the initial discussion with the children.
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case
The children will be supported to print one sentence
letters of the alphabet
under their drawing. Or, the teacher may prepare the
3.6 Connect spoken language(s) to written
paper for the children’s drawing, with space for the
language and other representations (e.g.
drawing and an incomplete (fill-in-the-blank)
drawings)
70
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter sentence at the bottom: “A plant can change the
shapes environment by ____________.”
3.8 Spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly
Science – Interdependent Relationships Science- Product
in Ecosystems
2.2.8. can give a specific example of how a The children’s drawings and printing will show their
plant or animal can change their development of the Science SCOs.
environment to meet their needs.
2.2.9 can explain that we know that plants Science – Observation and Conversation
and animals can change their environment
because we have evidence The teacher will enter information into the checklist
for Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems
Outcomes 2.2.8 and 2.2.9 based on observation and
conversation with the learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Math, and Science: Plant Hero
Adventure Game
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, Learners will learn how various plants change their
others and with oral stories and information 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and environment by acting as "Plant Heroes". The
sharing. conversation with the learners. children will complete 3 different missions related to
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to the plant heroes.
interact with a variety of audiences with
sensitivity and respect The teacher sets up three (3) different stations in the
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher classroom or the school environment and will divide
and children who have diverse interests, the children into three groups.
backgrounds and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening Each station will have a plant (or picture of a plant
enhances understanding in the absence of a real plant), a card with
1.7 Use Home Language(s) and, as Standard information about the plant in relation to how it
English develops, share their thoughts, changes the environment and a mission/ activity to
71
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
feelings and questions about engaging events, complete. The teacher will show all the children the
stories and conversations with increasing plants and will read to all the children what the plant
confidence does. The teacher will also explain what the children
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when should do on the worksheets at the stations.
sharing stories or experiences
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and Learners will start in their groups at a particular
language structures to enhance their station. They will look at the plant/picture, read
understanding of how to communicate ideas (teacher may read) and discuss how it changes the
with purpose and focus environment and then complete the provided activity.
At the sound of a whistle they will move from one
station to the next until all stations are completed.
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
Teachers can choose any plant within context and also any
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range
The teacher will enter information into the checklist number of stations according to the number of learners in class.
of genres and text forms
for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, Stations can be given special names for interest and motivation.
2.3 connect background knowledge to the
2.7, 2.8, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14 and 2.15 based on Please see additional information in the Useful Content for
titles and pictures of fiction and nonfiction
observation and conversation with the learners. Teachers section below.
passages to build a foundation of
understanding
The teacher may ask additional adults to help during this ILS.
2.4 develop understanding and application of
the Concepts of Print
Examples of Stations:
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose
and variety of texts that are read or read to
Station #1 ( 5 minutes)
them
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
Card: (One learner or
environmental print and pictorial
teacher may read the card )
information
Coral Vine (Antigonon
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies
leptopus)
to visualize, predict and connect
Coral vine is a climbing plant
2.11 recognise and use a variety of high
that covers the ground and
frequency words of personal importance,
keeps the soil from washing
such as names and pre-emergent level high-
away. It also has pretty flowers that bees and
frequency words
butterflies like.
(The children should discuss the question -How
does it change the environment?)
72
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the Mission/Activity: Complete the maze to guide the
meaning and flow of the language to bee which way to go to get to the vine.
anticipate upcoming words
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and
phrasing during shared reading, independent
and guided reading of emergent level
passages
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with
those of personal importance
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
Station # 2 ( 5 minutes)
upcoming words in emergent level passages
Language Arts - Writing and Language Arts – Product
Representing
The children’s printing will show their development
Sea Grape (Coccoloba uvifera)
of the Writing and Representing SCOs.
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case
Sea grape plants grow near the beach. Their strong
letters of the alphabet
roots help keep the sand in place. Their big leaves
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written
give shade and they make tasty berries for animals to
The teacher will enter information into the checklist
language and other representations (e.g.
eat. (How does it change the environment?)
for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.3, 3.4,
drawings)
3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
Mission/Activity: Color the sea grapes, count the
conversation with the learners.
shapes
number of bunches on the tree and write the numeral
3.8 spell name and some words of personal
that represents the quantity.
importance correctly
Mathematics – Number Sense Mathematics – Observation and Conversation
1.1.1 Say the number sequence to 10 by 1’s The teacher will enter information into the checklist
1.1.4 Say the number that comes after a for Number Sense Outcomes 1.1.1, 1.1.4, 1.1.8 and
given number 1.1.9 based on observation and conversation with the
1.1.8 Count by meaning to 10 by building learners.
quantities
73
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.1.9 Count with meaning to 10, by matching There are ______________bunches of grapes on the
quantity and numeral tree.
Science – Interdependent Relationships Science – Observation and Conversation
in Ecosystems
2.2.8. can give a specific example of how a The teacher will enter information into the checklist
plant or animal can change their for Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems
environment to meet their needs. Outcome 2.2.8 and 2.2.9 based on observation and
2.2.9 can explain that we know that plants conversation with the learners.
and animals can change their environment
because we have evidence Station # 3 (5 minutes)
Banana (Musa acuminata)
Banana plants grow big leaves that fall and make the
soil rich. They grow yummy bananas that animals and
people can eat.
(How does it change the environment?)
Mission/Activity: Connect the dots to complete the picture
Reflection Circle
After visiting all the stations, gather the children and
have a reflection circle. The teacher collects all the
plants or pictures and displays them one at a time.
Learners will share what they learned about each
plant and how it changes its environment.
74
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The teacher will write three sentences and ask for the
children’s help with spelling the words Please see the
Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for
more ideas to make this an experience that helps the
children to develop their skills in Language Arts.
Echo Reading
The teacher models fluency by reading aloud three
sentences created from the science activity. After the
reading learners will read with the same rate and
prosody.
1. Coral vine keeps the soil from washing
away.
2. Sea grapes have strong roots that keep the
soil in place.
3. Banana plants grow big leaves that fall and
make the soil rich.
Sight Words
As the teacher reviews how plants change the
environment, the teacher will use some of these
strategies to reinforce learning of the sight words.
Prompt the learners to pay attention to the
underlined words in each sentence.
see and say- look at the word and say it
spell it- spell out the letters then call the word
Arm Tapping- Tap the letters on your arm and say
the word
Air Writing- Write the word in the air
Book Writing- write the word in his/her book of
Sight Words
The teacher might extend the discussion to the idea
that some plants might have a harmful effect on the
environment. For example, some plants might
75
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
“invade” a garden and cause the garden plants to die.
This would be one reason why a gardener would
“weed” the garden.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Science: How do animals
change the environment?
1.1 listen to music, conversation and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
environmental sounds for personal for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, The teacher asks questions to review what children
enjoyment 1.4, 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and learned about animals in previous weeks of this
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, conversation with the learners. Integrated Unit, and to think about what they have
engagement in sharing the experiences of now learned about how plants can change the
others and with oral stories and information environment.
sharing.
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to ● Where do animals live?
interact with a variety of audiences with ● How do animals move?
sensitivity and respect ● Can plants change the place where they live?
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher ● Are humans animals?
and children who have diverse interests, Do animals change anything around them?
backgrounds and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening The teacher waits for learners to respond after each
enhances understanding question and asks if they have any questions to ask.
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard Learners' answers and questions will be recorded.
English develops, share their thoughts,
feelings and questions about engaging events, Argument
stories and conversations with increasing The teacher makes the claim that just like plants
confidence change their environment, animals can change their
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when environment too (Including humans). Today, we
sharing stories or experiences are going to explore how animals change their
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and environment as we continue on our adventure to
language structures to enhance their discover their amazing powers!
understanding of how to communicate ideas
with purpose and focus Group Work
The teacher provides learners with toys or pictures of
different animals (e.g. earthworm, rabbit, ants, bird,
76
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing caterpillar, bee, dog, horse, donkey, spider, jack
Spaniard/wasp) and pictures of humans. They will
2.4 develop understanding and application of The teacher will enter information into the checklist work in small groups to:
the Concepts of Print for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.4, 2.7, 2.8, 2.11, -Identify the pictures
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some 2.14 and 2.15 based on observation and conversation -talk about what they know about the animal/ human
environmental print and pictorial with the learners. - talk about if that animal can change the
information environment
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies
to visualize, predict and connect Shared Writing
2.11 recognise and use a variety of high The teacher will call all the children together. The
frequency words of personal importance, teacher will hold up a picture, one at a time, of the
such as names and pre-emergent level high- animals the learners were discussing in their small
frequency words groups. The teacher will ask how this animal will
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter change their environment by. Learners will share and
names and letter sounds, beginning with the teacher records information. The teacher may also
those of personal importance add information that the children have not thought
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode of.
upcoming words in emergent level passages
This is a Shared Writing activity. Please see the
Language Arts - Writing and Language Arts – Product Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for
Representing suggestions to enhance the children’s skills in
Language Arts through activity. )
3.1 use shared ideas to co-construct stories The children’s drawings and printing will show their
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom development of the Writing and Representing SCOs. The list that the teacher and children will create will
tools to assist in writing process* include this information (and more, depending on all
3.6 Connect spoken language(s) to written The teacher will enter information into the checklist the pictures that the teacher provided to the small
language and other representations (e.g. for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.1, 3.4, 3.6 groups)
drawings) and 3.7 based on observation and conversation with o Horse/donkey - Eating plants/grass
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter the learners. o Spider - Making web
shapes o Ants, Worm: Making tunnels or
holes
o Humans -Littering beaches
o Humans – planting vegetables
77
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Science – Interdependent Relationships Science – Observation and Conversation
in Ecosystems
2.2.8. can give a specific example of how a The teacher will enter information into the checklist
plant or animal can change their for Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems
environment to meet their needs. Outcomes 2.2.8 and 2.2.9 based on observation and
2.2.9 can explain that we know that plants conversation with the learners.
and animals can change their environment
because we have evidence
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Science: Video about animals
changing their environment
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher and the children will engage in Shared
others and with oral stories and information 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and Reading of the ways that Animals may change their
sharing. conversation with the learners. environment, referring to the list that was prepared
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to in the previous ILS.
interact with a variety of audiences with
sensitivity and respect Learners will view a video that speaks to how animals
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher change the environment. The learners will be asked
and children who have diverse interests, to watch and listen carefully to see if there is
backgrounds and languages information that is new, to add to what they already
1.5 become aware of how effective listening know.
enhances understanding
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XiywCGad
English develops, share their thoughts, ohQ
feelings and questions about engaging events,
stories and conversations with increasing
confidence Role play: Learners would act out how each animal
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when changes its environment using role-play or puppetry
sharing stories or experiences
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and Group Discussion: Engage the learners in a
language structures to enhance their discussion by asking questions like:
understanding of how to communicate ideas ● What did you learn about how animals change their
with purpose and focus environment?
78
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
● Can you think of other ways animals/humans
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
change where they live?
The teacher will enter information into the checklist ● Why do you think animals /humans change their
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range
for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.5, 2.7, environment?
of genres and text forms
2.8, 2.9, 2.11, 2.14 and 2.15 based on observation and
2.4 develop understanding and application of
conversation with the learners. The children will be asked to draw a picture that
the Concepts of Print
shows one way that an animal can change the
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose
environment. It could be something that was learned
and variety of texts that are read or read to
from the video, or, it could be something that was
them
mentioned previously with the children. The children
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
will be supported to print one sentence under their
environmental print and pictorial
drawing. Or, the teacher may prepare the paper for
information
the children’s drawing, with space for the drawing
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies
and an incomplete (fill-in-the-blank) sentence at the
to visualize, predict and connect
bottom: “An animal can change the environment by
2.9 demonstrate understanding by
____________.”
responding to read-alouds with images,
model making, discussions, or temporary
writing.
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high
frequency words of personal importance,
such as names and pre-emergent level high-
frequency words
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with
those of personal importance
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages
Language Arts - Writing and Language Arts – Product
Representing
The children’s drawings and printing will show their
development of the Writing and Representing SCOs.
3.2 Assign meaning to experimental drawing
and writing
79
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas The teacher will enter information into the checklist
and real and imagined topics for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.3, 3.5,
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and
letters of the alphabet conversation with the learners.
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written
language and other representations (e.g.
drawings)
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
shapes
3.8 Spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly
Science – Interdependent Relationships Science – Observation and Conversation
in Ecosystems
2.2.8. can give a specific example of how a The teacher will enter information into the checklist
plant or animal can change their for Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems
environment to meet their needs. Outcomes 2.2.8 and 2.2.9 based on observation and
2.2.9 can explain that we know that plants conversation with the learners.
and animals can change their environment
because we have evidence
End of Week Four: End of Week Four:
Nature Walk/ Field Trip to Zoo, Animal Farm,
Reassessing Previous Checklists Gardens
The teacher will want to use the assessment strategy Take learners on a nature walk/Field Trip to observe
tools used throughout the week to reassess learners animals in their habitats and how they change their
for new knowledge/improvements. environment.
Learners will draw a picture or share a story about
The teacher will make notes in the anecdotal notes their favorite animal (from nature walk or Field Trip)
area of learners who may have been able to master and how it changes its environment.
the concept by the end of the week with dates.
The teacher will lead the children in a discussion
about the question for the week, Can plants and
80
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
animals change the place where they live (the
environment)?
and will ask the children if they changed their mind
about the answer they gave at the beginning of the
week. Did they learn some new things this week?
The teacher may also do a review, as follows:
Visual Summary/ Using our senses
Evidence clearly shows that plants and animals can
change their environment. The teacher will use an
infographic (Large pictures of a plant, an animal and a
human) on the chalkboard/white board to summarize
information using the guided questions.
Learners will be given sentence strips with
information to stick on the graphic in answer to the
questions.
1. What evidence did we see of how plants and
animals/humans change the environment? (e.g., Bird
droppings, garbage around us, leaves from trees,
humans cut trees to build homes)
2. What did we hear that shows plants and animals /
human change their environment (e.g., Dog barking,
birds chirping, frogs croaking, rabbits dig holes)
3. What can we smell as changes are being made to the
environment by plants and animals / human (e.g.,
garbage/materials burning, stench from littering)
81
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Examples of sentence strips
Look! There is birds dropping on the floor.
Animals dig holes in the ground.
Seeds grow into trees.
The leaves are falling .
There is a smell of rubber in the air.
Humans cut down trees to build houses.
Additional Resources:
All resources to support the Inclusive Learning Strategies in this week are embedded in the ILS.
Useful Content for the Teacher
1. Mangroves (Rhizophora mangle)
Simple Explanation: Mangroves are special trees that grow near the ocean. Their roots hold onto the sand and dirt so it doesn't wash away. They make safe
homes for fish and crabs.
2. Sea Grape (Coccoloba uvifera)
Simple Explanation: Sea grape plants grow near the beach. Their strong roots help keep the sand in place, and they make tasty berries for animals to eat.
Their big leaves give shade.
3. Banana (Musa acuminata)
Simple Explanation: B anana plants grow big leaves that fall and make the soil rich. They grow yummy bananas that animals and people can eat.
4. Soursop (Annona muricata)
Simple Explanation: Soursop trees grow spiky, green fruits. When their leaves fall, they make the soil better. They also give food to animals and people.
5. Breadfruit (Artocarpus altilis)
Simple Explanation: Breadfruit trees have big, tasty fruits. Their leaves fall and make the soil better. They also give shade to keep the ground cool.
82
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
6. Tamarind (Tamarindus indica)
Simple Explanation: Tamarind trees grow sweet-sour fruits. Their leaves help make the soil better, and they give shade and homes for animals.
7. Royal Palm (Roystonea regia)
Simple Explanation: Royal palms are tall trees with big leaves. Their roots help keep the soil strong, and they give homes to birds and animals.
8. Sugarcane (Saccharum officinarum)
Simple Explanation: Sugarcane plants grow tall and can make the soil strong. They also give us sweet sugar, but we need to take care of the soil when we
grow them.
9. Coconut Palm (Cocos nucifera)
Simple Explanation: Coconut palms grow yummy coconuts. Their leaves fall and make the soil rich. They give food and homes to animals.
10. Coral Vine (Antigonon leptopus)
Simple Explanation: Coral vine is a climbing plant that covers the ground and keeps the soil from washing away. It also has pretty flowers that bees and
butterflies like.
11. Frangipani (Plumeria spp.)
Simple Explanation: Frangipani trees have pretty flowers. When their leaves fall, they help make the soil better. They also bring bees and butterflies to the
garden.
12. Ackee (Blighia sapida)
Simple Explanation: Ackee trees grow fruits that people and animals can eat. Their leaves make the soil rich and help plants grow better.
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies are open-
ended (rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
Strategies.
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies are open-
ended (rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
Strategies.
83
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
V. WEEK FIVE
Essential Question: How Do Plants and Animals Make a Difference to Me and My World?
Question for Week Five: Can we do some things so the environment is not changed so much by humans?
Language Arts – Plans for the Unit (5 weeks)
The teacher will be observing for children’s Concepts of Print. Please see the Useful Content for the Teacher below for a list of Concepts of Print.
The letters/sounds z, w, y, x will be the focus. The teacher will do some “stand-alone” lessons to introduce the children to these letters/sounds.
Please see the “Useful Content for the Teacher” below for many ideas for teaching children letters/sounds.
Phonemic Awareness skills will commence and the focal point will be on initial phoneme isolation in words related to this Integrated Unit, such as
(zoo, zucchini, watermelon, whale, extra, yucca). Please see the “Useful Content for the Teacher” below for many ideas for engaging learners in
phonemic awareness skills
The high frequency (sight) words all, am, at, be, but, did, do, get, he, like, no, on, please, ran, say will be the focus. The teacher will do some
“stand-alone lessons” to introduce these words. Please see the “Useful Content for Teacher below” for many ideas for teaching high frequency
words.
The teacher is encouraged to find opportunities to emphasise those letters/sounds/phonemes/high frequency words with the children
throughout the ILS for the unit.
84
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Introduction to Week Five: Language Arts,
Conversation Mathematics, Social Studies and Science: Natural
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, and Built Environments
engagement in sharing the experiences of The teacher will enter information into the
others and with oral stories and information checklist for Listening and Speaking Outcomes The teacher will remind the children of the focus for Week
sharing. 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.10 based on Five of this Integrated Unit: how plants and animals may
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to observation and conversation with the learners. change their environment. The teacher will ask the
interact with a variety of audiences with children to tell ways that plants change the environment,
sensitivity and respect and that animals change the environment.
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher
and children who have diverse interests, Link to the Social Studies SCOs (in the left column of this
backgrounds and languages ILS) about natural and built environments and explain the
1.5 become aware of how effective listening terms “natural” and “built”. Ask the children to think
enhances understanding about all the things around them in the school, out the
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard window, etc. Which things are natural and which things
English develops, share their thoughts, are built by humans?
feelings and questions about engaging events,
stories and conversations with increasing The children will each draw and color an outdoor setting
confidence they are familiar with– e.g. the school, their house, the
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when beach, the village. The teacher should prompt the child to
sharing stories or experiences add more things to their drawing (as appropriate). Then
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness the children will label each item in their scene with “N’ or
activities and word play to discriminate “B” (N for natural; B for built).
between various sounds in their environment,
letters of the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful After, ask each child to count how many “N”s and how
sound patterns many “B”s they have in their scene. The teacher will
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and make a chart with three columns: one column for
language structures to enhance their children’s names, one column N (for Natural) and one
understanding of how to communicate ideas column B (for Built). The teacher will ask each child to
with purpose and focus show his/her picture and count the N’s and the B’s, then
add the information as the children count and report. For
example, Joe will have 4 under the N and 5 under the B.
85
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing The group will agree that there are quite a few “B”s, which
shows that humans build (or change) many things in the
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose The teacher will enter information into the environment. The teacher may ask the children why we, as
and variety of texts that are read or read to checklist for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.5, humans, change the environment (to make shade, to make
them 2.7 and 2.14 based on observation and a smooth road, to make shelter, to make a place to sit,
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some conversation with the learners. etc.).
environmental print and pictorial information
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter The teacher may explain that some of the changes that
names and letter sounds, beginning with humans make to the environment are not good for the
those of personal importance planet earth. Then, the teacher may tell the children the
question for this week:
Language Arts - Writing and Representing
Can we do some things so the environment is not changed so much by
3.2 Assign meaning to experimental drawing humans?
Language Arts: Product
and writing
The drawing of a scene and labelling with N and B
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools The teacher may let the children provide answers to this
will provide the teacher with evidence of several
to assist in writing process question.
Writing and Representing SCOs.
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case
letters of the alphabet
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written
The teacher will enter information into the
language and other representations (e.g.
checklist for Writing and Representing Outcomes
drawings)
3.2, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
and conversation with the learners.
shapes
3.8 Spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly
Mathematics – Measurement
Mathematics – Observation and Conversation
5.1.1 Classify objects according to selected
attributes, e.g., size, color, shape, texture, The teacher will enter information into the
sound, etc. checklist for Measurement Outcome 5.1.1 based
on observation and conversation with the learners.
86
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Mathematics – Data Management and
Probability
6.1.1 collect simple sets of data in the class The teacher will enter information into the
and school environment using observation. checklist for Data Management and Probability
6.1.3 Use counting to determine the number Outcomes 6.1.1 and 6.1.3 based on observation
of objects in a group and conversation with the learners.
Science – Interdependent Relationships Science – Observation and Conversation
in Ecosystems
The teacher will enter information into the
2.4.1. understand that things that people do checklist for Interdependent Relationships in
to live comfortably can affect the world Ecosystems Outcome 2.4.1 based on observation
around them. and conversation with the learners.
Social Studies: Product
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial The drawing of a scene and labelling with N and B
Thinking will provide the teacher with evidence of
understanding Social Studies SCOs 3.4 and 3.5.
3.4 identify natural and built features of the
local environment Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
3.5 illustrate natural and built features of the
local environment (S) The teacher will enter information into the
checklist for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcomes
3.4 and 3.5 based on observation and conversation
with the learners.
87
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Language Arts and Science: How does Planet Earth
Conversation feel?
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity,
engagement in sharing the experiences of The teacher will enter information into the Gather the children in a circle. Introduce them to a puppet
others and with oral stories and information checklist for Listening and Speaking Outcomes or stuffed animal named "Earth."
sharing. 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.10 based
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to on observation and conversation with the learners. Explain that Earth is feeling sad because people are not
interact with a variety of audiences with taking care of it properly. (Earth is crying and saying things
sensitivity and respect like: I can't take the smoke anymore, too much garbage on
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher my land and water, and where are all my trees? Some
and children who have diverse interests, animals are getting scarce. I feel lost, empty, dirty, and sick.
backgrounds and languages I think you need to help me.)
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
enhances understanding Teacher engages learners in chit chat about the puppet
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation ‘Earth”
impact meaning and mood What is happening to earth?
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard Why is he sad?
English develops, share their thoughts, What do people do to make him sick?
feelings and questions about engaging events, How can we help the earth to feel better?
stories and conversations with increasing
confidence Teacher uses the responses and explains to the learners that
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when “the environment” is everything around us: the air, water,
sharing stories or experiences plants, and animals. The plants and animals on planet earth
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness need the air, water, food, safe shelter, other plants and other
activities and word play to discriminate animals. We need to take care of planet earth so it stays clean
between various sounds in their environment, and helps all of us to stay healthy.
letters of the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful
sound patterns Learners view pictures of a polluted environment (e.g., trash
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and on the ground, dirty water, smoke in the air).
language structures to enhance their Explain in simple terms what is happening in each picture
understanding of how to communicate ideas and how it makes Mr. Earth feel sad and sick.
with purpose and focus
88
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the
genres and text forms checklist for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1,
2.3 connect background knowledge to the 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.7, 2.8, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14 and 2.15
titles and pictures of fiction and nonfiction based on observation and conversation with the Is it good for the environment?
passages to build a foundation of learners. Is it harmful for the environment?
understanding How do you feel when you see these pictures?
2.4 develop understanding and application of
the Concepts of Print The teacher explains in simple terms how littering, wasting
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose water, land, water and air pollution can harm the
and variety of texts that are read or read to environment. Adding that human actions may be for good
them reason but that they hurt the Earth where we live. The
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some teacher may tell some examples:
environmental print and pictorial information
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies ● Why do humans cut trees? (Place to live, make
to visualize, predict and connect paper, lumber/furniture). What happens if we cut
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high too many trees? (No shelter for birds, no shade, no
frequency words of personal importance, fruit).
such as names and pre-emergent level high- ● Why do we pollute the air (Factories produce food
frequency words and materials). What happens if we pollute the air
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the too much? (Plants and animals can’t survive, hurts
meaning and flow of the language to our lungs, makes us sick).
anticipate upcoming words
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and How can we help the earth feel happy? What can you do as
phrasing during shared reading, independent a child in this big world?
and guided reading of emergent level
passages The teacher will have a chart of this chorus of a song:
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with We are green champions,
those of personal importance We’ll tell you what to do,
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode To save our planet,
upcoming words in emergent level passages And keep it green and blue.
89
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Science – Interdependent Relationships Science – Observation and Conversation As a Shared Reading activity, the teacher will go over the
in Ecosystems words of the song, emphasizing the rhyming words, letter
sounds, high frequency/sight words (Please see the
2.4.2. understand that we can do some things The teacher will enter information into the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for specific
to reduce the impact of humans on the checklist for Interdependent Relationships in ideas to enhance the Language Arts skills and knowledge).
environment Ecosystems Outcomes 2.4.2 and 2.4.3 based on
2.4.3 Understand that each child can make observation and conversation with the learners. The teacher should also help the children understand what
choices to reduce their impacts on the land, the song means – why do we want the planet to be green
water, air, and other living things. and blue? What does “saving the planet” mean?
Then the teacher will play the first part of the video (below)
and invite the children to sing the chorus, while the teacher
points to the words on the chart.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=57MpZ-1VmRs
We are Green Champions
Have the child watch this video, stop at specific times, and
the teacher write a list of what children can do (planting a
tree, recycling, saving electricity, saving water). After the
video, the teacher will go over the list with the children, and
ask them what they can do to help the planet. Can they do
any of the things listed in the video?
Note: there is Shared Writing and Shared Reading in the last
parts of this ILS. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and
Guide for Effective Strategies for suggestions of ways to
incorporate Language Arts skills during this experience.
90
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Language Arts and Science: What can we do?
Conversation
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher asks the children: Do you think we as human
engagement in sharing the experiences of The teacher will enter information into the beings need to help Earth survive?
others and with oral stories and information checklist for Listening and Speaking Outcomes What can we do to help Earth survive? How do we
sharing. 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on depend on the healthy earth?
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to observation and conversation with the learners.
interact with a variety of audiences with
sensitivity and respect Read Aloud (or Video) “The Earth Book” by Todd
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher Parr.
and children who have diverse interests,
backgrounds and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening https://youtu.be/lpEc5nHqO2c?si=hCiFV24ZUmA633S
enhances understanding
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
English develops, share their thoughts, Gather the children in a circle. Hold up "The Earth Book”
feelings and questions about engaging events, by Todd Parr or similar book that speaks to how humans
stories and conversations with increasing can help to take care of the earth.
confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
This is a Shared Reading. Please see the Curriculum
sharing stories or experiences
Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for specific ideas of
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
ways to make the most of a Read Aloud. Watch for ideas
language structures to enhance their
understanding of how to communicate ideas of what to do before, during and after this specific book!
with purpose and focus
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing After reading the book, discuss the different ways the
characters in the book helped the Earth.
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the
genres and text forms checklist for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1,
● Ask the children which ideas they liked best and
2.2 develop questions when browsing 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 1.13,
why.
through passages of interest 2.14 and 2.15 based on observation and
conversation with the learners.
91
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.3 connect background knowledge to the ● Write their responses on a large chart paper or
titles and pictures of fiction and nonfiction whiteboard. Check back to the end of the video
passages to build a foundation of
to see if the children remembered all the 9 ideas
understanding
listed. (Make the most of this Shared Writing
2.4 develop understanding and application of
experience by looking for suggestions in the
the Concepts of Print
Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies.
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose
and variety of texts that are read or read to Read through the list with the children, to make it
them a Shared Reading experience as well).
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some ● Introduce the children to the concepts of reuse,
environmental print and pictorial information
reduce and recycle
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies
to visualize, predict and connect
Role Play
2.9 demonstrate understanding by responding
Learners will work in groups as “Helpers" to help Earth by
to read-alouds with images, model making,
acting out different things that we as humans can do to
discussions, or temporary writing.
help (e.g., picking up trash, saving water, planting trees – refer to
2.10 connect words and images in pre-
the things on the list that the teacher made after watching the video.
emergent and emergent level texts to
Teacher gives simple props to each group to help them get
background knowledge
into character (e.g., cardboard trash, toy watering cans).
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high
frequency words of personal importance,
Charades
such as names and pre-emergent level high-
frequency words
The teacher must choose one child and whisper one way
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the
to help the earth (pick up trash), then the child may act out
meaning and flow of the language to
that way to help, without speaking, and the other children
anticipate upcoming words
will guess what the child is doing.
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and
phrasing during shared reading, independent
and guided reading of emergent level
passages
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with
those of personal importance
92
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages
Language Arts - Writing and Representing
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter The teacher will enter information into the
shapes checklist for Writing and Representing Outcome
3.7 based on observation and conversation with
the learners.
Science – Interdependent Relationships Science – Observation and Conversation
in Ecosystems
2.4.2. understand that we can do some things The teacher will enter information into the
to reduce the impact of humans on the checklist for Interdependent Relationships in
environment Ecosystems Outcomes 2.4.2 and 2.4.3 based on
2.4.3 Understand that each child can make observation and conversation with the learners.
choices to reduce their impacts on the land,
water, air, and other living things.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Language Arts, Mathematics, and Science: Recycling
Conversation
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, Class Project
engagement in sharing the experiences of The teacher will enter information into the
others and with oral stories and information checklist for Listening and Speaking Outcomes Teacher, parents and learners source bottles, materials for
sharing. 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on
collage and seeds etc.
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to observation and conversation with the learners.
interact with a variety of audiences with
sensitivity and respect
93
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher Sorting Recyclables
and children who have diverse interests,
backgrounds and languages Bring out a collection of recyclable and non-recyclable
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
items. Have learners sort them into the correct bins (use
enhances understanding
pictures or color-coded bins for guidance).
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation
impact meaning and mood
Math Data Collection: Counting and Charting
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
English develops, share their thoughts,
Once all items are sorted, gather the class around the chart
feelings and questions about engaging events,
stories and conversations with increasing paper or whiteboard.
confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when Count the number of items in the recyclable bin together,
sharing stories or experiences writing the total number on the board under a "Recyclable
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and Items" heading.
language structures to enhance their
understanding of how to communicate ideas
Repeat the process for the non-recyclable bin, writing the
with purpose and focus
total number under a "Non-Recyclable Items" heading.
Language Arts - Writing and Representing Language Arts – Product
Ask the children to compare the two quantities:
3.2 Assign meaning to experimental drawing The writing that the children do on the cardboard Which bin has more items?
and writing under their “beautiful junk” art will demonstrate Which bin has fewer items?
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and many of the Writing and Representing SCOs to
real and imagined topics the teacher. The teacher can emphasize how we can turn something
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools old into something useful.
to assist in writing process
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case
The teacher should show the learners how to make a bird
letters of the alphabet
feeder from a plastic bottle:
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written The teacher will enter information into the
https://www.pbs.org/parents/crafts-and-
language and other representations (e.g. checklist for Writing and Representing Outcomes
drawings) 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on experiments/how-to-make-a-plastic-bottle-birdfeeder
observation and conversation with the learners.
94
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter The class may make a bird feeder as a group, and hang it in
shapes the school yard.
3.8 spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly
The teacher should ask the children to bring in used
buttons, bottle caps, pull tabs, bread tags, small twigs,
Mathematics – Pattern and Relationship Mathematics – Observation and Conversation
seeds, etc. The children will sort the items into containers.
The teacher will model how to make a pattern with the
3.1.1 create simple repeating patterns (2 The teacher will enter information into the
elements) checklist for Pattern and Relationship Outcomes two kinds of items: e.g. bottle cap, seed, bottle cap, seed,
3.1.2 extend simple repeating patterns (2 3.1.1 and 3.1.2 based on observation and bottle cap seed, and then will ask the children to make
elements) conversation with the learners. their own pattern, or to extend the teacher’s pattern.
Mathematics - Measurement The teacher will enter information into the
The teacher should pull together some photos from the
checklist for Measurement Outcomes 5.1.1 and
internet, to show children examples of art made with
5.1.1 classify objects according to selected 5.1.2 based on observation and conversation with
“beautiful junk”. Using a piece of recycled cardboard as a
attributes, e.g., size, color, shape, texture, the learners.
sound, etc.
base, the children will create beautiful designs and pictures
5.1.2 classify objects according to selected The teacher will enter information into the with the recyclable materials. They will print their name on
attributes, e.g., size, color, shape, texture, checklist for Data Management and Probability the cardboard, and perhaps a title for their design. Note: it
sound, etc. Outcome 6.1.3 based on observation and is very challenging to glue the items onto a piece of paper.
conversation with the learners.
So the teacher may take photographs of the children’s
Mathematics – Data Management and
designs/pictures, and then the items may be recycled.
Probability
6.1.3 use counting to determine the number
of objects in a group
95
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
End of Week Five: End of Integrated Unit End of Week Five: End of Integrated Unit
Reassessing Previous Checklists Language Arts and Science: Celebration! The teacher may
invite the families or other adults in the school, or another
The teacher will want to use the assessment
class in the school to visit the room and to help with
strategy tools used throughout the week to
celebrating all the learning from the Unit.
reassess learners for new
knowledge/improvements.
Create a class poster with drawings and handprints with
Teacher will make notes in the anecdotal notes the title "Our Promise to Mr. Earth” to show how the
area of learners who may have been able to master children will help the environment.
the concept by the end of the week with dates.
Dear children, gather close, come near,
There's something special you must hear.
A heartfelt message just for you,
For all the kind things that you do.
You pick up trash, you save the trees,
You care for animals, birds, and bees.
You turn off pipes, you plant new seeds,
You do such good, helpful deeds.
Your little hands, your big kind hearts,
Are fixing up my broken parts.
Because of you, I feel so bright.
You fill my days with hope and light.
So, here's a thank you, just for you,
For everything you say and do.
Keep helping me, keep being kind,
Together, happiness we'll find.
96
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Planting Activity
Give each child a small plant or seeds to plant in a cup or
where lands available take the learners outside to plant
tree(s) or seeds. Explain how plants help the environment
by cleaning the air and providing food and shelter for
animals.
Teacher will wrap up the unit by telling the learners
that we can help our plant and animal friends by not
littering, planting more trees and flowers, and making sure
we don't waste water. When we take care of nature, we are
helping all the plants and animals that live there! Adding that
we should remember, plants and animals are always helping
each other out. And we can help them too by taking care of
the environment where they live.
Revisit the Essential Question
Teacher will say:” Everyone repeat after me”
“All the things that I have talked about, seen, and discovered tells
me... ”
(Pointing to the words on the chart in the classroom)
“How do plants and animals make a difference to me and my
world?”
97
Kindergarten Curriculum – Plants and Animals
Additional Resources
https://youtu.be/llppYxsVzlE?si=YP3CTHppKRM9AOA6
Reduce Reuse Recycle Song for Kids | Earth Day Songs for Children | The Kiboomers
Useful Content for the Teacher
Next Generation Science Standards (https://www.nextgenscience.org/sites/default/files/AllDCI.pdf)
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
or “Five Green and Speckled Frogs
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ziGG_L9C12o
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y3zuRq 0N4hc
or "The Itsy-Bitsy Spider"”
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies
are open-ended (rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for
Effective Strategies.
98
