November 2024
OHPC KINDERGARTEN
GAMES
INTEGRATED UNIT #5 MAY - JUNE 5 WEEKS
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Week 1
What games do I
like to play?
Week 2
Who do I play
games with?
Week 5
How can I get
better at
playing games?
Integrate d Unit on
Games
Are all games
fu n?
Week 4
Week 3
Where do I play
What do I need
games?
to play games? 2
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Table of Contents:
Introduction to Games Integrated Unit ................................................................................................................................................... 4
Essential Question: Are All Games Fun? ............................................................................................................................................... 6
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Linked to Inclusive Learning Strategies in this Integrated Unit...................................................... 7
Overview and Preparation ...................................................................................................................................................................... 11
Sample Letter to Parents/Caregivers ..................................................................................................................................................... 12
Sample Recording Sheet After a Guest Speaker or Field Trip ............................................................................................................. 13
Detailed Five-Week Plan ........................................................................................................................................................................ 14
I. WEEK ONE ................................................................................................................................................................................... 14
II. WEEK TWO ................................................................................................................................................................................... 28
III. WEEK THREE .............................................................................................................................................................................. 46
IV. WEEK FOUR ................................................................................................................................................................................. 60
V. WEEK FIVE ................................................................................................................................................................................... 75
3
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Introduction to Games Integrated Unit
The Kindergarten Curriculum consists of 6 documents:
• Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies
• Integrated Unit # 1 – Belonging
• Integrated Unit #2 – Weather
• Integrated Unit #3 – Celebrations
• Integrated Unit #4 – Plants and Animals
• Integrated Unit #5 – Games
The Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies document provides the framework for the delivery of the curriculum. Teachers must
examine this document prior to teaching this Unit to have a thorough understanding of the learning outcomes for Kindergarten, to teach the Integrated
Unit effectively and assess learner progress.
The Integrated Topics have been chosen to meet the learning outcomes for Language Arts, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies. No one Integrated
Unit contains all outcomes. Rather, they are spread across the Integrated Units. The five Integrated Topics are: Belonging, Celebrations, Weather,
Plants and Animals and Games with each having its own curriculum guide. This document contains the Learning Outcomes and Inclusive Learning
and Assessment Strategies that will be taught in the Games Integrated Unit. The following table highlights the letters, sounds, words and specific
concepts in mathematics that are designated to be taught in each of the Integrated Units.
First IU Topic Second IU Topic Third IU Topic Fourth IU Topic Fifth IU Topic
Integrated Unit Topic Belonging Weather Celebrations Plants and Animals Games
Proposed Sequence for s, a, t, i, p, n c(k), e, h, r, m, d g, o, u, l, f, b z, w, y, x j, qu, v
Language Arts Letters and
Sounds
Proposed sequence for Pre-primer words Pre-primer words Primer words Primer words Primer words
Language Arts Sight Words
4
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
First IU Topic Second IU Topic Third IU Topic Fourth IU Topic Fifth IU Topic
(loosely following Dolch sight a, and, big, can, go, I, in, it, not, run, up, we, one, three, two, four, all, am, at, be, but, said, where, she,
words) is, me, see, the, to away, find, help, here, look, make, play, did, do, get, he, like, they, was, went, will,
jump, little, my you, yellow, blue, no, on, please, ran, yes, eat, good, have,
red, brown, black, say into, new, now,
white, come, down there, this, with
Proposed Sequence for Strand 1 Strand 1 Strand 1 Strand 1 Strand 1
Math Skills (refer to Strand 3, 6 Strand 3, 6 Strand 3, 6 Strand 2 Strand 2
outcomes for Kindergarten Strand 4 Strand 3, 6 Strand 5
Mathematics in this document) Strand 3, 6
Teaching and learning through Integrated Units provides engaging, authentic, and relevant opportunities for children to learn knowledge, skills, and values
in Language Arts, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies. The children experience learning as a whole and they see “academic” knowledge and skills
being applied to topics that are part of their lived experiences. Where appropriate, teachers may find ways that Health and Physical Well-being, Arts and
Crafts, Music, and Additional Languages may be a part of the Integrated Units.
5
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Essential Question: Are All Games Fun?
The Essential Question provides the over-arching focus throughout the unit. Teachers may start the unit by asking their learners the question (and
perhaps create a chart with the learners’ answers). Teachers and children will revisit the question at the end of the unit and consider what they have
learned.
The Essential Question should be posted in the classroom and referred to frequently. If a visitor enters the room, it should be obvious what the
children are learning about. If a visitor/parent/administrator asks the children what they are learning about, the children should be able to readily
answer.
Essential Question: “Are all games fun?”
Weekly questions:
Week 1: What games do I like to play?
Week 2: Who do I play games with?
Week 3: Where do I play games?
Week 4: What do I need to play games?
Week 5: How can I get better at playing games?
End of Unit summary/celebration: Return to discuss the essential question: Are all games fun?
6
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Linked to Inclusive Learning Strategies in this Integrated Unit1
Language Arts: A list of LA SCOs that children will learn during this Unit will be filled in as the Writing Teams work on lessons/activities for this unit.
SCO Strand 1: Listening and Speaking
1.1 Listen to music, conversation and environmental sounds for personal enjoyment
1.2 Demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in sharing the experiences of others and with oral stories and information sharing.
1.3 Use social listening and speaking skills to interact with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and respect
1.4 Interact and collaborate with the teacher and children who have diverse interests, backgrounds and languages
1.5 Become aware of how effective listening enhances understanding
1.6 Observe how tone, fluency and intonation impact meaning and mood
1.7 Use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English develops, share their thoughts, feelings and questions about engaging events, stories and
conversations with increasing confidence
1.8 Develop increasing clarity and focus when sharing stories or experiences
1.9 Engage in active phonological awareness activities and word play to discriminate between various sounds in their environment, letters of the
alphabet, rhyme and meaningful sound patterns
1.10 Develop and apply vocabulary and language structures to enhance their understanding of how to communicate ideas with purpose and focus
SCO Strand 2: Reading and Viewing
2.1 Identify an increasing number of letter names and letter sounds, beginning with those of personal importance
2.2 Develop questions when browsing through passages of interest
2.3 Connect background knowledge to the titles and pictures of fiction and nonfiction passages to build a foundation of understanding
2.4 Develop understanding and application of the Concepts of Print
2.5 Develop knowledge about the purpose and variety of texts that are read or read to them
2.7 Demonstrate understanding of some environmental print and pictorial information
2.8 Begin to apply comprehension strategies to visualize, predict and connect
2.9 Demonstrate understanding by responding to read-alouds with images, model making, discussions, or temporary writing
2.10 Connect words and images in pre-emergent and emergent level texts to background knowledge
2.11 Recognize and use a variety of high frequency words of personal importance, such as names and pre-emergent level high-frequency words
1 Note: All Kindergarten Curriculum Outcomes are available in the OHPC Kindergarten Curriculum and Assessment Guidelines document. An individual Integrated
Unit does not contain all of the outcomes for the entire curriculum.
7
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
SCO Strand 2: Reading and Viewing
2.12 Participate in shared reading and use the meaning and flow of the language to anticipate upcoming words
2.13 Begin to demonstrate fluency and phrasing during shared reading, independent and guided reading of emergent level passages
2.14 Identify an increasing number of letter names and letter sounds, beginning with those of personal importance
2.15 Use known letter sounds to decode upcoming words in emergent level passages
SCO Strand 3: Writing and Representing
3.1 Use shared ideas to co-construct stories
3.2 Assign meaning to experimental drawing and writing
3.3 Begin expressive writing to share ideas and real and imagined topics
3.4 Use peer collaboration and classroom tools to assist in writing process
3.5 Learn to print the upper and lower case letters of the alphabet
3.6 Connect spoken language(s) to written language and other representations (e.g. drawings)
3.7 Connect phonological awareness to letter shapes
3.8 Spell name and some words of personal importance correctly
Mathematics: The following Math SCOs have been assigned to the Games Unit, although these SCOs may also be reviewed/included in other Integrated Units
SCO Strand 1: Number Sense
1.1.1 Say the number sequence to 10 by 1s
1.1.8 Count with meaning to 10, by building quantities
1.2.4 Count the number of objects in a given set, rearrange the objects, predict the new count, and recount to verify the prediction
1.3.1 Look briefly at a given familiar arrangement of one to five objects or dots and identify the number represented without counting
1.3.2 Look briefly at a given familiar arrangement of one to five objects or dots and identify the number represented by a given dot
1.3.3 Compare the number of objects in two sets of up to 10 objects, using phrases such as ‘same number as’, ‘equal to’, more than’, and 'less than
SCO Strand 2: Operations with Numbers
2.1.1 Compose and decompose numbers up to 9 in a variety of ways using manipulatives, fingers and pictures (e.g. seven fingers held up, fold down
two fingers, how many are left?)
SCO Strand 3: Pattern and Relationship
3.1.1 Create simple repeating patterns (2 elements)
3.1.2 Extend simple repeating patterns (2 elements)
3.1.3 Copy a given repeating pattern
3.1.4 Extend a variety of given repeating patterns to two more repetitions
3.1.5 Create a repeating pattern using manipulatives, musical instruments, or actions
8
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
SCO Strand 4: Geometrical Thinking
4.2.1 Identify and describe shapes (2-D = squares, circles, triangles, 3-D = cubes, cones, and spheres).
4.2.2 Describe objects in the environment using names of shapes and describe the relative positions of these objects using terms such as above,
below, beside, in front of, behind, and next to.
4.2.3 Correctly name shapes regardless of their orientations or overall size (2-D = squares, circles, triangles, 3-D = cubes, cones, and spheres).
SCO Strand 6: Data Management and Probability
6.1.3 Use counting to determine the number of objects in a group.
Science: These outcomes are taken from the OHPC Kindergarten Curriculum and Assessment Guidelines document and have been distributed to fit the weekly questions in
this Integrated Unit.
SCO Strand 1: Forces and Interactions: Pushes and Pulls
1.1.1 The child will understand that pushes can have different strengths and directions
1.1.2 The child will understand that pulls can have different strengths and directions
1.1.3 Pushing or pulling on an object can change the speed or direction of its motion
1.1.4 Pushing on an object can start or stop it
1.2.1 Demonstrate that when objects touch or collide, they push on one another and can change motion.
1.2.2 Demonstrate that a bigger push or pull makes things speed up or slow down more quickly
Social Studies: These outcomes are taken from the OHPC Kindergarten Curriculum and Assessment Guidelines document and have been distributed to fit the weekly
questions in this Integrated Unit
SCO Strand 2: Myself – Civic Participation
2.7 Express how my behaviour in groups and the behaviour of others affects me and others
2.8 Appreciate that members of groups to which I belong have responsibilities
2.9 Recognize that all children have the right to be safe from harm
2.10 List examples of what helps children feel safe
2.11 Appreciate that being safe from harm also means that they must learn to play safely
2.12 Demonstrate responsible caring behaviour towards others in play
2.16 Know why we have rules in groups to which I belong (e.g. family, class at school) (K)
2.18 Demonstrate examples of responsible and polite behaviour in groups to which I belong (V)
SCO Strand 3: Spatial Thinking
3.4 Identify natural and built features of the local environment
9
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
3.5 Illustrate natural and built features of the local environment
3.6 Appreciate that they are part of a wider environment
10
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Overview and Preparation
Preparation of the Room
Teachers are encouraged to display the Essential Question for the Integrated Unit on a bulletin board or the wall.
Resources
Teachers are encouraged to look through the entire plan for the Integrated Unit on Games (below) and gather resources needed to teach this
unit.
Possible guest speakers and field trip(s)
When preparing for this unit, teachers are encouraged to consider: What/who is in the school/neighbourhood to help us learn about Games?
Before any guest speaker comes to the class, the children will be guided to think of questions to ask him/her. After the guest speaker leaves, the
children will complete a sheet that shows what they learned (in pictures and words, with help). Sample of that sheet is provided on page 12 of this
document.
Letter Introducing the New Unit to Parents/Families
One way to find out who might come into the classroom as a guest speaker is to send a note home (and circulate in the school) telling what the
unit will be about and asking if anyone knows someone who could come into the classroom. In the letter, describe the focus of the Integrated Unit, ask
for specific resources (if appropriate), provide some examples for guest speakers, such as “someone who has….”, “someone who knows about…”.
Sample letter is provided on page 11 of this document.
Consider possible play connections/materials (some possibilities are listed below)
Art/craft materials
Paint easel
Water table
Sand table
Toys connected to the topic
Blocks
Dress-ups
Puzzles
11
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Sample Letter to Parents/Caregivers
School logo?
Date
Dear Parents and Caregivers,
On Monday, (date), we will be starting our last Integrated Unit of study. We will be learning all about “Games” and we will be thinking
about the question “Are all games fun?” This unit of study will be the focus in our classroom until (date).
We are wondering if any of you have a particular interest, or experience with Games and if you could come into our class one afternoon
to tell us about it. Maybe you played rugby when you were younger. Maybe you have always kept track of the football scores for your
community league. Maybe you are part of a group of friends who get together to play cribbage each week. Maybe you know the person who
does the grounds upkeep for the local golf course.
Or, perhaps you know someone else in the community who might be willing to come in to our class to help us learn more about Games.
If you can help us out, please contact _______________, phone: _______________, and we will find a day and time for you, or someone
you might suggest, to visit our class.
Meanwhile, please ask your child about what he or she is learning about Games and enjoy some discussions about this topic at home!
Thank you so much,
(Teacher)
12
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Sample Recording Sheet After a Guest Speaker or Field Trip
What I learned from ___ (place for guest speaker’s name, or location of field trip) ________________________
(Place for the child to do a drawing based on the guest speaker’s visit)
(lines for child to write a word or two, probably with assistance from the teacher)
___________________________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________________________
13
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Detailed Five-Week Plan
I. WEEK ONE
Essential Question: Are all games fun?
Question for Week One: What games do I like to play?
Gathering Assessment Data and Record-keeping
The Specific Learning Outcomes (SCOs) and Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILSs) for this unit are directly linked. The learners learn
and demonstrate development on the SCOS in the ILS. The teacher gathers assessment data on each of the SCOs (during the ILS).
The Assessment data is gathered through Observation, Conversation and Products, as set out in the Inclusive Assessment Strategies
(IAS) column.
The teacher will use the master checklist (hard copy or digital) included in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies to record data
collected about children’s progress in achieving the SCOs. The teacher will observe the children and will listen to the children’s responses or the
teacher will arrange for the children to create a “product” to gather evidence of the children’s development of the SCO attitudes, skills, and
knowledge.
The teacher will use a consistent scale in the checklist:
Is the child easily meeting the outcome (+)? Is the child meeting the outcome (=)? Does the child need more practice (-)?
The teacher will note the date of the observation/conversation, and the teacher may also add some comments for additional clarification
14
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Language Arts – Plans for the Unit – Week One
The teacher will be observing for children’s Concepts of Print. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for a list of Concepts
of Print.
The letters/sounds j, q, u, v will be the focus. The teacher should do some “stand-alone” lessons to introduce the children to these letters/sounds.
Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for teaching children letters/sounds.
Phonemic Awareness skills will commence and the focal point will be on initial phoneme isolation in words related to this Integrated Unit, such as
judge, juggle, quiet, quick, umpire, up, volleyball and very. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for
engaging learners in phonemic awareness skills
The high frequency (sight) words such as said, where, she, they, was, went, will, yes, eat, good, have, into, new, now, there, this, with
will be the focus. The teacher might do some “stand-alone lessons” to introduce these words. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
Strategies for many ideas for teaching high frequency words.
The teacher is encouraged to find opportunities to emphasize those letters/sounds/phonemes/high frequency words with the children
throughout the Integrated Learning Strategies for the unit.
15
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Initial discussion about the Essential Question for
this Integrated Unit: “Are all games fun?”
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, Language Arts and Social Studies: Discussion and
others and with oral stories and information 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.9 based on observation and Story
sharing. conversation with the learners.
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to The teacher will ask the children, “What games do you
interact with a variety of audiences with like to play?” The teacher will make a list of the games
sensitivity and respect on a chart. If two children say they like to play the
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and same game, the teacher will put two check marks to
children who have diverse interests, show that two children like that game, or three
backgrounds and languages children, etc. This is a Shared Writing experience.
1.5 become aware of how effective listening Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
enhances understanding Strategies for further tips and suggestions.
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings The teacher will save this chart for Shared Reading
and questions about engaging events, stories throughout the unit, and for Mathematics work (ILS
and conversations with increasing confidence below).
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences If any of the games start with the letters “j, Qu, or v”
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness the teacher may do some quick phonemic awareness
activities and word play to discriminate between work with the children.
various sounds in their environment, letters of
the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful sound The teacher will ask the children “Are all games fun?”
patterns The children might say “yes” at first, but the teacher
should ask again to see if children could give some
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing examples (and why) some games might not be fun.
(Maybe if the game is too hard, or if someone won’t let
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist you play with them).
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.2, 2.3,
2.2 develop questions when browsing through 2.4, 2.5, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 2.10 and 2.11 based on Show the children the book: Join In and Play By Cheri
passages of interest observation and conversation with the learners. J. Meiners | Kids Book Read Aloud (youtube.com)
2.3 connect background knowledge to the
titles and pictures of fiction and nonfiction
16
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
passages to build a foundation of
understanding
2.4 develop understanding and application of
the Concepts of Print
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and
variety of texts that are read or read to them
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
environmental print and pictorial information
Ask the children to watch to see what games the
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to
children in the book play. After, they will talk about
visualize, predict and connect *
what they saw and how they can relate to it (Have I
2.9 Demonstrate understanding by responding
played this game? Do I play a game that is similar?).
to read-alouds with images, model making,
discussions, or temporary writing.
The teacher will help the children discuss how playing
2.10 Connect words and images in pre-
with other children may not always go smoothly.
emergent and emergent level texts to
What did the girl in the story learn about joining into a
background knowledge
game?
2.11 Recognise and use a variety of high
frequency words of personal importance, such
The teacher will have the children role play how to join
as names and pre-emergent level high-
a game.
frequency words
The class may go outdoors and play some simple games
Social Studies – Myself – Civic Social Studies- Observation and Conversation
with equipment available to them – balls, chalk, hoops,
Participation
and ropes. After playing outdoors, the teacher can lead
the class in a discussion, asking if everyone got along
2.7. express how my behaviour in groups and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
while playing the games. Does your behaviour make a
the behaviour of others affects me and others for Myself – Civic Participation Outcome 2.7 and
difference to the others who are playing with you?
2.12 demonstrate responsible caring behaviour 2.12 based on observation and conversation with
Does their behaviour make a difference to you? How
towards others in play the learners.
can you work together to make playing the games more
fun for everyone?
17
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts – Listening and Speaking Language Arts: Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Mathematics – Discussion and
Games
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, Show the children the chart that lists the games they
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and like (see ILS above). Use Shared Reading strategies to
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners. remind the children what games they listed. Invite
interact with a variety of audiences with children to offer new games to the list, if they have
sensitivity and respect thought of some. (Please see Curriculum Outcomes and
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and Guide for Effective Strategies to consider ways to enhance
children who have diverse interests, children’s LA and Math skills through a Shared
backgrounds and languages Reading).
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
enhances understanding The teacher will go through each of the games on the
1.7 Use Home Language(s) and, as Standard list, asking the children who likes that game, counting
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings how many children say they like it, and printing that
and questions about engaging events, stories number beside the game on the chart.
and conversations with increasing confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when Discuss and compare with the children: Which games
sharing stories or experiences are really popular? Which games are not so popular?
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language How many children like.... (each game)?
structures to enhance their understanding of
how to communicate ideas with purpose and
focus Help the children to make their own graph of three of
the games that they like, printing the names of the
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing games, showing how many other children also like to
play that game. Print the numeral to match the
2.1 identify an increasing number of letter The teacher will enter information into the checklist quantity.
names and letter sounds, beginning with those for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.5,
of personal importance 2.7, 2.8, 2.11, 2.12, 2.14 and 2.15 based on Hopscotch Kick the Dress-Up
2.4 develop understanding and application of observation and conversation with the learners. Ball
the Concepts of Print X X X X X X X X X
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and 3 5 1
variety of texts that are read or read to them
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some In small groups, or partners, invite the children to play
games such as
18
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to a) Roll the Dice to see who gets the higher number;
visualize, predict and connect environmental b) Pick a cube from a bag, but guess the colour before
print and pictorial information pulling it out;
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high c) Stack the Cubes Race (who can stack 10 cubes first).
frequency words of personal importance, such
as names and pre-emergent level high- The children can rotate to play each game.
frequency words
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the Afterwards, the teacher and the children can discuss if
meaning and flow of the language to anticipate the games were fun? How did they keep “score”? Did
upcoming words they need to count? How did they remember the
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter score? Did they need to write anything down?
names and letter sounds, beginning with those
of personal importance
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages
Language Arts - Writing and Representing
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
real and imagined topics for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.3, 3.4
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools and 3.8 based on observation and conversation with
to assist in writing process the learners.
3.8 spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly.
Mathematics - Number Sense Mathematics: Observation and Conversation
1.2.4 count the number of objects in a given set, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
rearrange the objects, predict the new count, for Number Sense Outcomes 1.2.4, 1.3.1 and 1.3.2
and recount to verify the prediction based on observation and conversation with the
1.3.1 look briefly at a given familiar learners.
arrangement of one to five objects or dots and
identify the number represented without
counting
19
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.3.2 look briefly at a given familiar
arrangement of one to five objects or dots and
identify the number represented by a given dot
Mathematics - Data Management and
Probability
6.1.3 use counting to determine the number of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
objects in a group. for Data Management and Probability Outcome
6.1.3 based on observation and conversation with
the learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts related to the topic: Read-Aloud,
Discussion, Class Picture Book
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will ask the children if they like to play
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and video games. Which game? What happens in that
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners. game? When do they play the game? Do they play by
interact with a variety of audiences with themselves or with someone else? Are they permitted
sensitivity and respect to play the game all day?
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and
children who have diverse interests, Read Aloud: Bad Kitty Does Not Like Video Games
backgrounds and languages by, Nick Bruel
1.5 become aware of how effective listening https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b2wX5jcuyzw
enhances understanding
1.7 Use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
and questions about engaging events, stories
and conversations with increasing confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language
structures to enhance their understanding of
Discussion after the book – why do you think Kitty
was not permitted to play more hours of the video
20
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
how to communicate ideas with purpose and game? What did Kitty need to do instead? At the end
focus of the book, why did Kitty “not” like video games?
What did Kitty do instead?
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
The teacher will ask: ‘What is your favourite kind of
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist game to play – board games, hand games, ball games,
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, or video games? Learners can play 4 corners where
2.2 develop questions when browsing through 2.4, 2.5, 2.8, 2.9. 2.11 and 2.14 based on observation learners move into the corner which matches their
passages of interest and conversation with the learners. favourite game (board games, video games, hand games
2.3 connect background knowledge to the and ball games). Have a discussion with peers stating
titles and pictures of fiction and nonfiction why this is their favourite game THINK-PAIR-
passages to build a foundation of SHARE. (Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide
understanding for Effective Strategies for tips on this approach).
2.4 develop understanding and application of
the Concepts of Print
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and
variety of texts that are read or read to them
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to
visualize, predict and connect
2.9 Demonstrate understanding by responding
to read-alouds with images, model making,
discussions, or temporary writing.
2.11 Recognise and use a variety of high
frequency words of personal importance, such
as names and pre-emergent level high-
frequency words
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with those
of personal importance Each child will create three pictures displaying three
different games they like to play. The teacher may give
Language Arts - Writing and Representing Language Arts: Product the child one paper prepared with three columns.
3.2 Assign meaning to experimental drawing The sentence the children write will provide the
and writing teacher with information regarding the children’s The children will write sentences using sight words
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and development of LA outcomes in Writing and from the Word Wall, and support from the teacher.
real and imagined topics Representing.
21
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools The teacher will enter information into the checklist The children will share their work with the group. The
to assist in writing process for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.3, teacher will put the pictures together into a book
3.6 Connect spoken language(s) to written 3.4, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and (cover, title, authors) to put in the classroom library for
language and other representations (e.g. conversation with the learners. all to enjoy.
drawings)
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
shapes
3.8 spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Science, and Social Studies: Can
you play some games with small balls/cars?
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will start with a conversation about how to
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.6, 1.7 and 1.8 based on observation and play with others, based on the Social Studies concepts
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners. in the left column (2.7 and 2.12).
interact with a variety of audiences with
sensitivity and respect
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and Then the teacher will put the children in groups of
children who have diverse interests, three and give each group a small ball (about the size of
backgrounds and languages a golf ball), or a small toy car. It’s probably best if the
1.5 become aware of how effective listening children play these games on the floor.
enhances understanding
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation The teacher will ask the children to play some games
impact meaning and mood with these materials. The first game could be:
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings “Who can make the ball (or car) go fastest?”
and questions about engaging events, stories
and conversations with increasing confidence After the children try this for a short while, the teacher
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when will stop all the children, ask them to stand aside, and
sharing stories or experiences then ask each group how they manage to make the ball
go fast. The teacher can introduce the words “push”,
and “strength”.
22
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Science – Forces and Interactions: Pushes Science - Observation and Conversation The teacher should continue to suggest additional
and Pulls games to the children, and to pause every so often for
the children to show how they can play that game.
1.1.1 the child will understand that pushes can The teacher will enter information into the checklist
have different strengths and directions. for Forces and Interactions: Pushes and Pulls Additional games:
1.1.3 pushing or pulling on an object can Outcomes 1.1.1, 1.1.3 and 1.1.4 based on
change the speed or direction of its motion observation and conversation with the learners. Who can make the ball (or car) go slowest?
1.1.4 pushing on an object can start or stop it. Who can make the ball go sideways?
Who can stop the ball without using their hand?
Social Studies – Myself- Civic Participation Social Studies- Observation and Conversation
Wrap-up: the teacher should have a discussion with
2.7. express how my behaviour in groups and The teacher will enter information into the checklist the children indicating that they were being scientists,
the behaviour of others affects me and others for Myself – Civic Participation Outcomes 2.7 and the games gave them a problem to solve, and they
2.12 demonstrate responsible caring behaviour 2.12 based on observation and conversation with thought of ways to solve it. The teacher should
towards others in play the learners. introduce the words “push”, “strength”, “direction”
when talking about what the children were doing. The
teacher must explain to the children that stopping the
car or ball happens when they “push” on the car or
ball. The teacher may introduce the term “gravity” and
explain that gravity pulls the ball down the ramp. Also,
the teacher should have a closing conversation with the
children about Social Studies outcomes 2.7 and 2.12.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts related to the topic: Guests to play
games with the children
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will arrange several parents or other adults
oral stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and to come to the class and tell about a game they like to
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners. play (or perhaps a game they liked to play when they
interact with a variety of audiences with were young). The guests can bring any items needed
sensitivity and respect to play the games with small groups of children.
23
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and The groups of children can rotate to play the games
children who have diverse interests, with the different guests. This could be done outside
backgrounds and languages and inside.
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
enhances understanding After the guests have gone, the teacher will hold a
1.7 Use Home Language(s) and, as Standard discussion with the children and then the children will
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings complete a response, as below.
and questions about engaging events, stories
and conversations with increasing confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
Name:__________
sharing stories or experiences
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language
structures to enhance their understanding of
how to communicate ideas with purpose and
GAMES
focus
Speaker’s Response
Language Arts – Reading and Viewing
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high The teacher will enter information into the checklist
frequency words of personal importance, such for Reading and Viewing Outcome 2.11 based on I learned….________
as names and pre-emergent level high- observation and conversation with the learners. _________________________________________
frequency words __________________________
Language Arts - Writing and Representing Language Arts: Product
The Guest Speaker Response sheet will provide the
3.2 Assign meaning to experimental drawing teacher with information regarding the children’s
and writing development of LA outcomes in Writing and
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and Representing.
real and imagined topics*
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools
to assist in writing process* The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.3,
letters of the alphabet 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and
conversation with the learners.
24
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.6 Connect spoken language(s) to written
language and other representations (e.g.
drawings)
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
shapes
3.8 Spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly
Language Arts: Reassessing Previous Checklists End of Week Review: What games do you like to
play?
Mathematics: The teacher might want to use the assessment
strategy tools used throughout the week to reassess The teacher and the children will look at the list they
Science: learners for new knowledge/improvements. made at the beginning of the week (Shared Reading,
with connections to Concepts of Print, letters and
Social Studies: Teacher will make notes in the anecdotal notes area sounds, sight words). Have any of the children
(with dates) of learners who may have been able to changed their minds? Are there games they would like
master the concept by the end of the week. to add to the list?
The children will review what the girl learned in the
book: Join In and Play. The teacher may show the
book again to the children.
The teacher will review the term “push” and ask the
children to consider which games they have
discussed/played this week needed a player to “push”
something. Did the player need to “push” something
in different directions, or with strength? Did the player
need to stop something that was moving during the
game?
Another class of children will be invited in to play
games. This could be a buddy class of older children.
25
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The teacher could show these videos and all the
children could learn how to do a Clapping Hands game
in partners.
How Jamaican kids play Hand Games:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GShzvXLNU9E
Clapping Game:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2RhmXOrjDDs
Additional Resources
All resources to support the Inclusive Learning Strategies in this week are embedded in the ILS.
Useful Content for the Teacher
Next Generation Science Standards (https://www.nextgenscience.org/sites/default/files/AllDCI.pdf)
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies are open-
ended (rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies.
26
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies are open-
ended (rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies.
27
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
II. WEEK TWO
Essential Question: Are all games fun?
Question for Week Two: Who do I play games with?
Language Arts – Plans for the Unit – Week 2
The teacher will be observing for children’s Concepts of Print. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for a list of Concepts
of Print.
The letters/sounds j, q, u, v will be the focus. The teacher should do some “stand-alone” lessons to introduce the children to these letters/sounds.
Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for teaching children letters/sounds.
Phonemic Awareness skills will commence and the focal point will be on initial phoneme isolation in words related to this Integrated Unit, such as
judge, juggle, quiet, quick, umpire, up, volleyball and very. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for
engaging learners in phonemic awareness skills
The high frequency (sight) words such as said, where, she, they, was, went, will, yes, eat, good, have, into, new, now, there, this, with
will be the focus. The teacher might do some “stand-alone lessons” to introduce these words. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
Strategies for many ideas for teaching high frequency words.
The teacher is encouraged to find opportunities to emphasize those letters/sounds/phonemes/high frequency words with the children
throughout the Integrated Learning Strategies for the unit.
28
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts – Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts related to the unit topic: Discussion
about Week 2 Question: Who do you play with?
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher engages learners in a grand discussion by
others and with oral stories and information 1.5, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.10 based on observation and asking “Who do you play with?” The teacher
sharing. conversation with the learners. acknowledges and accepts learners’ responses.
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to
interact with a variety of audiences with The teacher will make a list of the different people that
sensitivity and respect children play with (including playing alone). (This is a
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher Shared Writing activity – please see the Curriculum
and children who have diverse interests, Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for further tips).
backgrounds and languages The teacher will then ask what kinds of games the
1.5 become aware of how effective listening children play with different people, and add that to the
enhances understanding list. Some incidental math can occur, with children
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard counting how many different people children play with?
English develops, share their thoughts, How many different games do they like to play alone?
feelings and questions about engaging events, How many different games do they like to play with
stories and conversations with increasing brothers and sisters?
confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness
activities and word play to discriminate
between various sounds in their environment,
letters of the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful
sound patterns
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
language structures to enhance their
understanding of how to communicate ideas The teacher should show a story, “Play With Me” by
with purpose and focus Michelle Lee
https://www.google.com/search?q=children%27s+read
+aloud+play+a+game+with+me&rlz=1C5GCCM_en&
oq=children%27s+read+aloud+play+a+game+with+m
e&gs_lcrp=EgZjaHJvbWUyBggAEEUYOTIHCAEQIR
29
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts – Reading and Viewing igATIHCAIQIRigAdIBCTEwNjUwajBqN6gCALACA
A&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist 8#fpstate=ive&vld=cid:31248667,vid:mb_2Jlf-OL0,st:0
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.3, 2.4,
2.3 connect background knowledge to the 2.5, 2.7, 2.9, 2.10, 2.11, 2,14 and 2.15 based on The children must discuss the different games that Pip
titles and pictures of fiction and nonfiction observation and conversation with the learners. wanted to play, and the reactions that Nico had. The
passages to build a foundation of teacher can link the discussion to the Social Studies
understanding outcomes, how did Pip and Nico show responsible,
2.4 develop understanding and application of caring behaviour towards each other?
the Concepts of Print
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose The children will begin work on a mural showing
and variety of texts that are read or read to children playing different games with different people.
them The teacher will provide time for children to work on
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some this mural on all week, adding detail, perhaps adding
environmental print and pictorial information some labels. The title across the top of the mural might
2.9 Demonstrate understanding by be “Who Do I Play With?”
responding to read-alouds with images,
model making, discussions, or temporary
writing.
2.10 Connect words and images in pre-
emergent and emergent level texts to
background knowledge
2.11 Recognise and use a variety of high
frequency words of personal importance,
such as names and pre-emergent level high-
frequency words
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with
those of personal importance
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages
30
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Writing and Representing Language Arts: Product
3.2 Assign meaning to experimental drawing The labels the children put on the mural will
and writing provide the teacher with information regarding the
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and children’s development of LA outcomes in Writing
real and imagined topics and Representing.
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools
to assist in writing process The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.3,
letters of the alphabet 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and
3.6 Connect spoken language(s) to written conversation with the learners.
language and other representations (e.g.
drawings)
3.7 Connect phonological awareness to letter
shapes
3.8 Spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly
Mathematics – Number Sense Mathematics- Observation and Conversation
1.1.1 say the number sequence to 10 by 1s The teacher will enter information into the checklist
1.1.8 count with meaning to 10, by building for Number Sense Outcomes 1.1.1 and 1.1.8 based
quantities on observation and conversation with the learners.
Social Studies – Myself – Civic Social Studies- Observation and Conversation
Participation
2.7. express how my behaviour in groups and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
the behaviour of others affects me and others for Myself – Civic Participation Outcomes 2.7 and
2.12 demonstrate responsible caring 2.12 based on observation and conversation with
behaviour towards others in play the learners.
31
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts – Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Social Studies, Science, Language Arts,
Mathematics: Games with Shapes and Ramps
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will pose “”problems” for the children to
others and with oral stories and information 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and solve.
sharing. conversation with the learners.
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to The teacher will review 2D shapes by drawing the shapes
interact with a variety of audiences with on the white board (squares, circles, triangles).
sensitivity and respect
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher Problem 1: The teacher will create large shapes on the
and children who have diverse interests, floor with tape. In partners, the children will be asked to
backgrounds and languages roll a small ball (or car) along the paths. The teacher will
1.5 become aware of how effective listening stop the games and hold a discussion about the
enhances understanding challenges the children had and how they solved their
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard problems. How did they need to push the ball or car?
English develops, share their thoughts, How did they use a “push” to stop the car? Was there
feelings and questions about engaging events, one shape that was the hardest to follow? (Science).
stories and conversations with increasing Did they need to cooperate with their partner? How did
confidence one partner’s behaviour make a difference to the other
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when partner? What “responsibilities” did the players have?
sharing stories or experiences The teacher should mention examples of children
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and demonstrating caring, responsible behaviour while they
language structures to enhance their played this game with their partner. (Social Studies).
understanding of how to communicate ideas
with purpose and focus
Language Arts – Reading and Viewing
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.7,
2.4 develop understanding and application of 2.11, 2.12, 2.13 and 2.14 based on observation and
the Concepts of Print conversation with the learners.
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
environmental print and pictorial information
32
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.11 Recognise and use a variety of high
frequency words of personal importance,
such as names and pre-emergent level high- Problem 2: The teacher will collect cardboard tubes and
frequency words boxes. The children will also need balls (or toy cars) of a
2.12 Participate in shared reading and use the size to fit through the tube. The teacher will show the
meaning and flow of the language to children some ways to make ramps (propping up the
anticipate upcoming words tubes or box). In partners, or groups of 3, the children
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and will be asked to make a ball (or car) go down a ramp.
phrasing during shared reading, independent They can change the slope of the ramp, the length of the
and guided reading of emergent level length of the ramp, etc. The teacher will stop the games
passages and hold a discussion about the challenges the children
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter had and how they solved their problems. How did they
names and letter sounds, beginning with set up their ramp so it stayed in place? How did they
those of personal importance need to push the ball or car? How did they use a “push”
to stop the car? (Science). Did they need to cooperate
Language Arts - Writing and Representing with their partners? How did one partner’s behaviour
make a difference to the other partners? What
3.1 use shared ideas to co-construct stories The teacher will enter information into the checklist “responsibilities” did the players have? The teacher
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.1, 3.2, should mention examples of children demonstrating
and writing 3.3, 3.4, 3.6 and 3.7 based on observation and caring, responsible behaviour while they played this game
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and conversation with the learners. with their partner. (Social Studies).
real and imagined topics*
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools
to assist in writing process*
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written
language and other representations (e.g.
drawings)
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
shapes
Mathematics – Geometrical Thinking Mathematics- Observation and Conversation
4.2.1 identify and describe shapes (2-D = The teacher will enter information into the checklist
squares, circles, triangles, 3-D = cubes, for Geometrical Thinking Outcomes 4.2.1 and 4.2.3
cones, and spheres).
33
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4.2.3 correctly name shapes regardless of their based on observation and conversation with the
orientations or overall size (2-D = squares, learners.
circles, triangles, 3-D = cubes, cones, and
spheres).
Science – Forces and Interactions – Science – Observation and Conversation
Pushes and Pulls
1.2 analyse data to determine if a design The teacher will enter information into the checklist
solution works as intended to change the for Forces and Interactions: Pushes and Pulls
speed or direction of an object with a push or Outcome 1.2 based on observation and
a pull. conversation with the learners.
Social Studies – Myself – Civic Social Studies- Observation and Conversation
Participation
2.7. express how my behaviour in groups and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
the behaviour of others affects me and others for Myself – Civic Participation Outcomes 2.7, 2.8
2.8 appreciate that members of groups to and 2.12 based on observation and conversation
which I belong have responsibilities with the learners.
2.12 demonstrate responsible caring
behaviour towards others in play
After doing the Science problems, the teacher will write a
“news story” about the children’s experiences (Shared
Writing and Shared Reading). The children and the
teacher will revisit this news story several times
throughout the unit. If the teacher took some photos of
34
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
the children playing the games, those photos could be
printed and put up with the “story”.
The teacher will use sight words for this unit: “said, they,
good, into, with”, and other sight words developed
throughout the year.
Example of a short story the teacher could write:
We played with cars and balls. The cars and balls went along
some shapes. The cars and balls went into a tunnel. The children
said they had a good time!
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Social Studies: Invited Guest –
Who do you play with?
1.2 demonstrates interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will invite a resource person to talk about a
others and with oral stories and information 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and game they play with a team. This resource person could
sharing. conversation with the learners. be someone in the school, a parent, an adult friend, or
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to even the teacher. The teacher would ask the resource
interact with a variety of audiences with person to describe the game they play, who is on their
sensitivity and respect team, maybe show some photos or a video of that game.
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher What special things do they need to play their game? Do
and children who have diverse interests, they have a uniform? Do they practice together?
backgrounds and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening The resource person should be asked what makes a good
enhances understanding “team player”. How does one player’s behaviour make a
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard difference to other players on the team? What
English develops, share their thoughts, responsibilities do the team members have? How do all
feelings and questions about engaging events, the members on the team stay safe?
stories and conversations with increasing
confidence The children will be invited to share if they play on a
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when team and what their experiences are being a “team
sharing stories or experiences player”.
35
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and After the guests has gone, the teacher will hold a
language structures to enhance their discussion with the children about what they learned
understanding of how to communicate ideas about playing on a team and then the children will
with purpose and focus complete a response, as below.
Language Arts – Reading and Viewing
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high The teacher will enter information into the checklist
frequency words of personal importance, such for Reading and Viewing Outcome 2.11 based on
Name:__________
as names and pre-emergent level high- observation and conversation with the learners.
frequency words
Language Arts - Writing and Representing
GAMES
Speaker’s Response
3.2 Assign meaning to experimental drawing The teacher will enter information into the checklist
and writing for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.3,
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and
real and imagined topics conversation with the learners.
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools I learned….________
to assist in writing process __________________________________________
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case _________________________
letters of the alphabet
3.6 Connect spoken language(s) to written Language Arts: Product
language and other representations (e.g. The Guest Speaker Response sheet will provide the
drawings) teacher with data regarding the children’s
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter development of LA outcomes in Writing and
shapes Representing.
3.8 Spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly
Social Studies – Myself – Civic Social Studies- Observation and Conversation
Participation
2.7. express how my behaviour in groups and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
the behaviour of others affects me and others for Myself – Civic Participation Outcomes 2.7, 2.8,
36
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.8 appreciate that members of groups to 2.11 and 2.12 based on observation and
which I belong have responsibilities conversation with the learners.
2.11 appreciate that being safe from harm
also means that they must learn to play safely
2.12 demonstrate responsible caring
behaviour towards others in play
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Social Studies, Mathematics – Who
Can Play this Game?
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will ask the children if all people can play
others and with oral stories and information 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and every game. The teacher will ask the children to explain
sharing. conversation with the learners. why they answered “yes” or why they answered “no”, to
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to extend the discussion. The teacher will ask, “What if
interact with a variety of audiences with your friend wanted to play with you, but they didn’t
sensitivity and respect know how to play that game? What would you do?”
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher
and children who have diverse interests, The teacher will share a video/book that shows one time
backgrounds and languages that a friend was not able to play a certain game. But,
1.5 become aware of how effective listening after some thought, the group of friends found a way for
enhances understanding all of them to play. The teacher will follow suggested
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard strategies for Read Alouds (Please see Curriculum Outcomes
English develops, share their thoughts, and Guide for Effective Strategies).
feelings and questions about engaging events,
stories and conversations with increasing Can I Play Too?, by Mo Willems
confidence https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8vbr81Vf9Hc
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
language structures to enhance their
understanding of how to communicate ideas
with purpose and focus
37
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts – Reading and Viewing
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.3, 2.4,
2.3 connect background knowledge to the 2.5, 2.7, 2.9, 2.10 and 2.15 based on observation and
titles and pictures of fiction and nonfiction conversation with the learners.
passages to build a foundation of
understanding
2.4 develop understanding and application of
the Concepts of Print
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose
and variety of texts that are read or read to
them
After the story, the teacher will hold a discussion asking
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
questions such as:
environmental print and pictorial information
2.9 demonstrate understanding by - What game did Elephant and Piggie want to play?
responding to read-alouds with images, - Who wanted to play with them?
model making, discussions, or temporary - What was the problem?
writing. - How did the three friends try to solve the problem?
2.10 connect words and images in pre- - What was the last way that they found to play
emergent and emergent level texts to together?
background knowledge - Do you think that was a good solution for playing
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode together?
upcoming words in emergent level passages
The teacher will help the children to relate what the
Mathematics – Geometrical Thinking Mathematics- Observation and Conversation friends in the story did, to what each child needs to
understand when they are playing: each child needs to
4.2.1 identify and describe shapes (2-D = The teacher will enter information into the checklist feel safe, players need to demonstrate responsible caring
squares, circles, triangles, 3-D = cubes, for Geometrical Thinking Outcomes 4.2.1 and 4.2.3 behaviour towards others; players need to play safely
cones, and spheres). based on observation and conversation with the
4.2.3 correctly name shapes regardless of their learners. Before playing a new game, the teacher will show
orientations or overall size (2-D = squares, examples and review 3D shapes: cubes, cones and
circles, triangles, 3-D = cubes, cones, and spheres.
spheres).
38
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Science - Forces and Interactions: Science – Observation and Conversation New Game Challenge – in partners, the children will use
Pushes and Pulls materials (from previous games in ILS) to set up a ramp.
Then, the children will need to find a way to move the
1.2 analyse data to determine if a design The teacher will enter information into the checklist 3D shapes down a ramp.
solution works as intended to change the for Forces and Interactions: Pushes and Pulls
speed or direction of an object with a push or Outcome 1.2 based on observation and After trying this challenge, the children will come
a pull. conversation with the learners. together to discuss what the “problem” was and how
they solved it.
Social Studies – Myself – Civic Social Studies- Observation and Conversation
Participation
2.9 recognize that all children have the right The teacher will enter information into the checklist
to be safe from harm for Myself – Civic Participation Outcome 2.9, 2.11
2.11 appreciate that being safe from harm and 2.12 based on observation and conversation
also means that they must learn to play safely with the learners.
2.12 demonstrate responsible caring
behaviour towards others in play
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Social Studies – Team Players
1.2 demonstrates interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist Team Player – Video with five short examples of
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, children playing different games and learning how to be
others and with oral stories and information 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and caring and responsible friends
sharing. conversation with the learners. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BGmfyWLoifs
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to
interact with a variety of audiences with The teacher could show one of these short clips and
sensitivity and respect discuss with the children each day of this week of the
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher Integrated Unit. The focus would be on “Who do you
and children who have diverse interests, play with?” and “What makes a good team player?” The
backgrounds and languages teacher would make sure to have the children relate to
1.5 become aware of how effective listening the Social Studies outcomes.
enhances understanding
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard The teacher could highlight sight words and
English develops, share their thoughts, letters/sounds that fit with each short video.
feelings and questions about engaging events,
39
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
stories and conversations with increasing The children could draw a picture so they will remember
confidence each little story; and add some labels with the pictures.
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when At the end of the week, staple each child’s pictures into a
sharing stories or experiences booklet with a title page, author. These booklets could
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and go into the class library for children to practice reading
language structures to enhance their and viewing.
understanding of how to communicate ideas
with purpose and focus
Language Arts – Reading and Viewing
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.5, 2.7 and
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose 2.8 based on observation and conversation with the
and variety of texts that are read or read to learners.
them
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
environmental print and pictorial information
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to
visualize, predict and connect
Language Arts - Writing and Representing
Language Arts: Product
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing
The labels the children add to their pictures will
and writing
provide the teacher with information regarding the
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and
children’s development of LA outcomes in Writing
real and imagined topics
and Representing.
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools
to assist in writing process
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case
The teacher will enter information into the checklist
letters of the alphabet
for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.3,
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written
3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and
language and other representations (e.g.
conversation with the learners.
drawings)
40
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter Language Arts: Product
shapes
3.8 spell name and some words of personal The pictures, with labels, that the children create
importance correctly will provide the teacher with data regarding the
children’s development of LA outcomes in Writing
and Representing, plus SCO 2.9 from Reading and
Viewing
Social Studies – Myself – Civic Social Studies- Observation and Conversation
Participation
2.7. express how my behaviour in groups and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
the behaviour of others affects me and others for Myself – Civic Participation Outcomes 2.7, 2.8,
2.8 appreciate that members of groups to 2.9, 2.10, 2.11 and 2.12 based on observation and
which I belong have responsibilities conversation with the learners.
2.9 recognize that all children have the right
to be safe from harm
2.10 list examples of what helps children feel
safe
2.11 appreciate that being safe from harm
also means that they must learn to play safely
2.12 demonstrate responsible caring
behaviour towards others in play
41
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts: Reassessing Previous Checklists End of week: Who do you play with?
Mathematics: The teacher might want to use the assessment Review the week’s ILS and the initial conversation
strategy tools used throughout the week to reassess about the week’s question.
Science learners for new knowledge/improvements.
The teacher should ask the children if they know of a
Social Studies: The teacher will make notes in the anecdotal notes game where they need to “pull” on something. One
area (with dates) of learners who may have been answer is: Tug’o War. The teacher could show a video,
able to master the concept by the end of the week. or photos of this kind of game/context. The teacher
should ask: Do you think the players are working hard?
Are they working together? How are they standing?
What happens for one team to win? Are they wearing
uniforms? Could they get hurt when playing this game?
How do the players stay safe? Are they having fun (link
back to the Essential Question for this unit: Are all
games fun?”)
Caribbean Maritime University Sports Day 2024
https://www.google.com/search?q=carribean+maritime
+university+sports+day+2024+tug+of+war&rlz=1C5G
CCM_en&oq=carribean+maritime+university+sports+
day+2024+tug+of+war&gs_lcrp=EgZjaHJvbWUyBggA
EEUYOTIJCAEQIRgKGKABMgkIAhAhGAoYoAHS
AQkxMTA2M2owajSoAgCwAgE&sourceid=chrome&i
e=UTF-8#vhid=PIMmTNHVPmX0fM&vssid=l&ip=1
42
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
43
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The teacher could take the children outside to play some
games of tug ‘o war. The teacher would discuss how the
children need to behave to stay safe. The teacher could
ask the children what they need to feel safe when playing
tug ‘o war. Children could play in partners with a
skipping rope; and in small teams with a heavier rope.
Parents could be invited to come and participate.
Additional Resources
A Little Spot of Teamwork by Diane Alber. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1LlV6HulH-I
It’s Great to Work Together (Storytime with Suzanne) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CV-vh1ABeDQ
44
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Useful Content for the Teacher
Next Generation Science Standards (https://www.nextgenscience.org/sites/default/files/AllDCI.pdf)
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies
are open-ended (rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for
Effective Strategies.
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies
are open-ended (rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for
Effective Strategies.
45
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
III. WEEK THREE
Essential Question: Are all games fun?
Question for Week Three: Where do I play games?
Language Arts – Plans for the Unit – Week Three
The teacher will be observing for children’s Concepts of Print. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for a list of Concepts
of Print.
The letters/sounds j, q, u, v will be the focus. The teacher should do some “stand-alone” lessons to introduce the children to these letters/sounds.
Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for teaching children letters/sounds.
Phonemic Awareness skills will commence and the focal point will be on initial phoneme isolation in words related to this Integrated Unit, such as
judge, juggle, quiet, quick, umpire, up, volleyball and very. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for
engaging learners in phonemic awareness skills
The high frequency (sight) words such as said, where, she, they, was, went, will, yes, eat, good, have, into, new, now, there, this, with
will be the focus. The teacher might do some “stand-alone lessons” to introduce these words. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
Strategies for many ideas for teaching high frequency words.
The teacher is encouraged to find opportunities to emphasize those letters/sounds/phonemes/high frequency words with the children
throughout the Integrated Learning Strategies for the unit.
46
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Mathematics– Introduction to
Week 3
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, Question for the week: Where do I play games?
others and with oral stories and information 1.5, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.10 based on observation and
sharing. conversation with the learners. The teacher will link back to the previous 2 weeks of this
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to Integrated Unit by doing a Gallery Walk, revisit and
interact with a variety of audiences with discuss the posters, paintings, etc. that were created and
sensitivity and respect displayed in the classroom:– What games do I like to
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher play? Who do I play with? How many different people
and children who have diverse interests, do the children play with? How many different games
backgrounds and languages do the children play? (incidental counting when children
1.5 become aware of how effective listening answer these questions- Mathematics).
enhances understanding
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard Introduce the question for this week: Where do I play
English develops, share their thoughts, games? Children will provide answers, with the teacher
feelings and questions about engaging events, probing for more answers, perhaps with small hints (e.g.
stories and conversations with increasing do you play games at school?)
confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when The teacher will make a chart/graph with the children
sharing stories or experiences (Shared Writing – Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness Guide for Effective Strategies for suggestions and guidance).
activities and word play to discriminate
between various sounds in their environment, As the children provide ideas of where they play games,
letters of the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful the teacher will print the possible places along the top of
sound patterns the chart to make a graph. The teacher will encourage
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and the children to help with letters/sounds while the teacher
language structures to enhance their prints the words. Once the list is complete, the children
understanding of how to communicate ideas will go up and put a sticky dot where they play games
with purpose and focus (doesn’t have to be where they LIKE to play games, just
WHERE they play games); each child can put many dots
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing up – or, the teacher can ask children to raise their hand,
count how many play games in the kitchen (for example),
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist put that number of dots to represent the children, and
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.7, then also count up the dots and print the numeral.
47
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.4 develop understanding and application of 2.8, 2.11, 2.14 and 2.15 based on observation and
the Concepts of Print conversation with the learners. Do adults play games in the same places as children?
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some No? Yes? Where? Do adults play games in some places
environmental print and pictorial information where children do not play games? No? Yes? Where?
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies
to visualize, predict and connect * If children have not suggested that games are played in
2.11 recognise and use a variety of high the water, the teacher could ask: Are all games played on
frequency words of personal importance, land?
such as names and pre-emergent level high-
frequency words Riddles: The teacher will demonstrate how to make up
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter a riddle and ask the children: e.g. I am playing a game. I
names and letter sounds, beginning with am getting hot from the sun. Where am I playing? The
those of personal importance children will work in partners to make up a riddle, they
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode will practice saying it with their partner, then they will
upcoming words in emergent level passages ask the riddle to the full group. The children will try to
answer where the game is being played, and what the
Language Arts - Writing and Language Arts: Product game could be. There will be many possible answers to
Representing these riddles, showing the children that many games may
be played in many different places.
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing The sentences the children write on the bottom of
and writing their pictures will provide the teacher with data Learners will draw (or paint) a picture of themselves
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas regarding the children’s development of LA playing in their favourite place. Children will be
and real and imagined topics outcomes in Writing and Representing. encouraged to print a sentence about their picture at the
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom bottom of the page. After, the learners will take turns
tools to assist in writing process telling their classmates about their drawing. Display
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case drawings on the classroom wall.
letters of the alphabet The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.3,
language and other representations (e.g. 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and
drawings) conversation with the learners.
3.7 Connect phonological awareness to letter
shapes
3.8 spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly.
48
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Mathematics – Number Sense Mathematics – Number Sense – Observation
and Conversation
1.1.1 say the number sequence to 10 by 1s
The teacher will enter information into the checklist
for Number Sense Outcome 1.1.1 based on
observation and conversation with the learners.
Mathematics - Data Management and Mathematics - Data Management and
Probability Probability – Observation and Conversation
6.1.3 use counting to determine the number of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
objects in a group. for Data Management and Probability Outcome
6.1.3 based on observation and conversation with
the learners.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts/ Social Studies: Indoors/Outdoors
– Natural or Built Environment
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity,
The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of
for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will refer to the chart created in the ILS
others and with oral stories and information
1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and above. Ask the children to categories those places as
sharing.
conversation with the learners. indoor and/or outdoor places. The teacher could put a
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to
star with a marker on the chart – blue star for indoors;
interact with a variety of audiences with
red star for outdoors. Perhaps some games may be
sensitivity and respect
played either indoors or outdoors. Which games can
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher
only be played outdoors? (This is a Shared Reading
and children who have diverse interests,
experience. Please refer to the Curriculum Outcomes and
backgrounds and languages
Guide for Effective Strategies)
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
enhances understanding
Have the children share with the class whether they
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
prefer playing indoors or outdoors and why.
English develops, share their thoughts,
feelings and questions about engaging events,
Teach the children the concept of Natural and Built
stories and conversations with increasing
features of the local environment, providing examples,
confidence
and then asking questions, and then asking the children
49
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when to give an example of a built feature of the local
sharing stories or experiences environment or a natural feature of the environment.
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
language structures to enhance their The teacher will invite the children to look through
understanding of how to communicate ideas magazines for pictures of Natural and Built features, cut
with purpose and focus out the pictures and paste on a big poster with the title:
Natural and Built Features of our Environment:
Language Arts: Writing and Representing Language Arts: Writing and Representing Where do we Play? (An alternative might be finding
images on-line of Natural and Built features). The
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing The labels the children print on the poster will teacher will encourage the children to print labels under
and writing provide the teacher with information about their the pictures they put on the poster (such as “road” or
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas Writing and Representing skills. “tree”).
and real and imagined topics
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom The teacher will enter information into the checklist The teacher will ensure that the children realize that they
tools to assist in writing process for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.3, are part of a wider environment.
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case 3.4, 3.5, 3.6 and 3.8 based on observation and
letters of the alphabet conversation with the learners.
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written
language and other representations (e.g.
drawings)
3.8 spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly.
Social Studies – Myself - Spatial Thinking Social Studies - Observation and Conversation
3.4. identify natural and built features of the Complete checklist for Myself – Spatial Thinking
local environment Outcomes 3.4 and 3.6 through observation and
3.6 appreciate that they are part of a wider conversation with learners
environment
50
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Mathematics and Social Studies –
Pete the Cat Plays Hide and Seek Read Aloud
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity,
The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of
for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will explain to learners that they will be
others and with oral stories and information
1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and listening to the story Pete the Cat Plays Hide and
sharing.
conversation with the learners. Seek by Kimberly and James Dean
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to
interact with a variety of audiences with
https://youtu.be/ci3cgtxDkLw?si=ocq68ZvvOeMo
sensitivity and respect
FMdG
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher
and children who have diverse interests,
backgrounds and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
enhances understanding
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
English develops, share their thoughts,
feelings and questions about engaging events,
stories and conversations with increasing
confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences
Please consult the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
for Effective Strategies for guidance on conducting
language structures to enhance their
Read-Alouds.
understanding of how to communicate ideas
with purpose and focus
Give the children guidelines for effective listening. Stop
to point out various tricky things in the photos, and to
Language Arts - Reading and Viewing
ask a few clarifying questions. Tell the children that they
will be discussing the story after.
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of
The teacher will enter information into the checklist Let’s Talk About the Story!
genres and text forms
for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.3, 2.4,
2.3 connect background knowledge to the
2.5, 2.8, 2.9 and 2.10 based on observation and Have learners talk about what they heard in the story.
titles and pictures of fiction and nonfiction
conversation with the learners. Give them guidelines for the discussion.
passages to build a foundation of
understanding
51
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.4 develop understanding and application of Discussion questions:
the Concepts of Print
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose What game was Pete playing? What was the objective of
and variety of texts that are read or read to the game? What animals were in the story? What other
them things did you observe in the story? Was Pete having
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies fun? Were the other friends having fun? (Link to the
to visualize, predict and connect * Essential Question of the unit: Are all games fun?)
2.9 Demonstrate understanding by
responding to read-alouds with images, Show/Read the story again and stop on each page to ask
model making, discussions, or temporary the children to identify the Natural and the Built features
writing. in the environment.
2.10 Connect words and images in pre-
emergent and emergent level texts to Show/Read the story third time (doesn’t need to be the
background knowledge same day) and ask children to find 3D shapes in the
illustrations (spheres, cones, cubes). The teacher will
Language Arts - Writing and Language Arts – Product help the children see that the swimming pool is like a
Representing cube, and in the drawing it’s like a square. The slide is
like a cone, and in the drawing it’s like a triangle. The
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing The teacher will have evidence of some outcomes top of the tree is like a sphere, and in the drawing it’s like
and writing because the children will be labelling the shapes and a circle. The difference between 2D and 3D will be the
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas items on their paper depicting items in the Natural emphasized in this lesson. In the book, the object is 2D,
and real and imagined topics or Built environment. 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.8 in real life the object is 3D.
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom
tools to assist in writing process The teacher will provide the children with cut out circles,
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case The teacher will enter information into the checklist triangles, and squares and ask them to glue the shapes
letters of the alphabet for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.3, onto a paper to represent items in the Natural or Built
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written 3.4, 3.5, 3.6 and 3.8 based on observation and environment. The teacher will model some ideas first.
language and other representations (e.g. conversation with the learners. The children will be encourage to label the items they
drawings) create (e.g. “tree”, or “bike”).
3.8 spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly.
52
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Mathematics – Geometrical Thinking Mathematics - Observation and Conversation
4.2.1 identify and describe shapes (2-D = The teacher will enter information into the checklist
squares, circles, triangles, 3-D = cubes, for Geometrical Thinking Outcomes 4.2.1 and 4.2.3
cones, and spheres). based on observation and conversation with the
4.2.3 correctly name shapes regardless of their learners.
orientations or overall size (2-D = squares,
circles, triangles, 3-D = cubes, cones, and
spheres).
Social Studies: Spatial Thinking Social Studies - Observation and Conversation
3.4. identify natural and built features of the
local environment The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.5. illustrate natural and built features of the for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcomes 3.4, 3.5
local environment and 3.6 based on observation and conversation with
3.6 appreciate that they are part of a wider the learners.
environment
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Mathematics and Social Studies
Where Can I Hide? Suggested Game: Hide-and-
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity,
The teacher will enter information into the checklist Seek
engagement in sharing the experiences of
for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4,
others and with oral stories and information
1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.10 based on observation Before playing a game of Hide and Seek with learners,
sharing.
and conversation with the learners. the teacher will discuss ideas based on the Social Studies
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to
SCOs 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 2.10, 2.16, 2.18 - listed in Column 1.
interact with a variety of audiences with
Ask for experiences from the learners and ideas of how
sensitivity and respect
to behave when playing a game. What safety measures
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher
should be in place?
and children who have diverse interests,
backgrounds and languages
Set up the game of Hide and Seek. Give the children a
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
geographical boundary for the game that includes indoor
enhances understanding
and outdoor (if this fits with the school/classroom
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation
setting). Ensure that it is a safe space. Give learners a
impact meaning and mood
signal word or sound for returning to the class. Ask
other teachers to help you supervise learners. One
53
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard learner will count to ten either forward or backwards and
English develops, share their thoughts, learners will hide. Seeker will find learners.
feelings and questions about engaging events,
stories and conversations with increasing Note: If it is not possible or safe to play the game the
confidence class can discuss where learners could hide if they were
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when playing the game. They could discuss where the game
sharing stories or experiences was played. What makes a place good for a hide and
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness seek game?
activities and word play to discriminate
between various sounds in their environment, Have a discussion with learners after the Hide-and-Seek
letters of the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful activity-
sound patterns
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and Where did you hide? The teacher will make a list. What
language structures to enhance their objects were good for hiding and why? Have learners
understanding of how to communicate ideas describe these objects- colour, shape etc.
with purpose and focus What did you see when you were hiding? Ask learners to
demonstrate with their bodies whether they hid below,
Language Arts: Reading and Viewing above, behind, beside or next to these objects Ask the
children which shapes were natural and which shapes
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high The teacher will enter information into the checklist were built.
frequency words of personal importance, for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1 and 2.14 (When the teacher makes a list of places the children hid,
such as names and pre-emergent level high- based on observation and conversation with the this is a Shared Writing experience. Please consult the
frequency words learners. Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter further guidance on ways to enhance the children’s skill
names and letter sounds, beginning with development during this kind of ILS)
those of personal importance
Writing and Representing Think-Pair-Share: Is it natural or built (man-made)?
3.1 use shared ideas to co-construct stories The teacher will enter information into the checklist Learners will work with a partner to draw and then make
3.2 Assign meaning to experimental drawing for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.1, 3.2, cut-outs of five objects from the list in the previous
and writing 3.4, 3.6 and 3.7 based on observation and activity. Partners will discuss whether each cut out
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools conversation with the learners. represents something natural or built by people. Learners
to assist in writing process will place their cut outs in one of two baskets or boxes
labelled Natural or Made by People. Learners will
54
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.6 Connect spoken language(s) to written explain the reason for their decision. Have peers decide
language and other representations (e.g. whether they agree or disagree, giving a reason for their
drawings) answer. Clarify any misconceptions or errors.
3.7 Connect phonological awareness to letter
shapes
Mathematics – Geometrical Thinking Mathematics - Observation and Conversation
4.2.2 describe objects in the environment The teacher will enter information into the checklist
using names of shapes and describe the for Geometrical Thinking Outcomes 4.2.2 based on
relative positions of these objects using terms observation and conversation with the learners.
such as above, below, beside, in front of,
behind, and next to.
Social Studies – Myself – Civic Social Studies - Observation and Conversation
Participation
2.7 express how my behaviour in groups and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
the behaviour of others affects me and others for Myself – Civic Participation Outcomes 2.7, 2.8,
(S) 2.9, 2.10, 2.16 and 2.18 based on observation and
2.8 appreciate that members of groups to conversation with the learners.
which I belong have responsibilities (V)
2.9 recognize that all children have the right
to be safe from harm (K)
2.10 list examples of what helps children feel
safe (S)
2.16 know why we have rules in groups to
which I belong (e.g. family, class at school)
(K)
2.18 demonstrate examples of responsible
and polite behaviour in groups to which I
belong (V)
55
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial
Thinking
3.4. identify natural and built features of the The teacher will enter information into the checklist
local environment for Myself – Spatial Thinking Outcomes 3.4, 3.5
3.5. illustrate natural and built features of the and 3.6 based on observation and conversation with
local environment the learners.
3.6 appreciate that they are part of a wider
environment
Language Arts – Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Mathematics, Language Arts, Social Studies – Hot
or Cold Game
1.1 listen to music, conversation and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
environmental sounds for personal enjoyment for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, The teacher will review the concepts of natural and built
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation features of the environment. The teacher will hold up
engagement in sharing the experiences of and conversation with the learners. several small toys and ask if this represents a natural or a
others and with oral stories and information built item (toy car, small ball, plastic orange, toy house,
sharing. toy garden rake, etc.). An interesting conversation may
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to happen, when the children realize that a toy car is built
interact with a variety of audiences with whether it is a toy or a “real” car, but a toy tree is
sensitivity and respect represents a natural feature of our environment.
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher
and children who have diverse interests, Hot or Cold Game
backgrounds and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening The teacher will show the children 3D objects of a cube,
enhances understanding a sphere, and a cone. Review the names of the shapes.
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation Add the 3D shapes to the basket of small toys (above).
impact meaning and mood
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard The group will play the Hot or Cold Game.
English develops, share their thoughts, One child (the “seeker”, chosen by the teacher) will leave
feelings and questions about engaging events, the room (or cover his/her eyes). The other children
stories and conversations with increasing must stay silent! One child (chosen by the teacher) will
confidence silently pick one of the 3D shapes and will hide the
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when object somewhere in the room. The child who has
sharing stories or experiences hidden the toy returns to sit. The child who has left the
56
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and room, or covered his/her eyes returns (the seeker) and
language structures to enhance their then slowly walks around the room. All the children use
understanding of how to communicate ideas “temperature” words to tell the “seeker” if they are close
with purpose and focus to the object (getting warmer) or moving away from it
(getting colder). When the seeker is really close to the
Mathematics – Geometrical Thinking Mathematics - Observation and Conversation object, the children might say “burning hot!” or when
the seeker is far away from the object, the children might
4.2.1 identify and describe shapes (2-D = The teacher will enter information into the checklist say “freezing cold!”
squares, circles, triangles, 3-D = cubes, for Geometrical Thinking Outcomes 4.2.1, 4.22 and
cones, and spheres) 4.2.3 based on observation and conversation with After the child finds the object, the child will describe
4.2.2 describe objects in the environment the learners. where the object was using words such as “above, below,
using names of shapes and describe the beside, in front of, behind, and next to”. The teacher
relative positions of these objects using terms will support the child in this.
such as above, below, beside, in front of,
behind, and next to (These two links explain the game for the teacher, with a
4.2.3 correctly name shapes regardless of their few variations. Then the teacher can explain the game to
orientations or overall size (2-D = squares, the children.)
circles, triangles, 3-D = cubes, cones, and
spheres) https://www.thegamegal.com/2012/03/31/hot-or-
cold/
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Social Studies - Observation and Conversation
Thinking https://www.google.com/search?q=hide+an+item+play
+hot+or+cold+with+clues+video&sca_esv=b5e39c184
3.4. identify natural and built features of the Complete checklist for Myself – Spatial Thinking 5ece73b&sca_upv=1&rlz=1C5GCCM_en&sxsrf=ADL
local environment Outcomes 3.4 and 3.5 through observation and YWIJz9rm8vUy9lqEtDc1ttGnT7nk_Tg%3A171794099
3.5. illustrate natural and built features of the conversation with learners 6368&ei=BLNlZsmcFqTdptQPxrOpgAg&ved=0ahUK
local environment EwjJrtX21M6GAxWkrokEHcZZCoAQ4dUDCBA&uac
t=5&oq=hide+an+item+play+hot+or+cold+with+clue
s+video&gs_lp=Egxnd3Mtd2l6LXNlcnAiLmhpZGUgY
W4gaXRlbSBwbGF5IGhvdCBvciBjb2xkIHdpdGggY2x
1ZXMgdmlkZW8yBRAhGKABMgUQIRigAUj1EFCF
B1iHDnABeAGQAQCYAYEBoAHbBKoBAzUuMbg
BA8gBAPgBAZgCB6ACgAXCAgoQABiwAxjWBBhH
wgIFECEYnwXCAgcQIRigARgKmAMAiAYBkAYIkg
cDMy40oAeDFw&sclient=gws-wiz-
57
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
serp#fpstate=ive&vld=cid:b62a170d,vid:R8lxZ54QH90,
st:0
After a few rounds of this Hot and Cold Game, the
teacher might link back to the questions for this unit:
Are all games fun? Did the seeker have fun? Did the
hider have fun? Did the children saying “hotter” or
“colder” have fun? Who could you play this game with?
Where could you play this game?
NOTE: Since it would take a long time for each child to
have a turn, this game might be played a few times
throughout the Games unit.
Language Arts: Reassessing Previous Checklists Week Three Culminating Activity: Outdoor Games
Day
Mathematics: The teacher might want to use the assessment
strategy tools used throughout the week to reassess Review the week’s ILS and the initial conversation
Social Studies: learners for new knowledge/improvements. about the week’s question: Where do I play games?
The teacher will make notes in the anecdotal notes Have learners plan a games day where they organize
area (with dates) of learners who may have been game centres (for example board games, video games,
able to master the concept by the end of the week. physical games such as hopscotch, skipping, tossing bean
bags.) Including the children in the planning will involve
making list of supplies, deciding who will play which
game, inviting parents or another class to join the event.
All of those steps will provide opportunities for
Language Arts and Mathematics skill development.
When the day comes, the learners will play games of
their choice, possibly with some invited visitors.
58
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Additional Resources
All resources to support the Inclusive Learning Strategies in this week are embedded in the ILS.
Useful Content for the Teacher
Next Generation Science Standards (https://www.nextgenscience.org/sites/default/files/AllDCI.pdf)
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies
are open-ended (rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for
Effective Strategies.
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies
are open-ended (rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for
Effective Strategies.
59
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
IV. WEEK FOUR
Essential Question: Are all games fun?
Question for Week Four: What do I need to play games?
Language Arts – Plans for the Unit – Week Four
The teacher will be observing for children’s Concepts of Print. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for a list of Concepts
of Print.
The letters/sounds j, q, u, v will be the focus. The teacher should do some “stand-alone” lessons to introduce the children to these letters/sounds.
Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for teaching children letters/sounds.
Phonemic Awareness skills will commence and the focal point will be on initial phoneme isolation in words related to this Integrated Unit, such as
judge, juggle, quiet, quick, umpire, up, volleyball and very. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for
engaging learners in phonemic awareness skills
The high frequency (sight) words such as said, where, she, they, was, went, will, yes, eat, good, have, into, new, now, there, this, with
will be the focus. The teacher might do some “stand-alone lessons” to introduce these words. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
Strategies for many ideas for teaching high frequency words.
The teacher is encouraged to find opportunities to emphasize those letters/sounds/phonemes/high frequency words with the children
throughout the Integrated Learning Strategies for the unit.
60
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts - Introduction to Week 4 – What do we
need to play games?
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in
The teacher will enter information into the checklist
sharing the experiences of others and with oral
for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will help the children to review the list of
stories and information sharing.
1.5, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.10 based on observation and games from Week One. (This is Shared Reading – the
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to
conversation with the learners. teacher will enlist the children’s knowledge of
interact with a variety of audiences with sensitivity
letters/sounds and sight words to help read the list). The
and respect
teacher will point to each of the games on the list, and ask
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and
“What do we need to play this game?” The teacher will
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds
start a list of what is needed to play games. (This is a
and languages
Shared Writing experience. Please consult the Curriculum
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for further guidance
enhances understanding
on ways to enhance the children’s skill development
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
during this kind of ILS).
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
and questions about engaging events, stories and
conversations with increasing confidence
Continue discussing what is needed for various games, and
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
adding the items to the list, next to the name of the game.
sharing stories or experiences
The children may start to see that many games need a ball;
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness
or many games need a way to keep score, or many games
activities and word play to discriminate between
need another person. The children might eventually
various sounds in their environment, letters of
realize that a person needs to know the rules or have some
the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful sound
skill in order to play a game.
patterns
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language
The teacher will ask if there are some games where you
structures to enhance their understanding of how
don’t need anything to play?
to communicate ideas with purpose and focus
The Memory Game only needs you and one friend (or
Language Arts – Reading and Viewing
more friends), and nothing else to play it.
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of
The teacher will enter information into the checklist Memory Game: The children will sit in a circle and play
genres and text forms
for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.5, the game. The first person might say, “I’m going to the
2.4 develop understanding and application of the
2.7, 2.8, 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14 and 2.15 based beach and I’m taking my towel”. The next person in the
Concepts of Print
on observation and conversation with the learners. circle needs to remember what the first person said, and
add one thing, e.g. “I’m going to the beach and I’m taking
61
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and my towel, and some sun screen.” The third person needs
variety of texts that are read or read to them to remember what the first two people said, and add
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some something new to the list. “I’m going to the beach and
environmental print and pictorial information I’m taking my towel, and some sunscreen, and my hat.”
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to This continues until someone cannot remember all of the
visualize, predict and connect items (others can help or provide hints). Then, the game
2.10 connect words and images in pre-emergent starts over, but it could be a different phrase, such as, “I’m
and emergent level texts to background going to have lunch and I will eat a banana...”
knowledge
2.11 recognise and use a variety of high The teacher asks the learners the essential question: Are all
frequency words of personal importance, such as games fun, then recaps the discussion of the question for
names and pre-emergent level high-frequency Week 4: What do I need to play games?
words (materials/tool/resources/skill).
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the
meaning and flow of the language to anticipate
upcoming words The teacher will send a note home, and ask for children to
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and phrasing bring in an item that they need to play a game. Invite the
during shared reading, independent and guided children to “Show and Tell” the item they brought in. For
reading of emergent level passages learners who do not bring in an item, they could describe
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter it orally. The children should explain what the game is,
names and letter sounds, beginning with those how to play it, how to use the item they brought in.
of personal importance
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode A few children per day could do this Show and Tell.
upcoming words in emergent level passages
Writing and Representing
3.1 use shared ideas to co-construct stories The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools to for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.1, 3.4,
assist in writing process* and 3.7 based on observation and conversation with
3.7 Connect phonological awareness to letter the learners.
shapes
62
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Social Studies and Mathematics –
Good Sportsmanship
1.2 demonstrates interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
in sharing the experiences of others and with oral for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, One thing that is needed to play a game so that everyone is
stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.10 based on observation having fun and is safe is good sportsmanship.
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to and conversation with the learners. The teacher will review good sportsmanship (based on the
interact with a variety of audiences with sensitivity Social Studies outcomes in the left column here). The
and respect teacher can remind the learners about the discussion about
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and Team Players in a previous week of this unit.
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds
and languages After reminding the children about good sportsmanship,
1.5 become aware of how effective listening the children will then play a series of games. Perhaps the
enhances understanding teacher will set a timer of 5-10 minutes, before the
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation children switch to a different game.
impact meaning and mood
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard Playing Games and Demonstrating Sportsmanship
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
and questions about engaging events, stories and • BINGO game- The teacher will create a BINGO
conversations with increasing confidence card with the numerals 1 – 6. The children will
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when take turns rolling the dice and will place a marker
sharing stories or experiences on that number rolled. (If the children know
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness what number of dots is on the dice without
activities and word play to discriminate between counting, that is called “subitizing” SCO 1.3.1)
various sounds in their environment, letters of
the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful sound • BEAN BAG TOSS- Find a bucket to be used as a
patterns
target – 2 children take turns tossing a bean bag to
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language
try to get it in the bucket. Whoever gets the bean
structures to enhance their understanding of how
bag in the bucket, gets one point The children
to communicate ideas with purpose and focus
need to have a scoring sheet to keep track of who
hits gets the bean bag in the bucket the most
Language Arts – Reading and Viewing times.
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist • SNAP – deck of cards (commercial or home-
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.5, made); children say “1, 2, 3” then turn over one
63
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.4 develop understanding and application of the 2.11 and 2.14 based on observation and card – if the number is the same on both cards,
Concepts of Print conversation with the learners. they go again; whoever has a higher number
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and collects the cards, continue until all cards are held
variety of texts that are read or read to them by one child.
2.11 recognise and use a variety of high
frequency words of personal importance, such as • COPY MY PATTERN – one child will create an
names and pre-emergent level high-frequency alternating pattern using body motions (e.g. could
words be jump, twirl, jump, twirl). . The other child will
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter copy the pattern and extend that pattern. Then
names and letter sounds, beginning with those the children switch roles.
of personal importance
• COMPUTER GAME – the teacher might have
Language Arts - Writing and Representing
one available for two children to play
3.1 use shared ideas to co-construct stories The teacher will enter information into the checklist After the children have played the games, the teacher will
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools to for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.1, 3.4, review the concept of good sportsmanship and tell
assist in writing process 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and examples of children who demonstrated good
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written conversation with the learners. sportsmanship while playing the games, ( For example, “I
language and other representations (e.g.
saw ... waiting for his turn”). The teacher will lead the
drawings)
children in a Shared Writing experience, making a list
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
called “What does a good sport do?”
shapes
3.8 spell name and some words of personal The list will be posted in the classroom for reference in the
importance correctly
upcoming days.
Mathematics – Number Sense Mathematics- Observation and Conversation
1.3.1 look briefly at a given familiar The teacher will enter information into the checklist
arrangement of one to five objects or dots and for Number Sense Outcomes 1.3.1 and 1.3.3 based
identify the number represented without on observation and conversation with the learners.
counting
1.3.3 compare the number of objects in two
sets of up to 10 objects, using phrases such as
‘same number as’, ‘equal’
64
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Mathematics – Pattern and Relationships
3.1.1 create simple repeating patterns (2 The teacher will enter information into the checklist
elements) for Pattern and Relationships Outcomes 3.1.1, 3.1.2,
3.1.2 extend simple repeating patterns (2 3.1.3, 3.1.4 and 3.1.5 based on observation and
elements) conversation with the learners.
3.1.3 copy a given repeating pattern
3.1.4 extend a variety of given repeating
patterns to two more repetitions
3.1.5 create a repeating pattern using
manipulatives, musical instruments, or actions
Social Studies – Myself – Civic Participation Social Studies - Observation and Conversation
2.7. express how my behaviour in groups and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
the behaviour of others affects me and others for Myself – Civic Participation Outcomes 2.7, 2.8,
2.8 appreciate that members of groups to which 2.11 and 2.21 based on observation and
I belong have responsibilities conversation with the learners.
2.11 appreciate that being safe from harm also
means that they must learn to play safely
2.12 demonstrate responsible caring behaviour
towards others in play
65
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Science: Read Aloud “Play Ball”
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in The teacher will enter information into the checklist The teacher will create a poster with this poem:
sharing the experiences of others and with oral for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4,
stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and Oh, what shall we do?
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners. Pick up a ball.
interact with a variety of audiences with sensitivity It’s time for fun.
and respect Let’s play, one and all.
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds This will be a Shared Reading experience (see the
and languages Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for
1.5 become aware of how effective listening guidance for enhancing Language Arts skills).
enhances understanding
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard The teacher and children will discuss what kind of games
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings they know that need a ball. What shape is a ball?
and questions about engaging events, stories and (Mathematics 3D shapes – a ball is actually called a
conversations with increasing confidence “sphere”).
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences The teacher will introduce the children to the following
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language book and follow strategies for effective Read-Alouds (see
structures to enhance their understanding of how Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies).
to communicate ideas with purpose and focus
Play Ball by Nancy Noel Williams
Reading and Viewing
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qere9edYaHY
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.2, 2.3,
2.2 develop questions when browsing through 2.4, 2.5, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14 and
passages of interest 2.15 based on observation and conversation with
2.3 connect background knowledge to the titles the learners.
and pictures of fiction and nonfiction passages
to build a foundation of understanding
2.4 develop understanding and application of the
Concepts of Print
66
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and The teacher will alert the children to pay attention to the
variety of texts that are read or read to them different kinds of balls, colours of balls, shapes of balls,
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some and sizes of balls. What else did the children need to play
environmental print and pictorial information those games? Maybe look at the book again to see if there
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to are things they didn’t remember. Compare with the list of
visualize, predict and connect things people need to play games (list made at the
2.9 demonstrate understanding by responding to beginning of this week).
read-alouds with images, model making,
discussions, or temporary writing. The teacher will review the ideas of “pushing” and help
2.10 connect words and images in pre-emergent the children see there are different ways to “push” a ball –
and emergent level texts to background with your foot, with a bat.
knowledge
2.11 recognise and use a variety of high The teacher and children will go outside and play games of
frequency words of personal importance, such as Dandy Shandy, or other familiar games using balls.
names and pre-emergent level high-frequency
words
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the
meaning and flow of the language to anticipate
upcoming words
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and phrasing
during shared reading, independent and guided
reading of emergent level passages
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with those
of personal importance
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages
Mathematics – Geometrical Thinking Mathematics- Observation and Conversation
4.2.1 identify and describe shapes (2-D = The teacher will enter information into the checklist
squares, circles, triangles, 3-D = cubes, cones, for Geometrical Thinking Outcomes 4.2.1 and 4.2.3
and spheres) based on observation and conversation with the
4.2.3 correctly name shapes regardless of their learners.
orientations or overall size (2-D = squares,
67
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
circles, triangles, 3-D = cubes, cones, and
spheres)
Science - Forces and Interactions: Pushes Science – Observation and Conversation
and Pulls
The teacher will enter information into the checklist
1.1.1 the child will understand that pushes for Forces and Interactions: Pushes and Pulls
can have different strengths and directions. Outcome 1.1.1, 1.1.2, 1.1.3 and 1.1.4 based on
1.1.2 the child will understand that pulls can observation and conversation with the learners.
have different strengths and directions.
1.1.3 pushing or pulling on an object can
change the speed or direction of its motion
1.1.4 pushing on an object can start or stop it.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts and Social Studies – Shared Writing of
a Story about playing a game of “tag”
1.2 demonstrates interest, curiosity, engagement
in sharing the experiences of others and with oral The teacher will enter information into the checklist The teacher and learners will be creating a poster with the
stories and information sharing. for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, title, “How to Play Tag”. The teacher and learners will
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to 1.5, 1.7, 1.9 and 1.10 based on observation and brainstorm ideas for what to include for each section of
interact with a variety of audiences with sensitivity conversation with the learners. the poster (guided by the questions in the example below).
and respect The teacher provides support so that a complete sentence
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and is ready and then the teacher prints the sentence, calling on
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds children for help with spelling, sounds, Concepts of Print
and languages (e.g. period at end of sentence). The children and the
1.5 become aware of how effective listening teacher will re-read the poster together. (This is a Shared
enhances understanding Writing experience. Please consult the Curriculum Outcomes
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard and Guide for Effective Strategies for further guidance on ways
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings to enhance the children’s skill development during this
and questions about engaging events, stories and kind of ILS).
conversations with increasing confidence
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness
activities and word play to discriminate between
various sounds in their environment, letters of
68
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful sound TITLE: How to Play Tag
patterns
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language How many children
structures to enhance their understanding of how can play in the game?
to communicate ideas with purpose and focus What is the role of
one person?
Language Arts – Reading and Viewing What do the other
children do?
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist Do the children need
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.4, 2.5, anything special to
2.4 develop understanding and application of the 2.7, 2.8, 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14 and 2.15 based play the game?
Concepts of Print on observation and conversation with the learners. How should the
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and children stay safe?
variety of texts that are read or read to them
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some The teacher will make individual copies of the poster for
environmental print and pictorial information each child to practice reading and to illustrate.
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to
visualize, predict and connect
2.10 Connect words and images in pre-
emergent and emergent level texts to
background knowledge
2.11 Recognise and use a variety of high
frequency words of personal importance, such as
names and pre-emergent level high-frequency
words
2.12 Participate in shared reading and use the
meaning and flow of the language to anticipate
upcoming words
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and phrasing
during shared reading, independent and guided
reading of emergent level passages
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with those
of personal importance
69
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages
Language Arts - Writing and Representing
3.1 use shared ideas to co-construct stories The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.2 Assign meaning to experimental drawing and for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.1, 3.2,
writing 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and and conversation with the learners.
real and imagined topics
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools to
assist in writing process
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case letters
of the alphabet
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written
language and other representations (e.g.
drawings)
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
shapes
3.8 spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly.
Social Studies – Myself – Civic Participation
Social Studies - Observation and Conversation
2.7. express how my behaviour in groups and
the behaviour of others affects me and others The teacher will enter information into the checklist
2.8 appreciate that members of groups to which for Myself – Civic Participation Outcomes 2.7. 2.8,
I belong have responsibilities 2.11 and 2.12 based on observation and
2.11 appreciate that being safe from harm also conversation with the learners.
means that they must learn to play safely
2.12 demonstrate responsible caring behaviour
towards others in play
70
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Mathematics – Making a Board
Game
1.2 demonstrates interest, curiosity, engagement The teacher will enter information into the checklist The teacher and children make up a board game (similar to
in sharing the experiences of others and with oral for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, the example shown here) with shapes drawn in the spots
stories and information sharing. 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and to land on, and dice to roll. The teacher and children will
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to conversation with the learners. decide the rules - What happens if someone lands on a
interact with a variety of audiences with sensitivity triangle? What happens if someone lands on a circle?
and respect What happens if someone lands on a square? Who rolls
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and the dice first? How does someone win?
children who have diverse interests, backgrounds The teacher and children will try out the game and see if
and languages all the rules have been set and make sense. The teacher
1.5 become aware of how effective listening and children might have a discussion about whether or not
enhances understanding the rules should be written down, so everyone remembers
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard them!
English develops, share their thoughts, feelings
and questions about engaging events, stories and https://stock.adobe.com/ca/search?k=game+board+tem
conversations with increasing confidence plate&asset_id=540062249
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language
structures to enhance their understanding of how
to communicate ideas with purpose and focus
Mathematics – Number Sense Mathematics- Observation and Conversation
1.3.1 look briefly at a given familiar arrangement The teacher will enter information into the checklist
of one to five objects or dots and identify the for Number Sense Outcome 1.3.1 based on
number represented without counting observation and conversation with the learners.
Mathematics – Geometrical Thinking
4.2.1 identify and describe shapes (2-D = The teacher will enter information into the checklist
squares, circles, triangles, 3-D = cubes, cones, for Geometrical Thinking Outcomes 4.2.1 and 4.2.3
and spheres). based on observation and conversation with the
learners.
71
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
4.2.3 correctly name shapes regardless of their
orientations or overall size (2-D = squares,
circles, triangles, 3-D = cubes, cones, and
spheres).
Mathematics: Reassessing Previous Checklists End of week: What do you need to play?
Social Studies: The teacher should use the assessment strategy Review the week’s ILS and the initial conversation
tools used throughout the week to reassess learners about the week’s question.
Language Arts for new knowledge/improvements.
And especially these Science outcomes - The teacher will make notes in the anecdotal notes The teacher will have gathered many items such as “loose
area (with dates) of learners who may have been parts” or “beautiful junk”. The teacher might have sent
Plan and conduct an investigation to compare able to master the concept by the end of the week. home a note asking parents to send some items in to the
the effects of different strengths or different class (clean milk cartons, buttons, short sticks, bits of
directions of pushes and pulls on the motion of twine or ribbon, bottle caps, etc.)
an object.
The teacher will provide tape, and will arrange the items in
1.1.1 the child will understand that pushes buckets, baskets, boxes for the children to access.
can have different strengths and directions.
1.1.2 the child will understand that pulls can
have different strengths and directions.
1.1.3 pushing or pulling on an object can
change the speed or direction of its motion
1.1.4 pushing on an object can start or stop it.
72
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Subject Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
The teacher will ask the children:
How can you use these things to make a game, where you
need to push something, or you need to pull something?
Groups of 2 children will work together. The teacher will
circulate and support!
If possible, some additional adults could be invited to
come in for this ILS
The children will take turns showing the others the game
they invented. They will discuss: What did you find
challenging? What was successful? In your game, do the
players need to “push” something? Do the players need to
“pull” something?
73
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Additional Resources
All resources to support the Inclusive Learning Strategies in this week are embedded in the ILS.
Useful Content for the Teacher
Next Generation Science Standards (https://www.nextgenscience.org/sites/default/files/AllDCI.pdf)
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies
are open-ended (rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for
Effective Strategies.
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies
are open-ended (rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for
Effective Strategies.
74
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
V. WEEK FIVE
Essential Question: Are all games fun?
Question for Week Five: How can I get better at playing games?
Language Arts – Plans for the Unit – Week Five
The teacher will be observing for children’s Concepts of Print. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for a list of Concepts
of Print.
The letters/sounds j, q, u, v will be the focus. The teacher should do some “stand-alone” lessons to introduce the children to these letters/sounds.
Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for teaching children letters/sounds.
Phonemic Awareness skills will commence and the focal point will be on initial phoneme isolation in words related to this Integrated Unit, such as
judge, juggle, quiet, quick, umpire, up, volleyball and very. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for many ideas for
engaging learners in phonemic awareness skills
The high frequency (sight) words such as said, where, she, they, was, went, will, yes, eat, good, have, into, new, now, there, this, with
will be the focus. The teacher might do some “stand-alone lessons” to introduce these words. Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
Strategies for many ideas for teaching high frequency words.
The teacher is encouraged to find opportunities to emphasize those letters/sounds/phonemes/high frequency words with the children
throughout the Integrated Learning Strategies for the unit.
75
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Speaking and Listening Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts - Introduction to Week 5 – How
can I get better at playing games?
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, Review the questions for the weeks of this unit:
others and with oral stories and information 1.5, 1.7, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.10 based on What games do I play?
sharing. observation and conversation with the learners. Who do I play games with?
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to Where do I play games?
interact with a variety of audiences with What do I need to play games?
sensitivity and respect
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher Then, ask the children and listen to their answers:
and children who have diverse interests, How can I get better at playing games? The
backgrounds and languages teacher might make a list of the ways that the children
1.5 become aware of how effective listening suggest for getting better at games. This would be a
enhances understanding Shared Writing experience: (Please see the Curriculum
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for ways to help
impact meaning and mood with LA skills such as sight words, letters/sounds,
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard Concepts of Print).
English develops, share their thoughts,
feelings and questions about engaging events, The teacher will ask: Are all games fun? Why are some
stories and conversations with increasing games not fun? Once again, the teacher will listen and
confidence accept all answers.
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences The teacher might say that one reason a game might
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness not be fun, and one way to get better at a game, is if
activities and word play to discriminate the child does not know the rules of the game. Have
between various sounds in their environment, the children ever had that happen to them? Then the
letters of the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful teacher will say they will be watching a book video
sound patterns where one character did not know all the rules. Prior to
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and watching the video, the teacher might ask if the
language structures to enhance their children know the rules for baseball. How is that game
understanding of how to communicate ideas played? Do the children know what “t-ball” is? After
with purpose and focus some initial discussion, the teacher might show the
video of the story: Froggy Plays T-ball
76
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts – Reading and Viewing https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TEBg8WmfKM
E
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.3, 2.4,
2.3 connect background knowledge to the 2.5, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 2.10, 2.11, 2.14 and 2.15 based on
titles and pictures of fiction and nonfiction observation and conversation with the learners.
passages to build a foundation of
understanding
2.4 develop understanding and application of
the Concepts of Print
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose
(Please consult the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for
and variety of texts that are read or read to
Effective Strategies for guidance about Read-Alouds).
them
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
After the story, the teacher will lead a discussion. In
environmental print and pictorial information
particular, the teacher might point out that there are
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies
some “jokes” in the story because Froggy does not
to visualize, predict and connect
seem to know the rules.
2.9 demonstrate understanding by
a. He threw the ball to first base
responding to read-alouds with images,
b. He actually ate flies, rather than catching
model making, discussions, or temporary
fly balls
writing.
c. He thought he should run to his real home
2.10 connect words and images in pre-
instead of home base
emergent and emergent level texts to
background knowledge
The children will draw or paint a picture of something
2.11 recognise and use a variety of high
they remember from the book, and they will try to
frequency words of personal importance,
print a sentence under their picture (or print labels next
such as names and pre-emergent level high-
to the items in their picture).
frequency words
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
The teacher will re-enforce the idea that one way to get
names and letter sounds, beginning with
better at a game is to know the rules of the game.
those of personal importance
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages
77
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts – Writing and Language Arts – Product
Representing
The drawing or painting that the children will
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing complete in response to the Read-Aloud will
and writing provide the teacher with evidence of SCOs 2.9, 3.6,
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and 3.7.
real and imagined topics
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools The teacher will enter information into the checklist
to assist in writing process for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.2, 3.3,
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation and
letters of the alphabet conversation with the learners.
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written
language and other representations (e.g.
drawings)
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
shapes
3.8 spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly
Language Arts - Speaking and Listening Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Mathematics – Building
Muscles
1.1 listen to music, conversation and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
environmental sounds for personal enjoyment for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will discuss with the children that one way
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.10 based on observation to get better at a game would be to build your muscles.
engagement in sharing the experiences of and conversation with the learners. The teacher and the children will have a grand
others and with oral stories and information conversation about what muscles are needed for
sharing. different games, and how do they build the muscles.
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to
interact with a variety of audiences with The teacher will show the children this chant (print it
sensitivity and respect off, or put it on a chart or the projector to do a Shared
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher Reading with the children). Please consult the
and children who have diverse interests, Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for
backgrounds and languages tips on ways to enhance LA skills through Shared
1.5 become aware of how effective listening Reading.
enhances understanding
78
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation
impact meaning and mood
1.7 Use Home Language(s) and, as Standard
English develops, share their thoughts,
feelings and questions about engaging events,
stories and conversations with increasing
confidence
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when
sharing stories or experiences
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness
activities and word play to discriminate
between various sounds in their environment,
letters of the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful
sound patterns
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
language structures to enhance their
understanding of how to communicate ideas
with purpose and focus
Language Arts – Reading and Viewing
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of
genres and text forms The teacher will enter information into the checklist
2.3 connect background knowledge to the for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.3, 2.4,
titles and pictures of fiction and nonfiction 2.5, 2.7, 2.9, 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14 and 2.15
passages to build a foundation of based on observation and conversation with the
understanding learners.
2.4 develop understanding and application of
the Concepts of Print
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose
and variety of texts that are read or read to
The children and the teacher could do the actions
them
slowly at first, and then more quickly!
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
environmental print and pictorial information
79
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.9 demonstrate understanding by responding The children and the teacher could “join an exercise
to read-alouds with images, model making, class” -for example, see this video –
discussions, or temporary writing Gracie’s Corner Exercise Song
2.10 connect words and images in pre-
emergent and emergent level texts to https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mEgmcvjYIlo
background knowledge
2.11 recognize and use a variety of high The teacher could lead the children in some exercises
frequency words of personal importance, such and practice some counting:
as names and pre-emergent level high-
frequency words How many jumps can the children do in 10 seconds?
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the How many arm punches can the children do in 10
meaning and flow of the language to seconds?
anticipate upcoming words How many knee bends can the children do in 10
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and seconds?
phrasing during shared reading, independent
and guided reading of emergent level The teacher will ask the children for ideas of exercise
passages moves to count in 10 seconds.
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with those The teacher will discuss with the children that if they
of personal importance do this every day, they might find that they can do
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode more in 10 seconds, or that they can do Gracie’s
upcoming words in emergent level passages Corner Exercise Song without getting out of breath.
Mathematics – Number Sense Mathematics - Observation and Conversation The teacher and children could do the exercises
another day, or maybe every day! The teacher will
1.1.1 say the number sequence to 10 by 1s The teacher will enter information into the checklist emphasize that having stronger muscles is a way to get
for Number Sense Outcome 1.1.1 based on better at playing many games.
observation and conversation with the learners.
80
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts - Speaking and Listening Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Science: Keep on Trying
1.1 listen to music, conversation and The teacher will enter information into the checklist The teacher and children will look at the list about how
environmental sounds for personal enjoyment for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, to get better at games (list made in the first ILS in this
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, 1.4, 1.5, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.10 based on observation week). Did they have “keep on trying” on the list?
engagement in sharing the experiences of and conversation with the learners.
others and with oral stories and information Teachers may use the video below as an introduction
sharing. to get learners active (make a connection to the
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to previous ILS about exercising) and thinking about skills
interact with a variety of audiences with are needed and what should be done to get better at
sensitivity and respect games.
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher
and children who have diverse interests, Ask the children to remember which different games
backgrounds and languages were mentioned in the video.
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
enhances understanding Jack Hartman: Keep on Trying!
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lKKouReasVo
English develops, share their thoughts, After the video/dance, do a “Think-Pair-Share” with
feelings and questions about engaging events, the children, asking them what different games were
stories and conversations with increasing mentioned in the video. Then the teacher will make a
confidence list of all the different games the children remember
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when from the video. (This is a Shared Writing activity.
sharing stories or experiences Please see the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness Strategies to find ways to include LA Skill development
activities and word play to discriminate while making the list with the children. Also see the
between various sounds in their environment, Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies for a
letters of the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful description of how to do a Think Pair Share with a
sound patterns class of children.)
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
language structures to enhance their Show the video again, and check to see if all the games
understanding of how to communicate ideas are on the list the teacher and children created, or, did
with purpose and focus the teacher and children forget some of the games
from the video? (When the teacher and the children
review the list they created of the different games, this
is a Shared Reading experience).
81
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Language Arts – Reading and Viewing Another resource to spark some discussion about
“Trying Harder” and to introduce the word
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist “perseverance” is:
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, Perseverance Makes Me Stronger by Elizabeth Cole
2.2 develop questions when browsing 2.4, 2.5, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 2.1, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14 and 2.15 (about a child learning to roller skate)
through passages of interest based on observation and conversation with the https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=80EUzy6zOeM
2.3 connect background knowledge to the learners.
titles and pictures of fiction and nonfiction
passages to build a foundation of
understanding
2.4 develop understanding and application of
the Concepts of Print
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose
and variety of texts that are read or read to
them
The teacher will have a discussion with the children
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some
about “perseverance” and if they ever had to
environmental print and pictorial information
“persevere” with learning a game or a sport.
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies
To challenge the children to try something “hard” and
to visualize, predict and connect
practice to get better, the teacher might take the
2.9 demonstrate understanding by
children outside to play this game: “Hit the stick”.
responding to read-alouds with images,
The children will stand a certain distance away from the
model making, discussions, or temporary
stick. The children will toss a ball towards the stick
writing.
and try to hit it. When they try again and again, the
2.11 recognise and use a variety of high
children will get closer to hitting the stick because they
frequency words of personal importance,
will be learning how hard to throw the ball, what
such as names and pre-emergent level high-
direction, etc.
frequency words
Science connection: The teacher will discuss with the
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the
children that when they are tossing the ball, it is like
meaning and flow of the language to
they are giving the ball a “push”. It’s important to
anticipate upcoming words
realize how hard a “push” to give, or what direction to
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and
give that “push”
phrasing during shared reading, independent
and guided reading of emergent level
passages
82
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter
names and letter sounds, beginning with
those of personal importance
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages
Science - Forces and Interactions: Science - Observation and Conversation
Pushes and Pulls
1.1.1 the child will understand that pushes The teacher will enter information into the checklist
can have different strengths and directions. for Forces and Interactions: Pushes and Pulls
1.1.3 pushing or pulling on an object can Outcome 1.1.1, 1.1.3 and 1.1.4 based on
change the speed or direction of its motion observation and conversation with the learners.
1.1.4 pushing on an object can start or
stop it.
Language Arts - Listening and Speaking Language Arts - Observation and Conversation Language Arts and Social Studies – Guest Speaker
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist The teacher will ask someone who coaches a team
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, (could be in the school, or in the community) to visit
others and with oral stories and information 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and the classroom. The coach can describe the game
sharing. conversation with the learners. he/she coaches, age of players, items needed to play,
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to where they play (natural or built environment). The
interact with a variety of audiences with coach can talk about the skills needed to get better.
sensitivity and respect
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher Or, the teacher will ask someone who plays a particular
and children who have diverse interests, sport to visit the classroom. The player of the sport
backgrounds and languages will describe the game he/she plays, age of players,
1.5 become aware of how effective listening items needed to play, where they play (natural or built
enhances understanding environment). The player will talk about his/her
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard personal experiences and what he/she did to master
English develops, share their thoughts, the sport.
feelings and questions about engaging events,
stories and conversations with increasing
confidence
83
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when Or, the teacher can invite a nutritionist to visit the
sharing stories or experiences classroom, to talk about eating the right foods and the
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and importance of exercise for success in playing games.
language structures to enhance their
understanding of how to communicate ideas Before a guest speaker comes to the class, the teacher
with purpose and focus and children will discuss possible questions to ask, and
what they think the answers might be. While the guest
Language Arts – Reading and Viewing is in the classroom, the teacher will invite the children
to ask questions. After the guest has left the
2.4 develop understanding and application of classroom, the children should complete a “guest
the Concepts of Print The teacher will enter information into the checklist speaker form”, with special emphasis on what they
2.11 recognise and use a variety of high for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.4, 2.11, 2.14 learned.
frequency words of personal importance, and 2.15 based on observation and conversation
such as names and pre-emergent level high- with the learners. The class could also make a thank-you card to send to
frequency words the speaker. This would be a Shared Writing
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter experiences. (Please consult the Curriculum Outcomes and
names and letter sounds, beginning with Guide for Effective Strategies for guidance on this
those of personal importance approach.)
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode
upcoming words in emergent level passages
Name:__________
Language Arts - Writing and Representing Language Arts: Product
3.1 use shared ideas to co-construct stories The Guest Speaker Response sheet will provide the
3.2 Assign meaning to experimental drawing teacher with information regarding the children’s
GAMES
and writing development of LA outcomes in Writing and
Speaker’s Response
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and Representing.
real and imagined topics
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools
to assist in writing process The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.1, 3.2, I learned….________
letters of the alphabet 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation _________________________________________
3.6 Connect spoken language(s) to written and conversation with the learners. __________________________
language and other representations (e.g.
drawings)
84
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
3.7 Connect phonological awareness to letter
shapes
3.8 Spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly
Social Studies – Myself – Spatial Social Studies – Observation and Conversation
Thinking
The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.4. identify natural and built features of the for Myself- Spatial Thinking Outcome 3.4 based on
local environment observation and conversation with the learners
Language Arts – Listening and Speaking Language Arts – Observation and Conversation Language Arts, Mathematics and Social Studies:
Work With Your Team, Read Aloud and Role Play
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, The teacher will enter information into the checklist
engagement in sharing the experiences of for Listening and Speaking Outcomes 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, The teacher will remind the children of all the ways to
others and with oral stories and information 1.5, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10 based on observation and get better at playing a game. Also the children may
sharing. conversation with the learners. remember the discussion about being a team player,
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to from Week Two.
interact with a variety of audiences with
sensitivity and respect Read-Aloud (please consult the hints from the
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for Effective Strategies).
and children who have diverse interests,
backgrounds and languages Franklin Plays the Game by Paulette Bourgeois
1.5 become aware of how effective listening
enhances understanding https://www.google.com/search?q=children%27s+rea
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard d+aloud+play+a+game+with+me&rlz=1C5GCCM_e
English develops, share their thoughts, n&oq=children%27s+read+aloud+play+a+game+wit
feelings and questions about engaging events, h+me&gs_lcrp=EgZjaHJvbWUyBggAEEUYOTIHC
stories and conversations with increasing AEQIRigATIHCAIQIRigAdIBCTEwNjUwajBqN6gC
confidence ALACAA&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when 8#fpstate=ive&ip=1&vld=cid:7846d11d,vid:LIOilec3
sharing stories or experiences Ya0,st:0
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and
language structures to enhance their
85
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
understanding of how to communicate ideas
with purpose and focus
Language Arts – Reading and Viewing
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of The teacher will enter information into the checklist
genres and text forms for Reading and Viewing Outcomes 2.1, 2.3, 2.4,
2.3 connect background knowledge to the 2.5, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 2.10, 2.11, 2.14 and 2.15 based on
titles and pictures of fiction and nonfiction observation and conversation with the learners.
passages to build a foundation of The teacher will stop the story at various point to
understanding discuss what is happening. After the story, the children
2.4 develop understanding and application of will discuss if they have experiences playing on a team.
the Concepts of Print
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose The teacher will remind the learners of the Social
and variety of texts that are read or read to Studies outcomes (listed in the left column here) and
them discuss how those outcomes apply to playing on a
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some team.
environmental print and pictorial information
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies Role Play – The teacher will choose 3 children to
to visualize, predict and connect stand before the group, and ask the group, “How many
2.9 Demonstrate understanding by children could be on each team?” The teacher would
responding to read-alouds with images, divide the 3 children into two teams; the children could
model making, discussions, or temporary discuss if that would work out well for playing a game.
writing. Then the teacher will choose 4 children and ask the
2.10 Connect words and images in pre- group, “How many children could be on each team?”
emergent and emergent level texts to The teacher would divide the 4 children into two
background knowledge teams; the children could discuss if that would work
2.11 Recognise and use a variety of high out well for playing a game. The teacher could repeat
frequency words of personal importance, this, up to 9 children. (This is an example of children
such as names and pre-emergent level high- learning to Compose and decompose numbers to 9.
frequency words
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter Writing - The children will decide what game they like,
names and letter sounds, beginning with and what they are doing to get better at their favourite
those of personal importance game. The children will be encouraged to think about
86
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
2.15 use known letter sounds to decode this, and then to share their sentence orally. This will
upcoming words in emergent level passages aid other children to prepare for writing.
Language Arts – Writing and Language Arts: Product Higher Achievers can write their own sentences. For
Representing example: I like to play and jump hopscotch. I play every day so
I can get better.
3.1 use shared ideas to co-construct stories The sentences that the child writes will provide the
3.2 Assign meaning to experimental drawing teacher with information regarding the children’s Other children can fill in the blanks: e.g. I like to play
and writing development of LA outcomes in Writing and ___________. I ______ every day so I can get better..
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and Representing.
real and imagined topics If the children are describing playing on a team, they
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools might draw the teams (in 2 groups) on their papers.
to assist in writing process The teacher will enter information into the checklist
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case for Writing and Representing Outcomes 3.1, 3.2,
letters of the alphabet 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 based on observation
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written and conversation with the learners.
language and other representations (e.g.
drawings)
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter
shapes
3.8 spell name and some words of personal
importance correctly
Mathematics – Operations With Mathematics - Observation and Conversation
Numbers
2.1.1 compose and decompose numbers up Complete checklist for Operations With Numbers
to 9 in a variety of ways using Outcome 2.1.1 through observation and
manipulatives, fingers and pictures conversation with learners
87
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
Social Studies – Myself – Civic Social Studies - Observation and Conversation
Participation
2.7. express how my behaviour in groups and The teacher will enter information into the checklist
the behaviour of others affects me and others for Myself – Civic Participation Outcome 2.7, 2.8,
2.8 appreciate that members of groups to 2.11 and 2.12 based on observation and
which I belong have responsibilities conversation with the learners.
2.11 appreciate that being safe from harm
also means that they must learn to play safely
2.12 demonstrate responsible caring
behaviour towards others in play
Language Arts Reassessing Previous Checklists End of the Unit – Are all games fun?
Mathematics The teacher might want to review the assessment The teacher and the children will have a grand
data gathered throughout the Unit and make notes conversation about the Essential Question: Are all
Science about the learners’ progress. games fun? Everyone does not have to agree to the
answer, but each child should be encouraged to give a
Social Studies reason for their answer. The group might reflect on all
that they did in this Integrated Unit on Games, by
doing a Gallery Walk around the room.
Go to a game! The teacher may have made
arrangements for a field trip to go to a game being
played nearby. Or, the children might even go to a
physical education class where the older children in the
school are playing a game.
Or:
Learners will create replicas/models of the games for
an exhibition and Games Day on the final day. This
can be held at the school’s playing field or nearby park.
Parents can be invited where families play against
88
Kindergarten Curriculum - Games
Specific Curriculum Outcomes Inclusive Assessment Strategies Inclusive Learning Strategies
families, or parents against learners or learners against
learners.
Additional Resources
All resources to support the Inclusive Learning Strategies in this week are embedded in the ILS.
Useful Content for the Teacher
Unless otherwise indicated here, useful content to support the Inclusive Learning Strategies in this week is embedded in the ILS.
Resources for a learner who is struggling:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies
are open-ended (rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for
Effective Strategies.
Resources for a learner who needs challenge:
The Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) listed for this week allow the teacher to differentiate for children’s varying skill development. The strategies
are open-ended (rather than “single answer”) which provides opportunities for all children to learn, develop their skills, and respond.
Detailed information on specific strategies to assist children in various stages of development are offered in the Curriculum Outcomes and Guide for
Effective Strategies.
89
