November 2024
HARMONISED KINDERGARTEN CURRICULUM
CURRICULUM OUTCOMES
AND
GUIDE FOR EFFECTIVE STRATEGIES
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Table of Contents
Introduction ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 3
I. Rationale for the Kindergarten Programme ................................................................................................................................ 4
II. Yearly Plan for Kindergarten Integrated Units ........................................................................................................................... 6
III. Vision for an Educated Person in the OECS .............................................................................................................................. 7
IV. Essential Education Competencies ............................................................................................................................................. 8
V. Principles of Learning ................................................................................................................................................................... 9
VI. Principles of Assessment ............................................................................................................................................................ 10
VII. Principles of Inclusivity .............................................................................................................................................................. 11
VIII. Sample Kindergarten Day Plan .................................................................................................................................................. 12
IX. OHPC Kindergarten Language Arts Curriculum Outcomes................................................................................................... 15
X. OHPC Kindergarten Mathematics Curriculum Outcomes ...................................................................................................... 24
XI. OHPC Kindergarten Science Curriculum Outcomes ............................................................................................................... 33
XII. OHPC Kindergarten Social Studies Curriculum Outcomes .................................................................................................... 45
XIII. Mathematics Outcomes Not Included in Integrated Units .................................................................................................... 54
XIV. Learning Strategies for Language Arts ..................................................................................................................................... 55
XV. Learning Strategies for Mathematics ......................................................................................................................................... 65
XVI. Effective Strategies for Assessment ........................................................................................................................................... 73
2
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Introduction
This document includes the Essential Learning Outcomes and Specific Curriculum Outcomes for Language Arts, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies
taken from the Architecture and Development Process for the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States Primary Harmonised Curriculum (OHPC, June
2023).
All of the Science and Social Studies Curriculum Outcomes, and most of the Language Arts and Mathematics Curriculum Outcomes are incorporated
into five Integrated Unit Plans, each of which is a separate document.
Cross-referencing of the Curriculum Outcomes in the Integrated Unit documents is provided in sections IX – XII in this document. A list of Language
Arts and Mathematics Curriculum Outcomes that are NOT included in any of the Integrated Units is provided in section XIII. This provides assurance
that all Curriculum Outcomes, from the four subject areas, are being addressed throughout the Kindergarten school year.
3
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
I. Rationale for the Kindergarten Programme
The Kindergarten year (the entry into formal schooling) is an important and impactful time in a child’s education; similar in importance to graduation
from high school. The new Kindergarten Curriculum, as part of the OECS Harmonized Primary Curriculum (OHPC) is designed to ensure that this
crucial educational transition experience is as positive and successful as possible for every child.
The Kindergarten Curriculum aligns with the beliefs and intentions expressed in the Architecture and Development Process for the OECS Primary
Harmonized Curriculum document (2022 Draft) and the OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework (2022 Draft). All of the following philosophical,
theoretical, organizational, and ethical tenets have guided the development of the Kindergarten Curriculum: Vision for an Educated Person; Principles of
Learning; Principles of Assessment; Principles of Inclusivity; Scope, Sequence and Continuity across grade levels, using consistent terminology in Language
Arts, Math, Science, and Social Studies.
The OECS Kindergarten Curriculum differs from the OECS Primary Harmonized Curriculum in four ways:
1. In addition to the knowledge, skills and attitudes set out for four subject areas in the OECS Primary Harmonized Curriculum, the Kindergarten
instruction, assessment, and daily activities focus on the social and emotional development of the young learner. A sample daily schedule to
support the delivery of the Kindergarten curriculum has been developed and is included in Section VII of this guide. It looks different from a
traditional, subject-based daily schedule for Grades 1 – 6. To support their social and emotional skill development, children in Kindergarten will
be provided with opportunities to choose activities and to express themselves through the creative arts.
2. The curriculum acts upon the strong rationale for integrated units (Architecture and Development Process for the OECS Primary Harmonized
Curriculum document Draft, 2022, p.4). Detailed plans for Integrated Units of Study have been developed for Kindergarten teachers. All aspects
of the Integrated Units of Study are clearly linked to the Essential Learning Outcomes and Kindergarten Grade Level Expectations for Language
Arts, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies.
3. The Kindergarten Curriculum Guide format differs from the sample guide shown in the Architecture and Development Process for the OECS
Primary Harmonized Curriculum document (Draft, 2022, pp. 11 – 21). The Inclusive Assessment and Inclusive Learning Strategies, Useful
Content for the Teacher, Resources and Materials are incorporated into Integrated Units of Study, rather than laid out in guides for specific
subjects.
4. This Guide outlines the guiding principles, structure, and philosophy for the Kindergarten year. It includes four subject-specific sections
(Language Arts, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies) with Introduction, Strands of the Subject Area, Essential Learning Outcomes, Grade
Level Expectations, Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs) and clear indication of links to the Integrated Units. These links ensure that all the
4
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
subject-specific SCOs are taught and assessed through the Integrated Units and through daily instructional periods focused specifically on LA
and Math. Specific instructional strategies for some LA and Math SCOs have been compiled and included.
5
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
II. Yearly Plan for Kindergarten Integrated Units
Topics, Sequence, Progression of Skills in Language Arts and Mathematics
The Integrated Topics have been chosen to meet Science and Social Studies Kindergarten curriculum outcomes. The five Integrated Topics for the OPHC
are: Belonging, Celebrations, Weather, Plants and Animals, Games
First IU Topic Second IU Topic Third IU Topic Fourth IU Topic Fifth IU Topic
Integrated Unit Topic Belonging Weather Celebrations Plants and Animals Games
Proposed Sequence for s, a, t, i, p, n c(k), e, h, r, m, d g, o, u, l, f, b z, w, y, x j, qu, v
Language Arts Letters and
Sounds
Proposed sequence for Pre-primer words Pre-primer words Primer words Primer words Primer words
Language Arts Sight Words
(loosely following Dolch sight a, and, big, can, go, I, in, it, not, run, up, we, one, three, two, four, all, am, at, be, but, did, said, where, she, they,
words) is, me, see, the, to away, find, help, here, look, make, play, you, do, get, he, like, no, was, went, will, yes,
jump, little, my yellow, blue, red, on, please, ran, say eat, good, have, into,
brown, black, white, new, now, there, this,
come, down with
Proposed Sequence for Math Strand 1 Strand 1 Strand 1 Strand 1 Strand 1
Skills (refer to outcomes for Strand 3, 6 Strand 3, 6 Strand 3, 6 Strand 2 Strand 2
Kindergarten Mathematics in this Strand 4 Strand 3, 6 Strand 5
document) Strand 3, 6
All curriculum outcomes describe what the child should know and be able to do at the END of Kindergarten. Children will be starting to develop
their knowledge and abilities from the beginning of the year. Building on the knowledge and skills developed from the beginning of the year, achievement
of some Math and LA outcomes is highest when those skills are introduced later in the school year.
6
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
III. Vision for an Educated Person in the OECS1
The following vision for an educated person in the OECS was developed collaboratively by educators from the 9 English speaking countries that
comprise the OECS:
Persons in the OECS will reach their full potential academically, socially, culturally, emotionally, spiritually and physically to support success in their
lives. An educated person:
• Has the mindset of a future oriented lifelong learner who applies 21st Century knowledge, skills, behaviours and attitudes critically and
creatively.
• Attends to the well-being of self and others.
• Demonstrates respect for diversity and the rights of all individuals in a manner that fosters an inclusive society.
• Actively engages in our democracy, is dedicated to protecting our environment, promotes innovation and sustainability, and contributes
responsibly to local and global advancement.
• Is resilient, reflective, flexible and adaptive in response to challenges and changes and is able to not only survive, but thrive in the face of
adversity.
1 OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework, October 2022
7
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
IV. Essential Education Competencies2
Develop Citizenship Competencies:
• Become an engaged, responsible, caring, tolerant, participatory democratic citizen.
• Make positive contributions to society locally, regionally and globally.
• Protect and preserve the rich history, heritage, arts and culture, norms and values of the nation and region.
• Understand liberation and what it means to Caribbean people.
Develop Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication Competencies:
• Think critically.
• Apply critical and creative approaches to solving problems.
• Communicate effectively.
• Use an ethical approach to positive social and professional interactions and personal behaviours.
Develop Well-being Competencies:
• Lead a healthy and active life.
• Value self through the development of coping strategies and self-care.
• Appreciate and foster individual and collective well-being.
Develop Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies:
• Use multiple literacies (includes but is not limited to reading, writing, numeracy, science, engineering, technology and creative arts) to
understand, appreciate, navigate and contribute to the world. Use knowledge to identify and transform opportunities into successful outcomes.
• Use flexibility and resiliency in applying skills that support success.
• Apply technological understanding and ability to personal and professional contexts.
2 OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework, October 2022
8
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
V. Principles of Learning3
Three foundational principles of learning are founded on elements that support high quality learning aligned with the vision and essential competencies.
These include principles that ensure equitable engagement, learning that is meaningfully constructed, and learning that is deep and comprehensive.
Equitable
• All learners have access to opportunities that support continued growth and achievement to full potential regardless of their race, religion, gender
or economic circumstances.
• Learning supports the developmental stage of each learner.
• Learning is deliberately built on prior knowledge to ensure the unique qualities and varied abilities of each learner are respected in all learning
situations.
Meaningfully Constructed
• Provides opportunity for individual, and collaborative experiences to construct and apply knowledge.
• Occurs in safe and supportive environments that develop self-confidence and motivation in learners.
• Stimulates a joy for learning and urge to explore and engage.
• Promotes the holistic development of the learner through the provision of opportunities for physical, social, emotional and academic growth and
wellbeing.
• Views making errors and approximations as a natural part of the learning process and creates opportunities to provide responsive instruction that
enhances learner self-confidence.
• Takes advantage of multiple contexts and roles for individuals such as community members, elders, volunteers, industry specialists and others.
Deep and Comprehensive
• Learning is an active and engaging process.
• There are sustained opportunities to promote critical thinking and depth of understanding.
• Curiosity, creativity and innovation are valued and encouraged,
• Strives for a deep grasp of central concepts of subject areas yet at the same time actively promotes developing cross curriculum links in
understanding relationships among those concepts.
• Uses varied and continuous assessment information to inform responsive teaching.
3 OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework, October 2022
9
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
VI. Principles of Assessment4
Three principles of assessment are founded on ensuring a fair and valid process of assessment that promotes learner success, is integral to effective
teaching and is aligned with the vision of an educated person, essential competencies, and principles of learning. Assessment is learner centred, informs
teaching and learning, and balanced as follows:
Learner-centred
• Positive, affirming and builds on learners’ confidence.
• Creates opportunities for learners to reflect on what they have learnt and what they need to know or understand better.
• Acknowledges learners’ unique learning strengths and provides developmentally appropriate opportunities to ensure fairness in
displaying unique capabilities
• Collected, stored and shared responsibly and in a manner that protects the rights of learners.
Informs teaching and learning
• Monitors progress and provides transparent feedback.
• Is reliable and valid.
• Extends beyond measuring the level of learner achievement, identifies gaps in learning, and provides learners and teachers with
evidence that may be used to plan learning.
• Is presented in a manner that is easy to understand, aligned with intended learning outcomes and actionable is shared with learners
parents and educators to measure progress, inform teaching and support system enhancement.
Balanced
• Is comprehensiveandincludescomponentsofassessmentoflearning,assessmentforlearningand assessment as learning.
• Uses a variety of strategies to measure a broad range of knowledge, skills and attitudes domains across content areas and learning
settings. This includes multiple possibilities from attitude surveys, psychomotor observations, writing portfolios, rubrics, observation
journals, testing and the creation of opportunities for self and peer assessment.
• Includes an appropriate emphasis on diagnostic, formative and summative assessment at a variety of levels and for different purposes.
4 OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework, October 2022
10
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
VII. Principles of Inclusivity5
The principles of inclusivity affirm identity and support differences in learners. They are aligned with other aspects of the Framework to facilitate high
quality teaching and learning in the curriculum.
Affirms Identity
• Tailored to the diverse strengths, needs, interests and aspirations of individual learners.
• Provides universal learning opportunities for all learners that support their full membership and participation in school programmes,
services and activities.
• Decision-making, including decisions about learner programming, placement and promotion is reasonable, just and responsive to each
learner’s unique personal circumstances.
• Education is barrier-free for all regardless of culture, gender, language, socio-economic status, location, religion, sexual orientation, need or
ability.
• Education is respectful of learners, their families and their communities.
• Is responsive to learners’ diverse cultures, languages, backgrounds, experiences, and community.
• Creates strong home-school-community collaboration and communication in which parents are welcomed and valued as partners.
Supports Differences
• Diverse, responsive and varied instruction is a responsibility and enables all learners to successfully engage with the curriculum.
• Flexible variations in the pace, place and format of learning, including learner grouping, that foster learner choice, engagement, and love of
learning
• Difference is supported through relevant resources, and use of varied teaching and assessment strategies in order that learners have
opportunities to represent their learning in multiple ways.
• Difference is supported by the strategic use of learner profiles and record information to support learning.
5 OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework, October 2022
11
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
VIII. Sample Kindergarten Day Plan
The following sample Day Plan for the OECS Harmonised Kindergarten Curriculum illustrates how the new curriculum might be delivered.
Teacher: _____________________ Class: __________________ Date: _________ Integrated Unit: _________________________
Duration6 Focus Plan
Opening
20 min Devotion and Morning Meeting Time
- review plans for the day
Language Arts
- “Stand-alone” skill instruction and/or tasks related to Integrated Unit
60 min - Whole group, small group, and individual teaching and learning
20 min Break
Mathematics
- “Stand-alone” skill instruction and/or tasks related to Integrated Unit
60 min - Whole group, small group, and individual teaching and learning
20 min Wellness/Physical Education Activity
40 min Lunch
Integrated Unit time
- Whole group, small group, and individual teaching and learning
90 min - Work on projects; browse resources; engage in role play and other exploration to
consolidate emerging understanding of concepts related to integrated unit
- Unit may include several specific learning outcomes from LA, Math, SS, and Science
20 min Review, Celebration, and Preparation for next day
6 Details of the timing might vary from country to country
12
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Sample Day Plan showing lessons based on ideas for Inclusive Instructional Strategies provided in a Kindergarten Integrated Unit
(Sample day at the end of Week 2 of a five week Integrated Unit on Weather)
Lesson plans providing more detail than outlined here may be required, depending on jurisdiction and principals’ expectations, teacher’s experience, etc.
Teacher: __________________ Class: __________________ Date: _______________ Integrated Unit: __Weather______
Duration7 Focus Plan8
Opening In addition to the usual routines during Morning Meeting Time, the class will sing the “Weather Song”, with
20 min Devotion and Morning Meeting Time one child per day telling the weather (sunny, cloudy, rainy, windy). This weather description will be added to
- review plans for the day the Class Daily Weather Chart.
Language Arts The lesson will start with a review of the alphabet letters and sounds c(k), r, s.
- “Stand-alone” skill instruction and/or The focus for the lesson will be the poem “Itsy Bitsy Spider”. The teacher will present the rhyme with
60 min tasks related to Integrated Unit pictures on a large chart. The teacher will read the title of the rhyme and ask learners if they have ever heard
- Whole group, small group, and or sung the rhyme before. The teacher will sing the rhyme and have learners to do the same. The teacher will
individual teaching and learning point to the words as they all read and sing the rhyme. The teacher will ask the learners: What was the
weather like for the spider? How do you think the spider felt about the rain? (If the learners respond by
stating an emotion such as sad, then the teacher can ask - ‘Why did the weather make the spider feel that
way?’). The teacher will use this Shared Reading opportunity to reinforce and encourage development of
sight words, letter sounds, letter recognition, vocabulary, and comprehension. The learners will be asked to
draw a picture about the itsy-bitsy spider and print one kind of weather the spider liked or did not like (the
teacher can scribe learners’ responses).
20 min Break
Mathematics Today is the end of the second week on the unit on Weather. The lesson will focus on the Class Daily
- “Stand-alone” skill instruction and/or Weather Chart that has been created during Morning Meeting Time for the past 5 days. The teacher will
60 min tasks related to Integrated Unit review the days of the week and then review the weather chart, asking what kind of weather we had on each
- Whole group, small group, and day this week, and counting with the children how many days of each kind of weather has been reported,
individual teaching and learning showing the children how to “read and interpret” the data on the chart, teaching about zero. The children
will each complete their own small Weather Chart (with the teacher’s help) for the week, colouring in how
7 Details of the timing might vary from country to country
8 Descriptions and resources for lessons, with links to SCOs, are provided in the Integrated Unit Guides.
13
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Duration7 Focus Plan8
many days for each kind of weather and printing the numerals below.. This lesson could be repeated at the
end of each week of this unit.
The teacher will do some 5 or 10-frames work with the children to end the session.
Mathematics Today is the end of the second week on the unit on Weather. The lesson will focus on the Class Daily
- “Stand-alone” skill instruction and/or Weather Chart that has been created during Morning Meeting Time for the past 5 days. The teacher will
60 min tasks related to Integrated Unit review the days of the week and then review the weather chart, asking what kind of weather we had on each
- Whole group, small group, and day this week, and counting with the children how many days of each kind of weather has been reported,
individual teaching and learning showing the children how to “read and interpret” the data on the chart, teaching about zero. The children
will each complete their own small Weather Chart (with the teacher’s help) for the week, colouring in how
many days for each kind of weather and printing the numerals below.. This lesson could be repeated at the
end of each week of this unit.
The teacher will do some 5 or 10-frames work with the children to end the session.
20 min Wellness/Physical Education Activity
40 min Lunch
Integrated Unit time Learners will use large paper plates and materials of their choice to make a weather wheel showing four types
- Whole group, small group, and individual of weather (sunny, rainy, cloudy, and windy). Part of their weather wheel will include an arrow to point to
90 min teaching and learning the type of weather needed. Learners will use their weather wheels to track the changes in the weather
- Work on projects; browse resources; throughout the day and to help predict the weather. Their observations will be shared to the whole class,
engage in role play and other exploration to where they would need to state the different kinds of weather.
consolidate emerging understanding of
concepts related to integrated unit Choice Time: browsing books about weather, painting pictures about weather, building block villages,
- Unit may include several specific learning puzzles about weather, “reading the room”, continuing activities started earlier in the week
outcomes from LA, Math, SS, and Sci
20 min Review, Celebration, and Preparation for The teacher and children will share some highlights from the day, discuss any reminders about next week,
next day share plans for the weekend.
This Sample Day Plan provides opportunities for the children to develop knowledge, skills, and attitudes in Language Arts, Mathematics, Science and
Social Studies. The Specific Curriculum Outcomes addressed in the lessons described above are listed in the “Weather” Integrated Unit (please see Week
Two).
Over the five weeks focusing on the Weather Unit, many Language Arts, Mathematics, Science, and Social Studies outcomes are addressed. The teaching
of the outcomes progresses over time. Assessment is done through observation, conversation, and products and is continuous.
14
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
IX. OHPC Kindergarten Language Arts Curriculum Outcomes9
IX(i) INTRODUCTION:
The content of this section reflects the tenets of the OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework (2022) which was created with significant input from a
wide range of stakeholders from the Member States. The OECS Learning Standards for Language Arts provided background information and content
that was used throughout the development of this document.
The underlying philosophy and pedagogical practice of the Language Arts Curriculum is based on Constructivist Theory (Bruner, Dewey, Piaget, Vygotsky)
that has been interpreted through the lens of inclusive, balanced, integrated and learner responsive Language Arts instruction (Bainbridge, Calkins, Clay,
Cunningham, Durkin, Fountas, Holdaway, Millar, Pearson, Pinnell, Routman). The content of this document was influenced by the writings and practice
of international and national literacy and assessment experts; literacy associations such as the International Literacy Association (ILA), Association for
Supervision and Curriculum Development (ASCD), United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO),Progress in
International Reading Studies (PIRLS) and the National Assessment of Reading Progress (NAEP); and curriculum /standards documents from the OECS,
Canada, Finland and Australia.
Extensive use has also been made of the OECS Learning and Assessment Standards. Aspects of the Outline that which have been taken directly from
the Standards or are reflected in the Standards appear in italics. There are aspects of the Standards that are not reflected in this Outline. The rationale is
provided below. The Performance Standards that appear in the OECS Learning Standards are very detailed and will be considered by the members of
the writing teams, along with various international references, as the Specific Curriculum Outcomes are modified.
The Literacy Policies (either existing or in draft) that were a focus during the OECS/USAID Early Learners Programme and have been further developed
since that time, are also being used to inform the development of the new curriculum; building on the important work of the Early Learners Programme
to advance literacy in the OECS.
The OECS Learning Standards for Language Arts (2018) states:
9 OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework, October 2022
15
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
“Language and thought are central to learning. Children develop their communicative skills in a social interactive environment that allows them numerous opportunities to
practise language in all its functions. As children explore and use language they learn a set of codes and rules which they use to communicate with others.
In the kindergarten, the child’s thought processes must be fostered by engaging him/her in meaningful and purposeful learning experiences. This development can only take place
when children are given opportunities to communicate, question and reflect on their thinking and to make representations through language.
As kindergarten children use language in functional ways they develop an understanding of what it is and how it works.
An effective Language Arts programme in the kindergarten is designed to enable pupils to become competent and confident language users. Learning outcomes are most effective
when they are taught using a play-based approach which combines the children’s natural curiosity with direct experiences which encourage them to use language to gain
information about real and imaginary worlds. Pupils are given opportunities to speak and listen, read and view and write and represent. They are also given opportunities to
question to obtain a deeper understanding.
Children come to school as active thinkers, possessing a natural curiosity and eagerness to learn. They have a natural desire to explore, manipulate and discover. Play is the
foundation of all learning in the kindergarten and it is the most appropriate means by which children can engage in language learning experiences, through role-playing, risk-
taking and problem solving.
It is through play that children can exhibit a degree of control that reflects their developmental needs which in turn build self-confidence and security in learning.” (p. 21)
The OECS Learning Standards have been referenced extensively throughout the Outline. In addition, the detailed Performance Standards have been
considered by the members of the writing team as part of the development of the Specific Curriculum Outcomes. There are certain aspects of the OECS
Learning Standards which have not been included in the Outline. They are provided in the table below. A rationale for each exclusion appears in brackets.
Items not included in Reading and Viewing Items not included in Writing and Representing
-Use letter/sound correlation and structural analysis to decode and -Make capital and lower case letters. (Revised to “some” to allow for age level)
recognise unfamiliar words. (Not developmentally appropriate)
-Form letters in manuscript print that is legible. (Revised to “some” to allow
- Use a variety of reference material to discover the meaning of words for age level)
and gather information. (Not developmentally appropriate)
- Write a variety of grammatically correct sentences focusing on spelling and
punctuation. (Not developmentally appropriate)
16
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
IX(ii) Statement of Purpose
The Purpose of Language Arts: Kindergarten: The purpose of the Kindergarten Curriculum is to provide a variety of integrated, play-based,
inclusive opportunities for learners to experiment with oral, written and visual languages and as they grow in self-confidence and develop a
positive image of themselves, their family, their language and their community. Learners foster a positive attitude that will result in confident,
curious and engaged learners and communicators with the foundation for further physical, social, psychological and cognitive development.
XI(iii) Strands and Outcomes for Kindergarten Language Arts
Strand 1: Listening and Speaking
Listening and Speaking are foundational for all learning. The strategies and skills of listening and speaking allow learners to
contribute meaningfully to social environments. As learners receive, reflect on, and communicate ideas, they develop increasing proficiency
in cognitive organization, critical thinking, and problem solving. Listening and speaking strategies and skills are foundational for the
development of reading, viewing, writing, and representing.
ELO 1.1: The learner will explore, use, and critically apply oral language for pleasure, personal growth, to foster relationships
and to develop an appreciation and celebration of culture and of oral languages.
Strand 2: Reading and Viewing
Reading and Viewing are meaning making, problem solving activities that provide opportunities to interact for a variety of purposes
with a wide range of written and visual text. Readers learn to integrate a variety of meaning, structure, vocabulary and word solving strategies
to develop thoughtful and critical understanding and insight into written or visual representations of text.
ELO 2.1: Learners will demonstrate a variety of ways to use background knowledge and interests to select and engage critically
with a range of culturally diverse paper based, visual, and digital texts for pleasure and personal growth.
ELO 2.2: Learners will interact with understanding and critical thought to a variety of genres and text forms using vocabulary,
comprehension strategies and graphophonic cues.
ELO 2.3: Learners will develop their understanding of how an author’s choice of vocabulary, language, genre, text form, text
features and style influence the meaning of text and define the author’s craft.
17
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Strand 3: Writing and Representing:
Writing and Representing strategies and skills provide opportunities for learners to communicate with their peers and other
meaningful audiences within and beyond their community using paper and digital formats. The process of writing includes planning,
organizing, revising, refining, and sharing feedback. Throughout this process, ongoing problem solving and critical thinking strategies,
applicable to subject areas and to life develop.
ELO 3.1: Learners will generate, gather and organize thoughts to explore, clarify and reflect on thoughts, feelings and experiences
as they create a written or representative draft, independently and collaboratively, for a range of audiences and purposes.
ELO 3.2: Learners will revise the organization and language use in drafted writing or representation, collaboratively and
independently, for a variety of purposes and audiences.
ELO 3.3: Learners will use their knowledge of spoken language, written language and writing conventions to refine the precision
and enhance the meaning and clarity of their written work.
Strand 1: Listening and Speaking10
Essential Learning Outcome 1.1
The learner will explore, use, and critically apply oral language for pleasure, personal growth, to foster relationships and to develop an
appreciation and celebration of culture and of oral languages.
The Grade Level Expectations (GLEs) provide an itemized grade level overview of the expectations for each Essential Learning Outcome. GLEs
with an asterix * are from the General Learning Outcomes of the OECS Learning Standards.
For Kindergarten, the Grade Level Expectations are expanded to Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)
10 Includes on Essential Learning Outcome
18
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
Belonging Weather Celebrations Plants & Games
Animals
1.1 listen to music, conversation and environmental sounds for personal
enjoyment*
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in sharing the
experiences of others and with oral stories and information sharing.
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to interact with a variety of
audiences with sensitivity and respect*
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and children who have
diverse interests, backgrounds and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening enhances understanding
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation impact meaning and mood
1.7 use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English develops, share their
thoughts, feelings and questions about engaging events, stories and
conversations with increasing confidence*
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when sharing stories or
experiences*
1.9 engage in active phonological awareness activities and word play to
discriminate between various sounds in their environment, letters of
the alphabet, rhyme and meaningful sound patterns*
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language structures to enhance
their understanding of how to communicate ideas with purpose and
focus*
19
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Strand 2: Reading and Viewing
The purpose of Reading and Viewing instruction is for pleasure and personal growth and to develop readers who enjoy and interact
meaningfully with a wide range of genres and text forms. Meaningful interaction with texts is developed through learning how to access and
build on background knowledge and use the information of provided by various sources of meaning, developing vocabulary, recognizing and
using language structures and meaningful application of graphophonic elements of the text.
Essential Learning Outcome 2.1
Learners will demonstrate a variety of ways to use background knowledge and interests to select and engage critically with a range of
culturally diverse paper based, visual, and digital texts for pleasure and personal growth.
Essential Learning Outcome 2.2
Learners will interact with understanding and critical thought to a variety of genres and text forms using vocabulary, comprehension
strategies and graphophonic cues.
Essential Learning Outcome 2.3
Learners will develop their understanding of how an author’s choice of vocabulary, language, genre, text form, text features and style
influence the meaning of text and define the author’s craft.
The Grade Level Expectations (GLEs) provide an itemized grade level overview of the expectations for each Essential Learning Outcome. GLEs
with an asterix * are from the General Learning Outcomes of the OECS Learning Standards.
For Kindergarten, the Grade Level Expectations are expanded to Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)
20
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of genres and text forms*
2.2 develop questions when browsing through passages of interest
connect background knowledge to the titles and pictures of fiction and
2.3
nonfiction passages to build a foundation of understanding *
2.4 develop understanding and application of the Concepts of Print*
develop knowledge about the purpose and variety of texts that are read or
2.5
read to them *
browse through a variety of images, and nonfiction material in pre-emergent
2.6
and emergent level passages, or passages of interest, to discover information.
demonstrate understanding of some environmental print and pictorial
2.7
information *
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to visualize, predict and connect *
demonstrate understanding by responding to read-alouds with images, model
2.9
making, discussions, or temporary writing
connect words and images in pre-emergent and emergent level texts to
2.10
background knowledge
recognise and use a variety of high frequency words of personal importance,
2.11
such as names and pre-emergent level high-frequency words *
participate in shared reading and use the meaning and flow of the language to
2.12
anticipate upcoming words
begin to demonstrate fluency and phrasing during shared reading,
2.13
independent and guided reading of emergent level passages
identify an increasing number of letter names and letter sounds, beginning
2.14
with those of personal importance*
use known letter sounds to decode upcoming words in emergent level
2.15
passages*
21
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Strand 3: Writing and Representing
Essential Learning Outcome 3.1
Learners will generate, gather and organize thoughts to explore, clarify and reflect on thoughts, feelings and experiences as they create a
written or representative draft, independently and collaboratively, for a range of audiences and purposes.
Essential Learning Outcome 3.2
Learners will revise the organization and language use in drafted writing or representation, collaboratively and independently, for a variety
of purposes and audiences.
Essential Learning Outcome 3.3
Learners will use their knowledge of spoken language, written language and writing conventions to refine the precision and enhance the
meaning and clarity of their written work.
The Grade Level Expectations (GLEs) provide an itemized grade level overview of the expectations for each Essential Learning Outcome. GLEs
with an asterix * are from the General Learning Outcomes of the OECS Learning Standards.
For Kindergarten, the Grade Level Expectations are expanded to Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)
22
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
3.1 use shared ideas to co-construct stories
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing and writing
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and real and imagined topics*
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools to assist in writing process*
3.5 learn to print the upper and lower case letters of the alphabet *
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written language and other representations (e.g.
drawings)
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter shapes
3.8 spell name and some words of personal importance correctly
23
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
X. OHPC Kindergarten Mathematics Curriculum Outcomes11
X(i) INTRODUCTION:
According to Principles and Standards for School Mathematics from the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, new knowledge, tools, and ways of doing
and communicating mathematics continue to emerge and evolve in an ever-changing world. The need to understand and be able to use mathematics in everyday life
and in the workplace has never been greater and will continue to increase.
-Adapted from Principles and Standards for School Mathematics
The OHPC mathematics outline is derived from the Common Core Curriculum developed by teachers of mathematics in the United States.
It is based on the standards developed by the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics12 , the largest mathematics education organization
in the world with approximately 100,000 members. The Common Core Curriculum Standards appear at
http://www.corestandards.org/wp-content/uploads/Math_Standards1.pdf . These have been supplemented with concepts from NRICH
resources from the University of Cambridge13
Mathematics is an activity that is critical for the development of individuals and societies. It is the study of the properties of number, and its
relationship to measurement, space, shape, statistics, and probability. Mathematics also deals with abstractions, with algebra being the strand
of mathematics that presents abstraction in its purest form. The study of mathematics enables individuals to become creative and critical
thinkers through the development of logical thinking, problem-solving, investigative, organizational, and argumentative skills.
In developing this outline, a set of outcomes and descriptors are used to describe the knowledge, skills and attributes a learner should attain
by the end of Grade 6. The outcomes describe educational objectives that concisely outline what learners are expected to know and be able
to do by the end of a grade level. The outcomes are sequenced according to learning progression across grades, where each grade level
learning expectation is built on previous expectations while preparing the learners for more challenging outcomes at the higher level.
11 OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework, October 2022
12 https://www.nctm.org/
13 https://nrich.maths.org/content/id/13291/EYFSKS1CurriculumLinkedtoNRICH.pdf
24
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Grade placements for specific outcomes have been made based on regional and international comparisons and on the collective experience
and professional judgment of educators, researchers, and mathematicians.
The curriculum consists of six strands: number sense, operations with numbers, pattern and relationship, geometrical thinking, measurement
and data handling and probability. Consistent with the other core subjects, these strands are then divided into essential learning outcomes
with grade level expectations expressed for each outcome. References from the OECS Learning Standards have been mapped to the essential
learning outcomes and noted for each.
XI(ii) Strands and Outcomes for Kindergarten Mathematics
Strand 1: Number Sense – Numbers to 10 (includes three Essential Learning Outcomes)
ELO 1.1 : Whole Number - Saying Number Sequence, Meaningful Counting and Skip Counting
ELO 1.2 : Whole Number – Representing and Partitioning Quantities
ELO 1.3 : Whole Number – Comparing and Ordering Quantities
Strand 2: Operations With Numbers (includes one Essential Learning Outcome)
ELO 2.1 : Additive Thinking - Understanding the meaning of addition and subtraction and how they relate
Strand 3: Pattern and Relationship (includes one Essential Learning Outcome)
ELO 3.1 : Recognizing, Describing and Extending Patterns - Describe, create, extend and generalise patterns
Strand 4: Geometric Thinking (includes two Essential Learning Outcome)
ELO 4.1 : Analysing and describing 3D shapes
ELO 4.2 : Recognize, Name and Describe Shapes – 2D and 3D
Strand 5: Measurement (includes two Essential Learning Outcome)
ELO 5.1 : Understanding What and How We Measure
ELO 5.2 : Developing and applying non-standard and standard units of measurement
Strand 6: Data Management and Probability (includes one Essential Learning Outcome)
ELO 6.1: Collecting, organizing, displaying and communicating data
25
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Strand 1: Number Sense – Numbers to 10
Essential Learning Outcome 1.1
Whole Number - Saying Number Sequence, Meaningful Counting and Skip Counting
Essential Learning Outcome 1.2
Whole Number – Representing and Partitioning Quantities
Essential Learning Outcome 1.3
Whole Number – Comparing and Ordering Quantities
For Kindergarten, the Grade Level Expectations are expanded to Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)
Link to OECS Learning Standard UN1, UN2, UN3, UN4, UN5
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
1.1.1 Say the number sequence to 10 by 1s
1.1.2 Count backwards from 10 by 1s
1.1.3 Identify an error in counting sequence
1.1.4 Say the number that comes after a given number
1.1.5 Say the number that comes before a given number
1.1.6 Use a number line to support counting
26
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
1.1.7 Recite number names from a given number to a given number – i.e. start at a
given number and go backwards down to 1 or start at a given number and
go up to 10
1.1.8 Count with meaning to 10, by building quantities
1.1.9 Count with meaning to 10, by matching quantity and numeral
1.2.1 Represent a given number up to 10 using a variety of concrete models,
including 5 and 10 frames
1.2.2 Answer the question, How many are in the set? using the last number
counted in a set
1.2.3 In a fixed arrangement, starting in different locations, can show that the
count of the number of objects in a set does not change
1.2.4 Count the number of objects in a given set, rearrange the objects, predict
the new count, and recount to verify the prediction
1.3.1 Look briefly at a given familiar arrangement of one to five objects or dots
and identify the number represented without counting
1.3.2 Look briefly at a given familiar arrangement of one to five objects or dots
and identify the number represented by a given dot
1.3.3 Compare the number of objects in two sets of up to 10 objects, using
phrases such as ‘same number as’, ‘equal to’, more than’, and 'less than
1.3.4 Make a set that has the same number of objects as a given set.
1.3.5 Make a set that has one more object than a given set.
Strand 2: Operations with Numbers
Essential Learning Outcome 2.1
Additive Thinking - Understanding the meaning of addition and subtraction and how they relate
For Kindergarten, the Grade Level Expectations are expanded to Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)
27
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Link to OECS Learning Standard OS1
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
Compose and decompose numbers up to 9 in a variety of ways using
manipulatives, fingers and pictures (e.g. seven fingers held up, fold down
two fingers, how many are left? Or, two blocks and two more blocks, how
2.1.1
many altogether?). Symbolic representation (writing equations for
composing and decomposing numbers) is an emerging outcome for end of
Kindergarten.
Strand 3: Pattern and Relationship
Essential Learning Outcome 3.1:
Recognizing, Describing and Extending Patterns - Describe, create, extend and generalise patterns
For Kindergarten, the Grade Level Expectations are expanded to Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)
Link to OECS Learning Standard NP4
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
3.1.1 Create simple repeating patterns (2 elements)
3.1.2 Extend simple repeating patterns (2 elements)
3.1.3 Copy a given repeating pattern
28
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
3.1.4 Extend a variety of given repeating patterns to two more repetitions
Create a repeating pattern using manipulatives, musical instruments, or
3.1.5
actions
Identify and describe a repeating pattern in the classroom, the school, and
3.1.6
outdoors
Strand 4: Geometrical Thinking
Essential Learning Outcome 4.1:
Analysing and describing 3D shapes
Essential Learning Outcome 4.2:
Recognize, Name and Describe Shapes – 2D and 3D
For Kindergarten, the Grade Level Expectations are expanded to Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)
Link to OECS Learning Standard SS1, SS2, SS3, SS4, DS1
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
4.1.1 Build and describe 3-D objects
Create a representation of a given 3-D object using building blocks, and
4.1.2
compare the representation to the original 3-D object
Describe a given 3-D object using words such as big, little, round, like a
4.1.3
box or a can
29
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
Identify and describe shapes (2-D = squares, circles, triangles, 3-D =
4.2.1
cubes, cones, and spheres).
Describe objects in the environment using names of shapes and describe
4.2.2 the relative positions of these objects using terms such as above, below,
beside, in front of, behind, and next to.
Correctly name shapes regardless of their orientations or overall size (2-D
4.2.3
= squares, circles, triangles, 3-D = cubes, cones, and spheres).
Strand 5: Measurement
Essential Learning Outcome 5.1:
Understanding what and how we measure
Essential Learning Outcome 5.2:
Developing and applying non-standard and standard units of measure
For Kindergarten, the Grade Level Expectations are expanded to Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)
Link to OECS Learning Standards LM3, LM5, LM6, MC2, MC3, MM2, MM3
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
5.1.1 Classify objects according to selected attributes, e.g., size, colour, shape,
texture, sound, etc.
5.1.2 Classify objects and count the number of objects in each category
30
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
5.1.3 Describe several measurable attributes of a single object.
Directly compare two objects with a measurable attribute in common (such
as length, weight) to see which object has “more of”/“less of” the attribute,
5.1.4
and describe the difference. For example, directly compare the heights of
two children and describe one child as taller/shorter
5.2.1 Use non-standard units to measure attributes, e.g. uses blocks, hands span,
toy cars, etc. to measure
Identify days, weeks, months, holidays, and seasons (standard units of
5.2.2
measure)
5.2.3 Recite days of the week and months of the year in order
Name the different monies (coins and notes) used in the Eastern
5.2.4 Caribbean. (standard units of measure) by identifying the quantity in terms
of cents
Strand 6: Data Management and Probability
Essential Learning Outcome 6.1:
Collecting, organizing, displaying and communicating data
For Kindergarten, the Grade Level Expectations are expanded to Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)
Link to OECS Learning Standard DC1, DR1, DR11, D12
31
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
Collect simple sets of data in the class and school environment using
6.1.1
observation.
6.1.2 Describe data classification.
6.1.3 Use counting to determine the number of objects in a group.
Describe the results of classification and data collection activities.
6.1.4
32
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
XI. OHPC Kindergarten Science Curriculum Outcomes14
XI(i) INTRODUCTION
A region’s aspirations for the educated child must always serve as the foundation for creating relevant and engaging curriculum. In science
education, this means the curriculum should pay particular attention to relevant issues about communities, to area culture and the important
questions that define their challenges and successes. This connection to local problem solving necessarily invokes critical thinking (see: OECS
Curriculum and Assessment Framework: Develop Critical Thinking and Ethical Communication Competencies).
Understanding the science of our human place in regional ecosystems and the nature of our human bodily systems provides a basis for
enhanced self-care and ways to best support the growth and well-being of plants and animals in our world (OECS Curriculum and Assessment
Framework: Develop Well-being Competencies).
The science curriculum should present timely and authentic questions to learners and teachers in way that develops core literacy skills through
rich classroom discussions. Inherent in promoting classroom discourse, is the notion that children construct knowledge through social
interaction in child-centred activities that are carefully scaffolded by teachers (see OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework:
Meaningfully Constructed Learning).
This inductive pedagogy should meanwhile promote the development of process skills within a context of value-based science; questions
that voting citizens should have the tools to answer (see: OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework: Develop Citizenship
Competencies). Quality science curriculum allows multiple entry and exit points within the same essential learning outcome (see: OECS
Curriculum and Assessment Framework: Equitable Learning). It should not only be multi-modal for a diversity of learning styles, it should
also allow opportunities for the teacher to differentiate instruction to the benefit of those learners with learning challenges. In a similar vein,
balanced science curriculum should advocate for assessment variety and be necessarily applied on an upward gradient on Bloom’s Taxonomic
cognitive engagement scale. This allows the teacher an analytical measure of where learners are in their critical thinking and further, allows
14 OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework, October 2022
33
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
children to express their learning whilst developing skills in literacy, numeracy, critical consideration of social issues and technology process
skills.
The prevalence of instructional technology behoves us to create curriculum that empowers our pedagogy to engage children in unique ways.
Broad based technology as “a way of adapting” coupled with the prominence of vocational careers is a clear signal that science curriculum
has to include more than awareness of technology around us but moreover design challenges that encourage children to problem solve and
create prototype solutions leveraging hands-on learning (see: OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework: Deep and Comprehensive
Learning).
Because the working world requires application of all of our knowledge, skills and values, it seems pertinent to create curriculum that
integrates subjects around interesting themes/questions that have meaning for communities (OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework:
Develop Knowledge and Entrepreneurial Competencies).
XI(ii) The Context of the Curriculum Development
The OECS has recently invested considerable energy in a process of writing science standards. Review of the OECS Learning and Assessment
Standards reveals a few important starting points as the OECS Member States embark on the assigned task of writing a new progressive
curriculum which aligns with international standards (https://www.nextgenscience.org/sites/default/files/AllDCI.pdf).
The OECS Learning and Assessment Standards have captured an admirable account of the developmental continuum with respect to process
skill development and attitudes towards the study of science. This presents a current and relevant foundation for writing the new harmonized
curriculum.
Careful review of the OECS Standards reveals considerable overlap in typical international topics however there is a distinct emphasis on
recall which does not map sufficiently with current notions of constructivist child-centred pedagogy. Considering the hierarchy of Blooms
Taxonomy (revised) for children’s progress towards higher-order thinking, the new OHPC should provide more emphasis on process skills
built through responding to real problems. As such, internationally accepted curriculum standards tend to be written based on what children
34
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
can accomplish rather than what they remember. This is a decided shift as educators move from “covering” a topic to building critical
thinking skills.
Retrieved from: https://uwaterloo.ca/centre-for-teaching-excellence/catalogs/tip-sheets/blooms-taxonomy
The OECS Learning and Assessment Standards are cross-referenced to the Essential Learning Outcomes (ELOs) throughout the Outline.
The mapping will be continually monitored by the writing teams for variations in the content, comparing the OECS Standards with the new
process-focused curriculum. Given the extreme flexibility within current international learning outcomes, it is anticipated that traditional
OECS topics can be integrated seamlessly within the current framework outlined below.
XI(iii) Strands and Essential Learning Outcomes
• The OECS curriculum should be designed based on the latest work of international acclaim: Next Generation Science Standards
(https://www.nextgenscience.org/sites/default/files/AllDCI.pdf)
• The forward-looking NGSS work has some overlap with the current OECS standards as indicated below.
• Engineering experiences can be accommodated across any grade and encompass several ELO’s within one learning experience; teachers need
only consider carefully the age appropriateness.
35
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
• Considerable effort was expended within the NGSS process in ensuring that the Strands and ELOs were age-appropriate recognizing that each
learning cohort will have different characteristics. It is expected therefore that teachers will appropriately judge their learners’ capability and adjust
accordingly. The ELOs exhibit enough breath to allow for differentiated instruction
• There is flexibility in the breadth of the ELOs to ensure that community and culture can be integrated
• The standards and essential learning outcomes have been arranged in an age (cognitive)-appropriate sequence based on work adopted from the state of Michigan, USA.
The figure below, while not comprehensive, outlines in a developmental way, how learners should progress through the science curriculum
as they build up cognitive capacity and manual dexterity.
36
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
XI(iv) Strands and Outcomes for Kindergarten Science
Strand 1: Forces and Interactions: Pushes and Pulls (Essential Learning Outcomes considered as equivalent to Specific Learning
outcomes (see below)
Strand 2: Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems: Animals, Plants, and Their Environment (Essential Learning Outcomes
considered as equivalent to Specific Learning outcomes (see below)
Strand 3: Weather and Climate (Essential Learning Outcomes considered as equivalent to Specific Learning outcomes (see below)
Strand 1: Forces and Interactions: Pushes and Pulls
For Kindergarten, the Essential Learning Outcomes (ELOs) are taken as equivalent to Specific Learning Outcomes (SCOs)
This strand links to OECS Learning Standards: Grade 1: Physical Science Strand: Forces, Motions and Structures Sub-strand
ELO Statement Clarification Statement Assessment Boundary
1.1 Plan and conduct an investigation to compare the Examples of pushes or pulls could include a Assessment is limited to different relative
effects of different strengths or different string attached to an object being pulled, a strengths or different directions, but not both
directions of pushes and pulls on the motion of an person pushing an object, a person stopping at the same time. Assessment does not
object. a rolling ball, and two objects colliding and include non-contact pushes or pulls such as
pushing on each other those produced by magnets.
Through manipulation of objects, the child
will discover that
- objects can be pushed by a person or by
another object
- pushes can have different strengths
- pushes can have different directions
- objects can be pulled by a person or by
another object
- pulls can have different strengths
37
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
ELO Statement Clarification Statement Assessment Boundary
- pulls can have different directions
1.2 Analyse data to determine if a design solution Examples of problems requiring a solution Assessment does not include friction as a
works as intended to change the speed or could include having a marble or other mechanism for change in speed.
direction of an object object move a certain distance, follow a
with a push or a pull. particular path, and knock down other
objects. Examples of solutions could
include tools such as a ramp to increase the
speed of the object and a structure that
would cause an object such as a marble or
ball to turn.
Through manipulation of objects, the child
will find ways to:
- Change the speed of an object with a
pull
- Change the speed of an object with a
push
- Change the direction of an object with a
push
- Change the direction of an object with a
pull
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
1.1.1 Demonstrate that pushes can have different strengths and directions.
1.1.2 Demonstrate that pulls can have different strengths and directions.
38
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
1.1.3 Demonstrate that pushing or pulling on an object can change the speed or
direction of its motion
1.1.4 Demonstrate that pushing on an object can start or stop it.
1.2.1 Demonstrate that when objects touch or collide, they push on one another
and can change motion.
1.2.2 Demonstrate that a bigger push or pull makes things speed up or slow
down more quickly.
Strand 2: Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems: Animals, Plants, and Their Environment
For Kindergarten, the Essential Learning Outcomes (ELOs) are taken as equivalent to Specific Learning Outcomes (SCOs)
This strand links to OECS Learning Standards: OECS Grade 1: Life Science Strand: Diversity & Classification Sub-strand and OECS
Grade 1: Life Science Strand: Ecosystem Sub-strand
ELO Statement Clarification Statement
2.1 Use observations to describe patterns of what plants and animals All animals need food in order to live and grow. They obtain their
(including humans) need to survive. food from plants or from other animals. Plants need water and light
to live and grow.
Examples of patterns could include that animals need to take in food
but plants do not; the different kinds of food needed by different
types of animals; the requirement of plants to have light; and that all
living things need water.
2.2 Construct an argument supported by evidence for how plants and animals Examples of plants and animals changing their environment could
(including humans) can change the environment to meet their needs. include a squirrel digs in the ground to hide its food and tree roots
can break concrete.
39
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
ELO Statement Clarification Statement
2.3 Use a model to represent the relationship between the needs of different Examples of relationships could include that deer eat buds and
plants or animals (including humans) and the places they live. leaves, therefore, they usually live in forested areas, and grasses need
sunlight so they often grow in meadows. Plants, animals, and their
surroundings make up a system.
Children will learn about different plants and animals and the places
they live (this should be local to your community, your country, but
some more “exotic” examples could also be shared)
2.4 Communicate solutions that will reduce the impact of humans on the land, Examples of human impact on the land could include cutting trees to
water, air, and/or other living things in the local environment. produce paper and using resources to produce bottles. Examples of
solutions could include reusing paper and recycling cans and bottles.
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
2.1.1 understand the difference between living and non-living things
2.1.2 understand which living things are plants and which living things are
animals
2.1.3 understand that humans are animals
2.2.1 understand what “survive” means
2.2.2 understand that all living things need water
2.2.3 understand plants need light to live and grow.
2.2.4 understand that plants do not need to move around because they make
their own food.
2.2.5 understand that some plants need different things to survive than other
plants.
2.2.6 understand that all animals need food to live and grow. They obtain their
food from plants or from other animals.
40
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
2.2.7 understand that some animals need different kinds of food to survive from
other animals
2.2.8 can give a specific example of how a plant or animal can change their
environment to meet their needs.
2.2.9 can explain that we know that plants and animals can change their
environment because we have evidence
2.3.1 understand why different plants and animals live where they do (their
needs are met)
2.3.2 create a model to show where a plant or animal lives and what they find
there that helps them to survive.
2.3.3 understand the way that plants and animals depend on each other and on
the environment where they live – it’s a system
2.4.1 understand that things that people do to live comfortably can affect the
world around them.
2.4.2 understand that we can do some things to reduce the impact of humans
on the environment
2.4.3 understand that each child can make choices to reduce their impacts on the
land, water, air, and other living things.
Strand 3: Weather and Climate
For Kindergarten, the Essential Learning Outcomes (ELOs) are taken as equivalent to Specific Learning Outcomes (SCOs)
This strand links to OECS Learning Standards: Grade 1: Earth & Space Science Strand: Earth’s Weather Sub-strand and Grade 2: Earth &
Space Science Strand: Earth’s Weather Sub-strand
ELO Statement Clarification Statement Assessment Boundary
3.1 Make observations to determine the effect of sunlight on Examples of Earth’s surface could include sand, Assessment of temperature is
Earth’s surface. soil, rocks, and water] limited to relative measures such as
warmer/cooler.
41
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
ELO Statement Clarification Statement Assessment Boundary
3.2 Use tools and materials to design and build a structure Examples of structures could include umbrellas,
that will reduce the warming effect of sunlight on an area canopies, and tents that minimize the warming
effect of the sun.]
• Asking questions, making observations, and
gathering information are helpful in thinking about
problems
• Designs can be conveyed through sketches,
drawings, or physical models. These representations
are useful in communicating ideas for a problem’s
solutions to other people
3.3 Use and share observations of local weather conditions Examples of qualitative observations could Assessment of quantitative
to describe patterns over time include descriptions of the weather (such as observations limited to whole
sunny, cloudy, rainy, and warm); examples of numbers and relative measures such
• Weather is the combination of sunlight, wind, snow
quantitative observations could include numbers as warmer/cooler
or rain, and temperature in a particular region at a
of sunny, windy, and rainy days in a month.
particular time.
Examples of patterns could include that it is
• People measure these conditions to describe and
usually cooler in the morning than in the
record the weather and to notice patterns over time
afternoon and the number
of sunny days versus cloudy days in different
months
2.4 Ask questions to obtain information about the purpose Emphasis is on local forms of severe weather.
of weather forecasting to prepare for, and respond to,
severe weather.
• Some kinds of severe weather are more likely than
others in a given region.
• Weather scientists forecast severe weather so that
the communities can prepare for and respond to
these events
42
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
3.1.1 understand that sunlight can make a difference to things on the earth’s
surface
3.1.2 observe that soil may change when the sun is shining
3.1.3 observe that a wet rock may change when the sun is shining on it
3.1.4 observe that a puddle may change when the sun is shining on it
3.2.1 explain why people might want to reduce the warming effect of the sun
3.2.2 name one thing people can build to minimize the warming effect of the sun
– could be umbrellas, canopies, and tents
3.2.3 explain one thing (asking questions, making observations, and gathering
information) that people might do to solve problems like the warming
effect of the sun
3.2.4 tell one way that the child may protect themself and their belongings from
the sun, or the rain
3.2.5 design a structure that will keep the rain or sun off their play things at their
house (this could be making a drawing of something that would keep the
rain or sun off their play things)
3.2.6 build a structure that will keep the rain or sun off their play things at their
house (to do this, the children might use recycled objects to make a shelter
for their toy car, or tricycle – whatever is relevant to their experience)
3.3.1 understand that the weather makes a difference to people, plants and
animals.
3.3.2 understand that people measure weather conditions to describe and record
the weather and to notice patterns over time
3.3.3 tell one example of a weather patterns could include that it is usually cooler
in the morning than in the afternoon and the number of sunny days versus
cloudy days is different in different months.
3.3.4 list the seasons there are in their country
43
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
3.3.5 keep track of descriptions of the weather (such as sunny, cloudy, rainy, and
warm)
3.3.6 keep track of numbers of sunny, windy, and rainy days in a month
3.4.1 explain one way that people can find out what the weather forecast is
3.4.2 tell who prepares a weather forecast
3.4.3 understand that it is important to know if severe weather is coming so
people can prepare for it
3.4.4 understand that it is important to know if severe weather is coming so
people can respond to it
3.4.5 understand what is meant by the motto: Be prepared; not scared
3.4.6 list one kind of severe weather that might happen where they live
44
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
XII. OHPC Kindergarten Social Studies Curriculum Outcomes15
XII(i) INTRODUCTION:
This curriculum has been developed to create greater coherence and local relevance in the learning outcomes for primary social studies grades
while adhering to the latest developments in social studies curriculum standards. An examination of the current social studies curriculum in
use in the OECS GPE countries revealed that there were several competing standards criteria driving their use of current curriculum that
needed to be reconciled. Social studies curricula in the Caribbean were influenced by the ten NCSS standards that originally were created in
the early 2000s and are still the basis of most international standards. These NCSS standards guided the draft of OECS Learning and
Assessment Standards for Social Studies that were developed in 2018 at a first attempt at harmonisation. Representatives of the Member
States have indicated that while these are important, each OECS Member State needs to see their own citizenship identity in the curriculum
and for it to be contextually relevant for their people. This likely explains why each OECS country continues to use elements of the new
OECS Learning and Assessment Standards while using some elements of their own Social Studies curriculum priorities that reflect the
particularities of their individual historical-cultural, economic, political, and geographic contexts. It was also noted by the OECS educators
leading the development of the curriculum, that the curriculum remains crowded and that many teachers continue to be unsure of what
standards to aim for. This is not surprising given the diverse approaches to adoption and implementation of the primary Social Studies
curriculum and may also explain why there is some level of uncertainty. This has led to the important decision to develop CPEA Standards
in 2020 to attempt to consolidate and clarify what is expected. This consolidation accomplishes the goal of reducing the level of content but
makes it difficult to visualize relationships to international curriculum standards. This CPEA document also does not include explicit spatial-
geographic standards language which is considered a vital aspect of social studies learning. Table 6.1 shows the interrelationships between
these various sets of standards and the last row provides justification for the decision to recommend the four consolidated strands which are
shared following the table to guide the new curriculum framework.
15 OECS Curriculum and Assessment Framework, October 2022
45
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
These four strands aim to accomplish the following three goals that have been identified by OECS curriculum leads as important for the new
harmonized social studies curriculum:
1) Keep a focus on key international standards that balance knowledge with essential social studies skills.
2) Provide standards that will enable teachers to be clear about what their learners need to know and ensure that their learning is relevant for
the Caribbean context and promote Caribbean identity and citizenship.
3) Address international standards for essential social studies skills and knowledge without compromising the integrity of the 8 OECS
standards to provide clarity of direction for learners and teachers.
Table XII.1
Dominica
NCSS 2018 OECS 2018 CPEA 2020 Ohio 2020 Scotland 2022 Modified OECS 2023
2010
People, places, Location, people Communication Spatial Thinking People, place and Spatial Thinking
environment and places and Interaction environment
Community “
Identity
Sustainability of “
the Environment
Time, Continuity Social Diversity of Historical People, past events Historical and Cultural
and Change issues/change Human Existence Thinking and societies thinking
Culture “
Power, Authority Civic ideals National and Government and Civic Participation Civic Participation and
and Governance and practices Regional Identity governance thinking
Individuals, Groups Group Identity Self, family and “
and Institutions community
Civic Ideals and Civic “
Practices Responsibility
46
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Dominica
NCSS 2018 OECS 2018 CPEA 2020 Ohio 2020 Scotland 2022 Modified OECS 2023
2010
Individual Morals, Ethics and “
Development and Values
Identity
Production, Resources Production Economy and Economic People in society, Economic Decisions
Distribution and Services sustainability Decisions business and and Thinking
Consumption /Resources in the economy
Community in the
Community
Science, Technology Communication “
and Society and Interaction
Global Connections Life skills “
XI(ii) The Four OECS Primary Social Studies Curriculum Strands
Historical-Cultural Thinking and Skills: Involves chronological thinking (past, present, future) and cause-effect relationships using
sources and evidence and identity formation.
Civic Participation and Skills: Individuals actively engaging in their community and nation for the common good, using effective
communication, negotiation, collaboration, and compromise.
Spatial Thinking and Skills: Examines relationships between people, places and environments, by mapping and graphing, analysing and
interpreting information.
Economic Decision Making and Skills: Is reasoning logically about key economic issues that affect consumers and producers.
47
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
XI(iii) Widening Horizon Grade Themes
K-Myself
1-Myself and My Family
2-My Community
3-Our People
4-Our Country, Our Island(s)
5- Our Caribbean Region
6- The Caribbean in the World
XI(iv) Strands and Outcomes for Kindergarten Social Studies
Strand 1: Myself – Historical and Cultural Thinking (includes two Essential Learning Outcomes)
ELO 1.1 : Recognize that all children are special as they all have people who love them, they have their own physical characteristics,
aptitudes and mannerisms.
ELO 1.2: To understand how our celebrations help us build pride in our identity
Strand 2: Myself – Civic Participation (includes one Essential Learning Outcome)
ELO 2: To understand that we have rights and responsibilities as individuals.
Strand 3: Spatial Thinking (includes one Essential Learning Outcome)
ELO 3: to understand that we belong to a wider environment
48
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Strand 1: Myself – Historical and Cultural Thinking
Essential Learning Outcome 1.1:
Recognize that all children are special as they all have people who love them, they have their own physical characteristics, aptitudes and mannerisms.
Essential Learning Outcome 1.2:
To understand how our celebrations help us build pride in our identity. (The emphasis should be on how the family takes part in celebrations.)
For Kindergarten the Grade Level Expectations (GLEs) are taken as equivalent to Specific Learning Outcomes (SCOs). The SCOs are denoted as follows:
K = Knowledge
S = Skills
V = Values
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
1.1.1 Demonstrate an understanding of “me” as a unique child (K)
1.1.2 Distinguish personal characteristics that make each child unique (physical
traits, mannerisms) (S)
1.1.3 Appreciate that everyone has unique and special characteristics (V)
1.1.4 Express appreciation of the child’s own personal attributes, one’s name (V)
1.1.5 Name family members (K)
1.1.6 Represent family members using pictures/images (S)
1.1.7 Compare their physical features with those of their family members;
categorize similarities and differences of self and other family members (S)
1.1.8 Understand that we inherit characteristics from our families (K)
49
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
1.1.9 Appreciate the uniqueness of families; respect that the composition of
families takes many forms (V)
1.1.10 Understand that respect for self includes proper cleanliness, language and
behaviour (K, V)
1.1.11 Categorize similarities and differences of self and others in families
1.1.12 Recognize that their own physical characteristics, preferences, and
mannerisms may be inherited from their families.
1.2.1 Name one religious and one national festival celebrated in their country.
(K)
1.2.2 Understand the significance and importance of religious and national
festivals.(S)
1.2.3 Appreciate that their country has different celebrations and traditions. (V)
1.2.4 Identify customs (food, music, dance language) associated with these
celebrations (K)
1.2.5 Make presentations on customs associated with these celebrations (S)
1.2.6 Appreciate the diversity of customs and take pride in this (V)
Strand 2: Myself – Civic Participation
Essential Learning Outcome:
To understand that we have rights and responsibilities as individuals.
For Kindergarten the Grade Level Expectations (GLEs) are taken as equivalent to Specific Learning Outcomes (SCOs). The SCOs are denoted as follows:
K = Knowledge
S = Skills
V = Values
50
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
2.1 Describe how family members care for one another (K)
2.2 Appreciate that family members love and care for one another (V)
2.3 Describe roles of various family members (K)
2.4 Chart the daily routines or activities in which family members care for one
another
2.5 Appreciate that the way family members love and care for one another
helps them meet their basic needs (V)
2.6 Identify groups to which I belong (K)
2.7 Express how my behaviour in groups and the behaviour of others affects
me and others (S)
2.8 Appreciate that members of groups to which I belong have responsibilities
(V)
2.9 Recognize that all children have the right to be safe from harm (K)
2.10 List examples of what helps children feel safe (S)
2.11 Appreciate that being safe from harm also means that they must learn to
play safely (V)
2.12 Demonstrate responsible caring behaviour towards others in play (S)
2.13 Identify national symbols and emblems such as the national flag, anthem,
pledge, bird and flower (K)
2.14 Demonstrate appropriate behaviour when national anthem is being played,
pledge is being said (S)
2.15 Appreciate and respect the importance of national symbols (V)
2.16 Know why we have rules in groups to which I belong (e.g. family, class at
school) (K)
51
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
2.17 Apply groups’ rules in daily life (S)
2.18 Demonstrate examples of responsible and polite behaviour in groups to
which I belong (V)
2.19 Describe safe practices while travelling to school (K)
2.20 Role play the use of safe practices when travelling to school (S)
2.21 Appreciate the value and benefits of practicing safety when travelling to
school (V)
Strand 3: Myself – Spatial Thinking
Essential Learning Outcome:
To understand that we belong to a wider environment
For Kindergarten the Grade Level Expectations (GLEs) are taken as equivalent to Specific Learning Outcomes (SCOs). The SCOs are denoted as follows:
K = Knowledge
S = Skills
V = Values
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
State the name and address of their home and school (K)
3.1
Express themselves clearly when stating their address (S)
3.2
Feel a sense of belonging in their surroundings (V)
3.3
52
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Integrated Unit(s) where outcome is taught
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can: Plants &
Belonging Weather Celebrations Games
Animals
Identify natural and built features of the local environment (K)
3.4
Illustrate natural and built features of the local environment (S)
3.5
Appreciate that they are part of a wider environment (A)
3.6
Describe various weather conditions (K)
3.7
Observe and record different weather conditions (S)
3.8
Appreciate the importance of taking safety precautions in some weather
3.9
conditions (V)
53
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
XIII. Mathematics Outcomes Not Included in Integrated Units
SCO Learners who demonstrate understanding can:
Strand 1: Number Sense – Numbers to 10
1.1.2 Count backwards from 10 by 1s
1.1.3 Identify an error in counting sequence
1.1.5 Say the number that comes before a given number
1.1.6 Use a number line to support counting
Recite number names from a given number to a given number – i.e. start at a given number and go backwards down to 1 or start at a given number and
1.1.7
go up to 10
1.3.4 Make a set that has the same number of objects as a given set.
1.3.5 Make a set that has one more object than a given set.
Strand 4: Geometrical Thinking
4.1.1 Build and describe 3-D objects
4.1.2 Create a representation of a given 3-D object using building blocks, and compare the representation to the original 3-D object
4.1.3 Describe a given 3-D object using words such as big, little, round, like a box or a can
Strand 5: Measurement
5.1.3 Describe several measurable attributes of a single object.
5.2.1 Use non-standard units to measure attributes, e.g. uses blocks, hands span, toy cars, etc. to measure
54
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
XIV. Effective Learning Strategies for Language Arts
The main message from 20 years of research on effective teaching of Language Arts - “No skill should be taught in isolation”
https://www.readingrockets.org/topics/early-literacy-development/articles/what-does-20-years-research-say-about-teaching-
language#resources
Concept Strategies
Comprehension Listening is an integral component of meaning making. These comprehension strategies may be used when children are
Skills listening to audio stories, read alouds, or during discussions.
Retelling: learners retelling information or a story they have listened to.
Connecting - When learners preview text, they tap into what they already know, that will help them to understand the text
they are about to listen to. This provides a framework for any new information they will hear.
Visualising - Learners who visualize while listening to a story often have better listening comprehension. Readers can take
advantage of illustrations that are embedded in the text.
Predicting - When learners make predictions about the text they are about to hear, it sets up expectations based on their
prior knowledge about similar topics. As they listen, they may mentally revise their prediction as they gain more information.
Recognizing Literal Meaning: Learners recall facts, details or information explicitly stated in the audio story.
Making Inferences: Learners make inferences as they listen to audio stories, interpreting what is said by going beyond the
literal meaning.
Identifying Main Idea: Learners identify the central idea or gist of an audio story .
Drawing Conclusions: Learners draw conclusions by synthesizing information in an audio story.
Analysing Reasoning: Learners support a claim made in an audio story.
Finding Evidence: Learners identify statements or details in an audio story that provide evidence to support claims.
Excellent, helpful strategies for teachers to enhance children’s comprehension
https://myokapi.com/education/literacy-voices/category/comprehension/
Concepts About Explanations, lessons, assessment list for Concepts of Print
Print https://www.reallygreatreading.com/countdown/supplemental/pdfs/Concepts_of_Print_Countdown_v3.pdf
https://www.readingrockets.org/topics/assessment-and-evaluation/articles/concepts-print-assessment
https://www.readingrockets.org/sites/default/files/migrated/Concepts-of-Print-Assessment-2.pdf
55
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Concept Strategies
Video for children: Parts of a Book
https://youtu.be/2n6-UibBbUQ?si=oWylwvtkXcNFgkpj
Examples of text features to teach children in Kindergarten and Grade One
https://4kinderteachers.com/what-are-text-features/
Forming letters: Emergent Writing Skills – possible practice with forming shapes early in the Kindergarten year
(Printing Practice) https://images.app.goo.gl/siUBUPBFBGcwz2Fc9
https://images.app.goo.gl/ieaqyYvhKBqQKzio8
Recognizing Letters https://images.app.goo.gl/k4BzeEhbKtVsMNYy9
(lower and upper https://images.app.goo.gl/eTynY1vSrnDUP1bx9
case)
• Have learners practise holding pencil correctly
• Have learners write/draw lines, circles, curves, strokes, pictures
• Have learners use appropriate stroke formation
• Begin to develop fine motor skills such as cutting
• Have learners write and draw daily
• Have learners match letters/numbers /picture straight line
• Have learners form letters using 2 lines lowercase and 3 lines uppercase
Instead of paper and pencil, the learners can use playdough to form letters, peas, beans, rice, confetti and other small
material to form letters, or ziplock bags with shaving foam fastened flat inside the bag to form letters
The learners can use white boards and markers to trace and copy the formation of the letter. Individual whiteboards can be
created by the teacher, using a rectangular piece of cardboard, clear tape which covers the cardboard on both sides and
markers for writing. See this link to create a wipeable writing board: https://fb.watch/rordKfI2Zt/
Sometimes the teacher may want to give the children a prepared paper for practice (as in these examples):
https://images.app.goo.gl/gxLsSijujKotKfdn8
https://images.app.goo.gl/pmj9z23nffdg2fBT8
56
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Concept Strategies
Videos for children to learn about forming letters – examples here for “Ss” and “Rr”
Letter Ss : https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7bdV4U1tsGc
Letter Rr: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s9g5TzuNxfU
High Frequency Ideas for teaching sight words – video by Kindergarten teacher
https://youtu.be/QQiPcwfgGEc
Or
Videos for children to learn High Frequency Words / Sight Words – examples here for “help” and “my”
Sight Words Help Sight Word - Remote Learning - Kindergarten (youtube.com)
Sight word MY (youtube.com)
See also, “Word Word Recognition-
Study” below Create a word wall by alphabetical order in the classroom for ease of referral by learners, adding words as they are taught
Have learners visually discriminate words (talk about the size and shape of the word, say words, sing out words)
Have learner find words around the classroom.
Have learners read sentences with words.
Have learners spell words in the air, on the desk, on boards.
Play Hot Potato /Go fish/musical chairs/hopscotch/I Spy to spell and recognize words.
Interactive letter or word bingo activity using the letter/words taught.
“Spot it” - interactive letter/word game. Teacher places the letters or words around the classroom and allow learners to
move around and find any letter or word called.
“Colour by sight word” activity where learners will colour the same words in one colour to create a picture/collage (samples
available online)
Sometimes the teacher may want to give the learners a practice sheet, as shown in these links.
https://images.app.goo.gl/p1fo8u483t4b9Fzo9
https://images.app.goo.gl/CXpT7KfhdSAwzYUy7
https://images.app.goo.gl/yQ3kgvZreF2wUSuTA
https://images.app.goo.gl/HvRDPFxNJoQnqhYo8
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/25121710401537081/
https://worksheets4free.com/free-dolch-sight-word-worksheet-a/
https://www.myteachingstation.com/reading/high-frequency-words/sight-word-THE-printable-worksheet
57
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Concept Strategies
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/the-sight-word-this-week-is-is-sight-words-are-some-of-the-most-frequently-used-words--
554365035353397450/
● Engage learners in fun games to practice reinforcing each sight word.
Map it and drive it! Find it and swat it!
Serve Pancake Sight Words to friends while naming it aloud.
Make sight word bracelets. Make paper crowns with words
Individual assessment:
Learners will be presented with the words in a shape. They will listen to the word called and place a bean on it. (As learners
do so independently, the teacher will observe and record by placing a tick for each correct word. )
For example:
58
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Concept Strategies
like I see
we my a
Independent During independent reading, learners read on their own for their own purposes. Teachers must be careful that the materials
Reading provided are at the learners’ independent level (“just-right books”) so that they are not frustrated.
Characteristics of Readers – Kindergarten learners typically at Stages A and B by end of year
https://core-
docs.s3.amazonaws.com/documents/asset/uploaded_file/203042/Characteristics_of_Readers_at_F_P_Levels.pdf
Strategies to support and short videos to illustrate end of kindergarten reading
https://www.readingrockets.org/literacy-home/reading-101-guide-parents/your-kindergartener/phonics-and-decoding-
activities
https://www.dpi.nc.gov/learners-families/parents-corner/literacy-home-digital-childrens-reading-initiative/kindergarten
Independent Writing Samples for Kindergarten
Writing
An important point to note is that teachers view writing as a developmental process and always review writing from the
perspective of what a learner has accomplished and what the next steps of learning should be.
https://www.readingrockets.org/classroom/looking-writing/kindergarten/writing-sample-1
Phonemic Phonemic Awareness is the ability to identify and manipulate individual sounds (phonemes) in spoken words.
Awareness
Video as an example of how to teach phonemes:
Phonological https://www.pbslearningmedia.org/resource/phonemes-video/rise-and-shine-literacy-time/
Awareness
Phonemic Awareness -Initial Phoneme Isolation https://youtu.be/g5N68TwqYJ8?si=79wF8r5NQMx3BurV
Detailed strategy for Initial Phoneme Isolation: Note: The sounds are introduced before the letter:
- The teacher will stress on the initial sounds in the words while separating the sound from the rest of the word using
Elkonin boxes drawn on the board and on flash cards. The learners will be asked to listen, observe the teacher's
lips/mouth and then repeat. (https://www.readingrockets.org/classroom/classroom-strategies/elkonin-boxes)
59
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Concept Strategies
- The gradual release process will be used. - My turn, Our turn. Individual turn. They will be asked to share what sound
each word made at the beginning. E.g. man - /m/, pan - /p/, van -/v/.
- Have learners find pictures/objects with target sound in class /school environment.
Sample video for children to learn a phoneme:
Letter Ee | New Phonics Songs | Little Fox | Animated Songs for Kids (youtube.com)
Phonological awareness is the ability to recognize and manipulate the spoken parts of works, including syllables, onset-rime,
and phonemes.
Excellent ideas and resources to teach phonological awareness
The Comprehensive Literacy Resource https://www.hand2mind.com/pdf/kindergarten/chapter_2.pdf (Chapter Two)
https://www.uwo.ca/fhs/lwm/teaching/dld_2018_19/Woldmo_PAGuideKindergarten.pdf
Position Statements and Research Briefs for teachers interested in building their understanding about Phonological
Awareness
https://www.literacyworldwide.org/docs/default-source/where-we-stand/9457_Phonological_Awareness_1-
2020_Final.pdf
Phonological Awareness Skills expected for Kindergarten learners
https://www.readingrockets.org/article/development-phonological-skills
Phoneme Identification, phonological awareness, blending, segmenting, etc.
https://readinguniverse.org/explore-teaching-topics/word-recognition/phonological-awareness/phonemic-awareness/phoneme-identification
-
Phonics Phonics involves the relationship between sounds and written symbols – understanding the sound-letter connection.
Note: A grapheme is a letter. It is the written form of a sound (phoneme).
Strategies for teaching letters/sounds to Kindergarten children
Present pictures of target sounds and letters
Have learners play games to identify pictures with target sound (hopscotch, Go fish, musical chairs, find the picture)
Have learners sing songs/recite rhymes about target sound.
60
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Concept Strategies
Present target letters on flashcards, have learners identify the uppercase and lowercase letters.
Have learners identify the target letters in words around classroom
Have learners trace letters in sand/on board/on desk.
Allow learners to identify the connection between the letter and its sound.
Teacher might allow learners to play games to match letters to pictures(Cards/Teacup and Saucer/My Pair/GoFish
Have learners draw/colour pictures beginning with target sound.
Have learners use playdough, paper, sticks to create an object which begins with target letters/sound.
Have learners create a scrapbook with pictures based on target sound
Phonics – sample worksheets
Letter S
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/english-second-language-esl/1843529#
https://youtu.be/4ofEKTBl6yM?si=PQxskzLs60yBkSn3
https://images.app.goo.gl/UVjhYFQKC8kTiYAB6
https://images.app.goo.gl/DdoBZyhTzoJnzcEYA
Sequence of Steps and Helpful Strategies for children to learn letter/sounds - example c(k)
1. LISTEN: Learners will listen to a story associated with the grapheme of the day – for example: “c” (The Jolly Phonics
program offers stories for each letter/sound, which can be found online.
A family is visiting a castle in Spain. While they are sitting outside a café, some Spanish dancers appear in the courtyard. The ladies wear
brightly coloured dresses and click castanets, going /c/, /c/, /c/, /c/.
Another example instead of a story, the teacher could go around the class asking the children what is their favourite meal.
each time a child replies, encourage the children to rub their bellies and say, /mmmmmmm/
2. ACTION: They will use their hand to make the action: Snap your fingers together in the air as if you are playing
castanets, and say/c/c/c/c/.
3. OBSERVE: Learners will look at the flashcard that has the grapheme and make the sound after the teacher has
modelled it. /c/
4. LETTER FORMATION: learners will finger trace a sanded letter “C”
5. BLENDING
C/A/T/
C/A/N/
C/A/P/
61
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Concept Strategies
6. SOUNDING: Auditory discrimination - Learners will identify words that do not contain the sound / c / after
viewing four pictures (CAT, PARROT, KITE, CLOCK.)
7. WRITING: learners will listen to the sound called out by the teacher and write it down on their white board /C/, /S/,
/T/, /P/, /N/.
8. DICTATE the words and have learners to write them down: it, at
9.. Learners will listen to the song associated with the letter, once, then, they will sing along while making the action.
https://youtu.be/-Qpj1j488PM
Read Aloud Helpful webinar for teachers (uses the term “shared reading”, however it is basically about “read aloud”)
https://myokapi.com/education/literacy-voices/shared-reading-approach/
Brief Description of a Read Aloud Process:
Teacher tells learners that good readers think as they read and ask themselves questions that they may find the answer
in the book.
• Display the cover of the book
• Teacher points to the title and identify the author/illustrator and read aloud. Teacher encourages children tell what
questions this book might answer. Note children’s responses.
• Children predict what they think will happen in the story. Responses are noted.
• Children listen to the story, teacher pauses at times for children to predict what will happen and check their
previous predictions to what has happened (before reading, teacher must identify pages where they will pause).
• Children check to see if their questions are answered.
• As the story is read, encourage children to raise they hands when they have a question or don’t understand.
Detailed Description of a Read Aloud Process:
Before Reading (including Picture Walk)
• Teacher shows learners the cover and asks the children what they think the book might be about based on the
cover.
● Briefly explain that the book will show different ways they can help take care of the Earth.
● Before opening the book, ask the children to look at the cover again and describe what they see.
● Discuss the colours, the illustrations, and any words they recognize.
● Open the book and start flipping through the pages without reading the text.
62
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Concept Strategies
● Stop at each page and ask the children to describe what they see in the pictures.
● Encourage them to guess what is happening on each page and how it might relate to taking care of the Earth.
During Reading
● Go back to the beginning of the book and read it aloud to the children.
● Pause occasionally to ask questions and make connections between the text and the pictures they discussed during
the picture walk.
● Use expressive voices and gestures to keep the children engaged.
After Reading
● After reading the book, discuss the book
● Ask the children which ideas or parts of the book they liked best and why.
● Possibly write their responses on a large chart paper or whiteboard or plan a different way for children to respond
to the book
Shared Reading Teacher and children read through some text that is presented so all can see – chart paper, whiteboard
Often shared reading might be a poem that the teacher has printed on chart paper. The first time through, the teacher will
read most of the words, pausing to “think aloud” about how to figure out what a word might be (first letter sound, word
looks like, guess the word). The second time through, the children will take a more active part in the reading. This is
especially effective if the text is repetitive, has rhyming words, or is easily predictable for the children.
Excellent video of a teacher and Kindergarten children:
Shared Reading of a Poem in Kindergarten (youtube.com)
Guide to Shared Reading: What is Shared Reading? (fountasandpinnell.com)
Morning Message
The morning message provides a daily opportunity for Shared Reading. The morning message lets learners know what is
happening each day. It provides structure and routine and gives the children notice of changes in schedule or new things
happening. The message can also let the children know what they will learn that day. Finally, the morning message provides
an opportunity for some teaching about letters, sounds, and sight words. In the last term of Kindergarten, teachers may
begin to leave out a word and invite the children to predict what word should be there, and to figure out the spelling of the
missing word.
63
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Concept Strategies
https://susanjonesteaching.com/morning-meeting-message-ideas-for-kindergarten-first-and-second-grade/
Shared Writing Teacher and children create text that is presented so all can see – chart paper, whiteboard. The teacher does most of the
printing, but may ask children to do some as well. The teacher pauses and asks children for their help with some letters,
sounds, words, and ideas.
Teacher engages the learners in opportunities to help with word choice, spelling, punctuation, etc.
Strategy guide: Shared Writing | Read Write Think
Video of teacher and children – demonstrating the way the teacher includes some phonics instruction, spelling, etc.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nVoEblnX5Zc
Teaching Strategy Think-Pair-Share
https://www.readwritethink.org/professional-development/strategy-guides/using-think-pair-share
Word Study Words related to Inclusive Learning Strategies in the Integrated Units
Example One: After a Shared Reading, brief word study of a specific word in the poem – “away”
(also see High The teacher will circle the word ‘away’ in the poem, then ask learners to guess the word, as she reads through the poem.
Frequency/Sight Then the teacher will show the learners the word ‘away’ by itself on a large flip chart or board. Learners will repeat the word
words) several times after the teacher and spell the word as the teacher points to each letter. The teacher will record a few simple
sentences on the board or chart with the word ‘away’. For example; “The bird flew away, The cat run away”. The learners
will point to the word away in the sentence and repeat the sentences after the teacher. The teacher will ask the learners what
each sentence means, then for learners to come up with a meaning of the word ‘away’.
If the learners have reading journals, they could enter the word ‘away” and draw a picture to help them remember the word.
The word ‘away’ will be placed on the class word wall. The teacher will discuss what it means for the “rain to go away”,
linking back to the poem.
Example Two: After a shared reading, brief word study of words in the story- “you, make, down”
Teacher presents the three words on flash cards. Reread the sentence in the book where the words are used, and pause for
the children to give the word, make a sentence using the word and then question learners: How many letters are in “you”,
“make” and “down”? What letter does each word begin with?
64
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
XV. Effective Learning Strategies for Mathematics
Concept SCO Strategies
Early 5.1.4 Teachers might do some work with these concepts before the commencement of teaching numbers
Concepts
more and less
same and different
big and small/little
These concepts should mostly be done with real objects in the classroom, supplemented with the videos and
worksheets
More and less
youtu.be/Vvu-_yXnh14?si=mEnpDHYGQNTotnS0
https://i.pinimg.com/564x/b0/80/93/b0809355eaa0c0a320ab2414c0aaef7f.jpg
Same and different-
https://youtu.be/oqzWr5ILxDM?si=7rjITX1sbLRRah6x
https://www.k5learning.com/worksheets/kindergarten/kindergarten-same-different-worksheet.gif
Big and little/small
https://youtu.be/XAMtgyiUhIo?si=SqBEqLwVPqURNfI5
https://youtu.be/4qbRP29MXRw?si=pLy-Ha_E2SN1TEWa
https://games4esl.com/esl-worksheets/big-and-small-worksheets/
65
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Concept SCO Strategies
Counting 1.1.1 Children should have many “real life” opportunities to count. For example, the children could count how many chairs
Numbers to 1.2.2 are at the table, to know how many children may sit there. The children could count how many activities there are on
1.2.3
10 (how the daily agenda.
1.2.4
many in a
Teaching Tips
set)
https://www.pbslearningmedia.org/resource/counting-clovers-video/count-on-june-bug/
Sample Activity
https://static.pbslearningmedia.org/media/media_files/fc511350-0d3e-4301-b5be-4af81bb0beeb/cebf9fea-
8534-4ceb-b0d0-a52128095715.pdf
Sample resources to help children learn numbers.
66
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Concept SCO Strategies
https://www.kidspuzzlesandgames.co.uk/worksheets/maths-worksheets/numbers-
worksheets/numbers-0-5-worksheets/0-recognising-the-number-zero-worksheet#google_vignette
https://cleverlearner.com/number-activities/number-zero-0-activity.html#google_vignette
https://cleverlearner.com/number-activities/images/number-writing-and-counting-activity-1-4.pdf
67
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Concept SCO Strategies
Number 4 song:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HzlfPXwy1YY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C0s9Y81rdBQ
Days of the 5.2.3 Days of the week:
week;
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mXMofxtDPUQ
months of
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=poQGhbve36g
the year
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lPgTdgvj_jc
Months of the year:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fe9bnYRzFvk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=omkuE6Wa5kQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Pq4VC0Uul6w
68
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Concept SCO Strategies
The Teacher might want to carry out daily routines where learners can keep track of the days of school using the
number line, tally marks and tens and ones and other calendar items. Teacher will have the days cards turned around
and they will be revealed daily as the days pass in each month.
The Teacher might want to carry out this calendar activity daily and incorporate different strategies to get learners to
use it across the curriculum. Teacher might want to allow learners to say the days of the week and months of the year
by rote. Use songs and rhymes to help learners to recite the days and months. Teacher might want to use questioning
as a technique to help with learners’ understanding (what day is it today, what day comes next, what month are we in,
what was last month etc).
69
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Concept SCO Strategies
Let's Learn Our Numbers 0-10 | Counting Song for Kids | Jack Hartmann Writing Numbers -
Identifying
YouTube
Numbers
and Printing
How to print the numbers- sample video:
Numbers
https://youtu.be/XTT5wuuhkU0?si=Jaq3DvlyzaCtDQ-V
Teaching Numbers 1-10
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kxoydi6ElQQ
Making Sets 1.3.4 Items to use for children to practice making sets and counting.
Patterning 3.1.1 Importance of Patterning and examples of strategies
https://www.qcaa.qld.edu.au/kindergarten/research-insights/patterning
The Patterns Practice Song | Math Songs | Scratch Garden (youtube.com)
70
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Concept SCO Strategies
https://mmecaroline.com/how-to-teach-patterning-in-kindergarten-in-3-easy-steps/
5 Frames 1.2.1 Videos for children to show different ways to show the numbers: sample:
and 10
https://youtu.be/q_DGrdsyirk?si=XzeXinm_SpWtQQn0
Frames
The teacher might have learners practice writing the numbers in the air, with the use of sandboxes, playdough,
Show the
coloured rice or with worksheets. The teacher might have learners work in small groups to represent the numbers in
number in
different ways e.g. use magnetic letters to write the number six in words, blocks/pictures, ten frames, tally marks.
different
ways
The Teacher might reinforce the learning by giving learners opportunities to represent the number using a variety of
concrete manipulatives. Example: Use of counters, unifix blocks, buttons, dean’s blocks, tens’ frames.
The Teacher might want to gather the learners in a circle and introduce the lesson by showing them a large numeral
cutout or flashcard.
Do you know what the number is? Teacher might want to encourage them to share any prior knowledge they
have about the number – example number 5 (I have five fingers, There are five days in a school week, I have 5
toes).
The Teacher might want to hide the number cards as well as objects that represent sets the number around the
classroom or a designated outdoor area. Teacher might want to explain to learners that they will need to search for
these numbers hidden around the room.
71
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Concept SCO Strategies
The Teacher might want to divide the learners into small groups or pairs, depending on the size of your class and
provide each group with a bucket or bag to collect the number cards they find.
The Teacher might want to set a timer and let the learners begin searching for the hidden numbers and encourage them
to work together and help each other find the numbers.
The teacher might have learners create anchor charts to represent the number in different ways.
Shapes 4.1.1 What makes a shape a shape?
https://vizuvizu.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/VizuVizu-What-Makes-a-Shape.pdf
What Can this Be – Shape
https://vizuvizu.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/VizuVizu-What-Can-This-Be.pdf
Shape-Safari
https://vizuvizu.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/VizuVizu-Shape-Safari.pdf
Shapes at the Playground
https://www.uniteforliteracy.com/unite/math/book?BookId=125
72
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
XVI. Effective Strategies for Assessment
Gathering Assessment Data and Record-keeping
Assessment is one of the most critical aspects of teaching and learning. The teacher uses observation, conversation and products to determine the degree
to which each learner has achieved the outcomes. This informs the emphasis that is placed on concepts in lesson plans and determines whether or not a
concept should be retaught to the entire class. Further, it assists the teacher to differentiate activities and lessons. Without assessment, the teacher cannot
be confident that every learner is succeeding which is our ultimate goal in education.
The Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs) and Inclusive Learning Strategies (ILS) must be directly linked. The learners learn and demonstrate
development of their learning of the SCOS during the ILS.
Assessment information is gathered through Observation, Conversation and Products, as set out in the Inclusive Assessment Strategies (IAS) column in
all the Integrated Units. The teacher gathers assessment information on each of the SCOs during the ILS, or after the ILS by examining any products the
children have produced.
The teacher will use checklists (hard copy or digital) to record data collected about children’s progress in achieving the SCOs. The teacher will observe
the children and will listen to the children’s responses or the teacher will arrange for the children to create a “product” to gather evidence of the children’s
development of the SCO attitudes, skills, and knowledge. Note that not every learner needs to be observed on every day. The teacher will know, based
on prior observations, those learners for whom additional observations would be helpful. The checklists which appear below would be prepared by term
for each learner. Teachers may use these to provide detailed reports to parents and caregivers.
The teacher will use a consistent scale in the checklists:
Which children are easily meeting the outcome (+)? Which children are meeting the outcome (=)? Which children need more practice (-)?
The teacher will note the date of the observation/conversation, and the teacher may also add some comments for additional clarification.
Additional records to keep:
The teacher may want to assess and keep track of individual learners’ progress in the following skills:
• grapheme/phoneme correspondence
• sight words the children know
• Concepts of Print
73
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
OHPC Kindergarten Progress Checklist – Language Arts
Learner: ___________________________ Teacher: _______________________________ Term: ________________________
Listening and Speaking
1.1 listen to music, conversation and environmental sounds for personal enjoyment *
1.2 demonstrate interest, curiosity, engagement in sharing the experiences of others and with oral stories and information sharing.
1.3 use social listening and speaking skills to interact with a variety of audiences with sensitivity and respect *
1.4 interact and collaborate with the teacher and children who have diverse interests, backgrounds and languages
1.5 become aware of how effective listening enhances understanding
1.6 observe how tone, fluency and intonation impact meaning and mood
use Home Language(s) and, as Standard English develops, share their thoughts, feelings and questions about engaging events, stories and conversations
1.7
with increasing confidence*
1.8 develop increasing clarity and focus when sharing stories or experiences*
engage in active phonological awareness activities and word play to discriminate between various sounds in their environment, letters of the alphabet,
1.9
rhyme and meaningful sound patterns*
1.10 develop and apply vocabulary and language structures to enhance their understanding of how to communicate ideas with purpose and focus *
Reading and Viewing
2.1 interact meaningfully with a wide range of genres and text forms*
2.2 develop questions when browsing through passages of interest
2.3 connect background knowledge to the titles and pictures of fiction and nonfiction passages to build a foundation of understanding *
2.4 develop understanding and application of the Concepts of Print*
2.5 develop knowledge about the purpose and variety of texts that are read or read to them *
browse through a variety of images, and nonfiction material in pre-emergent and emergent level passages, or passages of interest, to discover
2.6
information.
2.7 demonstrate understanding of some environmental print and pictorial information *
2.8 begin to apply comprehension strategies to visualize, predict and connect *
2.9 demonstrate understanding by responding to read-alouds with images, model making, discussions, or temporary writing
2.10 connect words and images in pre-emergent and emergent level texts to background knowledge
2.11 recognise and use a variety of high frequency words of personal importance, such as names and pre-emergent level high-frequency words *
2.12 participate in shared reading and use the meaning and flow of the language to anticipate upcoming words
2.13 begin to demonstrate fluency and phrasing during shared reading, independent and guided reading of emergent level passages
2.14 identify an increasing number of letter names and letter sounds, beginning with those of personal importance*
2.15 use known letter sounds to problem solve upcoming words in emergent level passages*
74
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Writing and Representing
3.1 use shared ideas to co-construct stories
3.2 assign meaning to experimental drawing and writing
3.3 begin expressive writing to share ideas and real and imagined topics*
3.4 use peer collaboration and classroom tools to assist in writing process*
3.5 learn to approximate and begin to refine printing of the lower case and upper case letters of the alphabet*
3.6 connect spoken language(s) to written language and other representations (e.g. drawings)
3.7 connect phonological awareness to letter shapes
3.8 spell name and some words of personal importance correctly
Note: Not every outcome will be assessed in each term. The teacher will delete from the checklist outcomes not assessed in that
particular term.
Key: + Learner is easily meeting the outcome
= Learner is meeting the outcome
x Learner needs more practice
SCO Date Date Date Date Date Date Comments
Listening and Speaking
1.1 + 9/13 + 9/20 + 10/10 + 10/19 + 11/15 + 12/15
1.2 = 9/13 = 9/20 = 10/10 = 10/19 = 10/30 + 11/15
1.3 X 9/13 X 9/17 X 9/21 X 9/30 = 10/15 = 10/30
Is very shy to Is gaining
speak in the large confidence
group
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
1.10
Reading and Viewing
2.1
75
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
SCO Date Date Date Date Date Date Comments
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
2.10
2.11
2.12
2.13
2.14
2.15
Writing and Representing
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
76
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
OHPC Kindergarten Progress Checklist – Mathematics
Learner: ___________________________ Teacher: _______________________________ Term: ________________________
Number Sense
1.1.1 Say the number sequence to 10 by 1s
1.1.2 Count backwards from 10 by 1s
1.1.3 Identify an error in counting sequence
1.1.4 Say the number that comes after a given number
1.1.5 Say the number that comes before a given number
1.1.6 Use a number line to support counting
1.1.7 Recite number names from a given number to a given number – i.e. start at a given number and go backwards down to 1 or start at a given number and
go up to 10
1.1.8 Count with meaning to 10, by building quantities
1.1.9 Count with meaning to 10, by matching quantity and numeral
1.2.1 Represent a given number up to 10 using a variety of concrete models, including 5 and 10 frames
1.2.2 Answer the question, How many are in the set? using the last number counted in a set
1.2.3 In a fixed arrangement, starting in different locations, can show that the count of the number of objects in a set does not change
1.2.4 Count the number of objects in a given set, rearrange the objects, predict the new count, and recount to verify the prediction
1.3.1 Look briefly at a given familiar arrangement of one to five objects or dots and identify the number represented without counting
1.3.2 Look briefly at a given familiar arrangement of one to five objects or dots and identify the number represented by a given dot
1.3.3 Compare the number of objects in two sets of up to 10 objects, using phrases such as ‘same number as’, ‘equal to’, more than’, and 'less than
1.3.4 Make a set that has the same number of objects as a given set.
1.3.5 Make a set that has one more object than a given set.
Operations with Numbers
2.1.1 Compose and decompose numbers up to 9 in a variety of ways using manipulatives, fingers and pictures (e.g. seven fingers held up, fold down two fingers,
how many are left? Or, two blocks and two more blocks, how many altogether?). Symbolic representation (writing equations for composing and
decomposing numbers) is an emerging outcome for end of Kindergarten.
Pattern and Relationship
3.1.1 Create simple repeating patterns (2 elements)
3.1.2 Extend simple repeating patterns (2 elements)
3.1.3 Copy a given repeating pattern
3.1.4 Extend a variety of given repeating patterns to two more repetitions
3.1.5 Create a repeating pattern using manipulatives, musical instruments, or actions
77
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Number Sense
3.1.6 Identify and describe a repeating pattern in the classroom, the school, and outdoors
Geometrical Thinking
4.1.1 Build and describe 3-D objects
4.1.2 Create a representation of a given 3-D object using building blocks, and compare the representation to the original 3-D object
4.1.3 Describe a given 3-D object using words such as big, little, round, like a box or a can
4.2.1 Identify and describe shapes (2-D = squares, circles, triangles, 3-D = cubes, cones, and spheres).
4.2.2 Describe objects in the environment using names of shapes and describe the relative positions of these objects using terms such as above, below, beside,
in front of, behind, and next to.
4.2.3 Correctly name shapes regardless of their orientations or overall size (2-D = squares, circles, triangles, 3-D = cubes, cones, and spheres).
Measurement
5.1.1 Classify objects according to selected attributes, e.g., size, colour, shape, texture, sound, etc.
5.1.2 Classify objects and count the number of objects in each category
5.1.3 Describe several measurable attributes of a single object.
5.1.4 Directly compare two objects with a measurable attribute in common (such as length, weight) to see which object has “more of”/“less of” the attribute,
and describe the difference. For example, directly compare the heights of two children and describe one child as taller/shorter
5.2.1 Use non-standard units to measure attributes, e.g. uses blocks, hands span, toy cars, etc. to measure
5.2.2 Identify days, weeks, months, holidays, and seasons (standard units of measure)
5.2.3 Recite days of the week and months of the year in order
5.2.4 Name the different monies (coins and notes) used in the Eastern
Caribbean. (standard units of measure) by identifying the quantity in terms of cents
Data Management and Probability
6.1.1 Collect simple sets of data in the class and school environment using observation.
6.1.2 Describe data classification.
6.1.3 Use counting to determine the number of objects in a group.
6.1.4 Describe the results of classification and data collection activities.
78
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
Note: Not every outcome will be assessed in each term. The teacher will delete from the checklist outcomes not assessed in that
particular term.
Key: + Learner is easily meeting the outcome
= Learner is meeting the outcome
x Learner needs more practice
SCO Date Date Date Date Date Date Comments
Number Sense
1.1.1 + 9/13 + 9/20 + 10/10 + 10/19 + 11/15 + 12/15
1.1.2 = 9/13 = 9/20 = 10/10 = 10/19 = 10/30 + 11/15
1.1.3 X 9/13 X 9/17 X 9/21 X 9/30 = 10/15 = 10/30
Is very shy to Is gaining
speak in the large confidence
group
1.1.4
1.1.5
1.1.6
1.1.7
1.1.8
1.1.9
1.2.1
1.2.2
1.2.3
1.2.4
1.3.1
1.3.2
1.3.3
1.3.4
1.3.5
Operations with Numbers
2.1.1
Pattern and Relationship
3.1.1
79
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
SCO Date Date Date Date Date Date Comments
3.1.2
3.1.3
3.1.4
3.1.5
3.1.6
Geometrical Thinking
4.1.1
4.1.2
4.1.3
4.2.1
4.2.2
4.2.3
Measurement
5.1.1
5.1.2
5.1.3
5.1.4
5.2.1
5.2.2
5.2.3
5.2.4
Data Management and Probability
6.1.1
6.1.2
6.1.3
6.1.4
80
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
OHPC Kindergarten Progress Checklist – Science
Learner: ___________________________ Teacher: _______________________________ Term: ________________________
Forces and Interactions: Pushes and Pulls
1.1.1 Demonstrate that pushes can have different strengths and directions.
1.1.2 Demonstrate that pulls can have different strengths and directions.
1.1.3 Demonstrate that pushing or pulling on an object can change the speed or direction of its motion
1.1.4 Demonstrate that pushing on an object can start or stop it.
1.2.1 Demonstrate that when objects touch or collide, they push on one another and can change motion.
1.2.2 Demonstrate that a bigger push or pull makes things speed up or slow down more quickly.
Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems: Animals, Plants, and Their Environment
2.1.1 Understand the difference between living and non-living things
2.1.2 Understand which living things are plants and which living things are animals
2.1.3 Understand that humans are animals
2.2.1 Understand what “survive” means
2.2.2 Understand that all living things need water
2.2.3 Understand plants need light to live and grow.
2.2.4 Understand that plants do not need to move around because they make their own food.
2.2.5 Understand that some plants need different things to survive than other plants.
2.2.6 Understand that all animals need food to live and grow. They obtain their food from plants or from other animals.
2.2.7 Understand that some animals need different kinds of food to survive from other animals
2.2.8 Can give a specific example of how a plant or animal can change their environment to meet their needs.
2.2.9 Can explain that we know that plants and animals can change their environment because we have evidence
2.3.1 Understand why different plants and animals live where they do (their needs are met)
2.3.2 Create a model to show where a plant or animal lives and what they find there that helps them to survive.
2.3.3 Understand the way that plants and animals depend on each other and on the environment where they live – it’s a system
2.4.1 Understand that things that people do to live comfortably can affect the world around them.
2.4.2 Understand that we can do some things to reduce the impact of humans on the environment
2.4.3 Understand that each child can make choices to reduce their impacts on the land, water, air, and other living things.
Weather and Climate
3.1.1 Understand that sunlight can make a difference to things on the earth’s surface
3.1.2 Observe that soil may change when the sun is shining
3.1.3 Observe that a wet rock may change when the sun is shining on it
81
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
3.1.4 Observe that a puddle may change when the sun is shining on it
3.2.1 Explain why people might want to reduce the warming effect of the sun
3.2.2 Name one thing people can build to minimize the warming effect of the sun – could be umbrellas, canopies, and tents
3.2.3 Explain one thing (asking questions, making observations, and gathering information) that people might do to solve problems like the warming
effect of the sun
3.2.4 Tell one way that the child may protect themself and their belongings from the sun, or the rain
3.2.5 Design a structure that will keep the rain or sun off their play things at their house (this could be making a drawing of something that would keep
the rain or sun off their play things)
3.2.6 Build a structure that will keep the rain or sun off their play things at their house (to do this, the children might use recycled objects to make a
shelter for their toy car, or tricycle – whatever is relevant to their experience)
3.3.1 Understand that the weather makes a difference to people, plants and animals.
3.3.2 Understand that people measure weather conditions to describe and record the weather and to notice patterns over time
3.3.3 Tell one example of a weather patterns could include that it is usually cooler in the morning than in the afternoon and the number of sunny days
versus cloudy days is different in different months.
3.3.4 List the seasons there are in their country
3.3.5 Keep track of descriptions of the weather (such as sunny, cloudy, rainy, and warm)
3.3.6 Keep track of numbers of sunny, windy, and rainy days in a month
3.4.1 Explain one way that people can find out what the weather forecast is
3.4.2 Tell who prepares a weather forecast
3.4.3 Understand that it is important to know if severe weather is coming so people can prepare for it
3.4.4 Understand that it is important to know if severe weather is coming so people can respond to it
3.4.5 Understand what is meant by the motto: Be prepared; not scared
3.4.6 List one kind of severe weather that might happen where they live
Note: Not every outcome will be assessed in each term. The teacher will delete from the checklist outcomes not assessed in that
particular term.
Key: + Learner is easily meeting the outcome
= Learner is meeting the outcome
x Learner needs more practice
SCO Date Date Date Date Date Date Comments
Forces and Interactions – Pushes and Pulls
1.1.1 + 9/13 + 9/20 + 10/10 + 10/19 + 11/15 + 12/15
82
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
SCO Date Date Date Date Date Date Comments
1.1.2 = 9/13 = 9/20 = 10/10 = 10/19 = 10/30 + 11/15
1.1.3 X 9/13 X 9/17 X 9/21 X 9/30 = 10/15 = 10/30
Is very shy to Is gaining
speak in the large confidence
group
1.1.4
1.2.1
1.2.2
Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems: Animals, Plants, and Their Environment
2.1.1
2.1.2
2.1.3
2.2.1
2.2.2
2.2.3
2.2.4
2.2.5
2.2.6
2.2.7
2.2.8
2.2.9
2.3.1
2.3.2
2.3.3
2.4.1
2.4.2
2.4.3
Weather and Climate
3.1.1
3.1.2
3.1.3
3.1.4
3.2.1
83
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
SCO Date Date Date Date Date Date Comments
3.2.2
3.2.3
3.2.4
3.2.5
3.2.6
3.3.1
3.3.2
3.3.3
3.3.4
3.3.5
3.3.6
3.4.1
3.4.2
3.4.3
3.4.4
3.4.5
3.4.6
84
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
OHPC Kindergarten Progress Checklist – Social Studies
Learner: ___________________________ Teacher: _______________________________ Term: ________________________
Myself – Historical and Cultural Thinking
1.1.1 Demonstrate an understanding of “me” as a unique child (K)
1.1.2 Distinguish personal characteristics that make each child unique (physical traits, mannerisms) (S)
1.1.3 Appreciate that everyone has unique and special characteristics (V)
1.1.4 Express appreciation of the child’s own personal attributes, one’s name (V)
1.1.5 Name family members (K)
1.1.6 Represent family members using pictures/images (S)
1.1.7 Compare their physical features with those of their family members; categorize similarities and differences of self and other family members (S)
1.1.8 Understand that we inherit characteristics from our families (K)
1.1.9 Appreciate the uniqueness of families; respect that the composition of families takes many forms (V)
1.1.10 Understand that respect for self includes proper cleanliness, language and behaviour (K, V)
1.1.11 Categorize similarities and differences of self and others in families
1.1.12 Recognize that their own physical characteristics, preferences, and mannerisms may be inherited from their families.
1.2.1 Name one religious and one national festival celebrated in their country. (K)
1.2.2 Understand the significance and importance of religious and national festivals.(S)
1.2.3 Appreciate that their country has different celebrations and traditions. (V)
1.2.4 Identify customs (food, music, dance language) associated with these celebrations (K)
1.2.5 Make presentations on customs associated with these celebrations (S)
1.2.6 Appreciate the diversity of customs and take pride in this (V)
Myself – Civic Participation
2.1 Describe how family members care for one another (K)
2.2 Appreciate that family members love and care for one another (V)
2.3 Describe roles of various family members (K)
2.4 Chart the daily routines or activities in which family members care for one another
2.5 Appreciate that the way family members love and care for one another helps them meet their basic needs (V)
2.6 Identify groups to which I belong (K)
2.7 Express how my behaviour in groups and the behaviour of others affects me and others (S)
2.8 Appreciate that members of groups to which I belong have responsibilities (V)
2.9 Recognize that all children have the right to be safe from harm (K)
85
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
2.10 List examples of what helps children feel safe (S)
2.11 Appreciate that being safe from harm also means that they must learn to play safely (V)
2.12 Demonstrate responsible caring behaviour towards others in play (S)
2.13 Identify national symbols and emblems such as the national flag, anthem, pledge, bird and flower (K)
2.14 Demonstrate appropriate behaviour when national anthem is being played, pledge is being said (S)
2.15 Appreciate and respect the importance of national symbols (V)
2.16 Know why we have rules in groups to which I belong (e.g. family, class at school) (K)
2.17 Apply groups’ rules in daily life (S)
2.18 Demonstrate examples of responsible and polite behaviour in groups to which I belong (V)
2.19 Describe safe practices while travelling to school (K)
2.20 Role play the use of safe practices when travelling to school (S)
2.21 Appreciate the value and benefits of practicing safety when travelling to school (V)
Myself – Spatial Thinking
3.1 State the name and address of their home and school (K)
3.2 Express themselves clearly when stating their address (S)
3.3 Feel a sense of belonging in their surroundings (V)
3.4 Identify natural and built features of the local environment (K)
3.5 Illustrate natural and built features of the local environment (S)
3.6 Appreciate that they are part of a wider environment (A)
3.7 Describe various weather conditions (K)
3.8 Observe and record different weather conditions (S)
3.9 Appreciate the importance of taking safety precautions in some weather conditions (V)
Note: Not every outcome will be assessed in each term. The teacher will delete from the checklist outcomes not assessed in that
particular term.
Key: + Learner is easily meeting the outcome
= Learner is meeting the outcome
x Learner needs more practice
SCO Date Date Date Date Date Date Comments
Myself – Historical and Cultural Thinking
1.1.1 + 9/13 + 9/20 + 10/10 + 10/19 + 11/15 + 12/15
1.1.2 = 9/13 = 9/20 = 10/10 = 10/19 = 10/30 + 11/15
86
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
SCO Date Date Date Date Date Date Comments
1.1.3 X 9/13 X 9/17 X 9/21 X 9/30 = 10/15 = 10/30
Is very shy to Is gaining
speak in the large confidence
group
1.1.4
1.1.5
1.1.6
1.1.7
1.1.8
1.1.9
1.1.10
1.1.11
1.1.12
1.2.1
1.2.2
1.2.3
1.2.4
1.2.5
1.2.6
Myself – Civic Participation
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
2.10
2.11
2.12
2.13
87
Kindergarten Curriculum Guide
SCO Date Date Date Date Date Date Comments
2.14
2.15
2.16
2.17
2.18
2.19
2.20
2.21
Myself – Spatial Thinking
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9
88
